Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4658 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/01/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P116989 
Project Name: AR Road Safety 
Task Team Leader: Veronica Ines Raffo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (25%);Roads and highways (25%);Health 
(25%);General public administration sector (25%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%);Injuries and non-
communicable diseases (20%);Municipal governance and institution building 
(20%);Managing for development results (20%);Other public sector governance (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
28.00
28.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to reduce road traffic crashes along targeted 
corridors of Argentina#s road network. This objective will be achieved through strengthening the 
institutional framework and management of road safety interventions, the development of 
improved institutional capacity to manage for results, enhanced monitoring and evaluation of 
road safety performance, and the achievement of targeted safety improvements on defined pilot 
corridors.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would provide strategic support to the ANSV for the implementation of the 
National Plan for Road Safety, and in effect would provide the platform and focus for the 
development of improved management practices and targeted safety programs. The proposed 
project components are broadly organized into three overarching areas, (1) Building Capacity to 
Manage for Results; (2) Road Safety Awareness and Demonstration Program; and (3) 
Page  2
Development of a Road Safety Monitoring and Evaluation System within the National Road 
Safety Observatory. Project cost would be US$54 million; with US$48 million in IBRD funding. 
 
Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building (estimated cost: US$12 million of which US$10 
million would be financed by the Bank loan). 
 
The component will support capacity building initiatives, technical assistance and project 
implementation to strengthen the management and technical capacity of the ANSV and prepare a 
national roll-out program for subsequent phases of the national road safety program strategy. 
This component seeks to strengthen the ANSV#s role as lead road safety agency and to enable 
the adoption of international best practices to allow for the achievement of targeted and 
measurable results within the timeframe established in the law that created the ANSV. In 
addition, through this component, the enabling environment will be established to allow 
monitoring of progress of implementation and provide a feedback loop in order to inform the 
decision making process and make adjustments to the National Road Safety Program as needed 
and reflect those in further updates of the National Road Safety Plan.  
 
This component will include three sub-components: (i) Support to the establishment of the 
ANSV (US$6 million), which will finance activities such as the creation of the national license 
and registry, the enhancement of regulatory framework and enforcement capabilities, the 
creation of the ANSV control force, and purchase of control and radar technology. (ii) Public 
Awareness through Educational and Communication Campaigns (US$3.5 million), which will 
finance the development and implementation of a national strategy for social communication on 
road safety, and educational campaigns (design of curricula and manuals and training of 
teachers). (iii) Improvement of Response Capacity in Emergencies (US$2.5 million), which will 
finance a consultancy for diagnosis of current capabilities and action plan, design of improved 
protocols and guidelines for emergency response, improvement of coordination systems amongst 
concerned agencies (police, ambulance services, hospitals, insurance companies), emergency 
health care personnel training, and procurement of IT goods for improved communications. 
 
Component 2: Road Safety Demonstration and Awareness Program (estimated cost: US$32 
million of which US$30 million would be financed by the Bank loan). 
 
This component will include two sub-components, (i) #Safe Corridors# Demonstration 
Program (US$16 million): This sub-component will develop and implement a comprehensive, 
integrated safety program along  selected high risk national and provincial road corridors 
(including urban areas), which can then be scaled up for a nationwide program under subsequent 
phases of the National Road Safety Program. Through this sub-component, interventions to 
improve the safety of road infrastructure and operations will be introduced on a pilot basis on the 
#safe corridors#, to be selected from among corridors that have been evaluated through the iRAP 
pilot. It also includes a program of coordinated road user education and awareness building and 
traffic safety enforcement which will initially be tested along the #Safety Corridors#. In order to 
enable the Police to better conduct traffic law enforcement, enabling tools and equipment, of 
appropriate technology will be procured, so as to effect better speed management and control of 
drunk driving. In addition improved emergency and post crash response will be provided along 
Page  3
the #Safety Corridors#. Through the demonstration program, the project aims to target and focus 
resources and efforts to provide a basis from which the ANSV can manage a multi-sectoral road 
safety program that is evidence based and results oriented, utilizing the monitoring and 
evaluation system developed within the National Road Safety Observatory as part of this project. 
This element will build upon international good practice and aim to have demonstration effects 
that may be replicated on the remainder of the network. Further this approach allows for a testing 
of the approach during the project period, and refinement based on findings so as to develop a 
long term ongoing fully funded program.  
 
(ii) Incentive Fund for the Implementation of Road Safety Policies and Practices (US$16 
million): This subcomponent includes the creation of a competitive fund allocated to support the 
actions carried out by the provinces and municipalities which had adhere to the national laws and 
work standard of the ANSV, aiming at reducing the traffic accident rate. Said fund will make it 
possible to periodically transfer funds for the instruments and/or tools needed to implement road 
safety plans in different jurisdictions. These instruments and/or standardized tools will have been 
previously defined in a positive list drafted to that end, for each level intervening (provincial and 
municipal). As an example, they will include the following items to be financed: diagnostic of 
road safety in the local situation, generation of local road safety plans consistent with ANSV 
framework; educational road safety activities in the school and at a community level; financing 
of traffic lights, signaling and lighting elements, radars, alcoholmeters, cinemometers, 
motorcycle helmets, speed bumps, and roundabouts. The refundable investments will have to be 
justified as necessary in the road safety diagnostic. The jurisdictions agree to carry out an initial 
planning for the whole of the project#s horizon, which will generate the objectives to be met in 
each period. According to the degree of compliance with the objectives, established through 
clear verification requirements agreed by the parties, the jurisdictions will receive the 
corresponding fund transfers. 
 
Component 3: Development of a Road Safety Monitoring and Evaluation System within the 
National Road Safety Observatory (estimated cost: US$10 million of which US$8 million would 
be financed by the Bank loan). 
 
Law 26.363 (April 2008) created the National Road Safety Observatory. The ANSV must 
develop and promote this observatory which will include the storage, analysis and monitoring of 
the following items, among others: i) National Statistics on Road Safety, ii) accident research 
and map development, iii) automotive engineering and degree of use of the technologies applied 
to motor vehicle safety, and iv) road infrastructure. The Observatory#s mandate includes the 
promotion of exchange of information between the national and international statistics and safety 
researcher network; collecting, harmonizing and disseminating accident data and exhibition and 
use of information and conclusions to identify particular matters to conduct research to define 
road safety improvements.  
 
This component will promote the design and development of a comprehensive crash data 
management system that will aid in identifying critical links, and provide feedback for improved 
decision making. To this end, international best practice, particularly within the OECD countries 
will be accessed on a pilot basis through linkage to the IRTAD. The current data collection 
system will be evaluated and recommendations for more efficient practices will be made, such as 
Page  4
standardizing the reporting form, establishing guidelines for data extraction from within the 
healthcare system. These efforts will build upon the existing analytical capabilities within the 
ST-CTLC and taking advantage of the ongoing partnership the unit has with local universities. 
The expected output is an improved national crash data and analysis system that is accessible not 
only to the police but to all safety agencies and partners contributing to the improvement of road 
safety outcomes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nation-wide, as potential sub-projects are expected from #Safety Corridors# from all parts of the 
country, including works located in national, provincial roads and/or municipal areas. At this 
stage, there is no information regarding salient physical characteristics to the safeguards analysis.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The ANSV is a new agency, without specific capacity for safeguards policies. However, in the 
case of works to be developed under Component 2-i (to improve the safety of road 
infrastructure) and some of major the works planned under Component 2-ii (roundabouts), 
environmental management will depend on procedures and regulations from the National Roads 
Directorate (DNV), if works will be done in a right of way with national jurisdiction, or from the 
Provincial Roads Directorates, if improvements are planned to occur in provincial roads. For 
both cases, the Borrower will developed the specific institutional arrangements and safeguards 
procedures, to be included in a Manual, acceptable to the Bank, an to be adopted not only by the 
Borrower but also by the participating parties, involved by jurisdiction at national, provincial and 
municipal level. The PIU in ANSV will ensure at least a specialist to coordinate and monitor the 
implementation of the arrangements for environmental and social management. 
 
The National Roads Directorate (DNV) is already engaged in WB safeguards practices, in close 
coordination with the Bank, as part of the supervision of #APL1/2 National Highway Assets 
Project# (P088153 and P095569). DNV, and its decentralized Districts (Distritos) inside the 
country, are progressively developing adequate capacity to monitor overall compliance with the 
environmental requirements resulting from the implementation of the #Manual for 
Environmental Assessment and Management of Road Works# (MEGA 2007). DNV has a clear 
set of policies and procedures consistent with the Bank's environmental and social safeguards 
policies. All bidding documents include obligations to comply with all environmental licenses 
and permits required by law, and to follow the MEGA 2007, which requires the development and 
implementation of Environmental Management Plans. MEGA 2007 includes procedures referred 
to 4 topics: (a) Cultural and physical resources heritage; (b) Environmental Management Plans 
(EMP); (c) Environmental Management of Right-Of-Way (ROW); and (d) Control of invasive 
species and/or pests in ROWs.  
 
Regarding provinces, there is no direct experience in the application of safeguards policies for 
Provincial Roads Directorates. Some provinces have adopted the MEGA 2007, while others 
apply their own environmental procedures. If a province is in charge of environmental 
management of works, the project#s environmental manual will describe the institutional 
arrangements to be followed, as well as the specific procedures to comply with safeguards as part 
of the agreements to be reached by the Borrower and the Bank, which will be reflected in the 
overall Environmental and Social Manual for the project. 
Page  5
Before appraisal, ANSV will develop a specific Environmental and Social Manual to reflect the 
institutional arrangements to develop capacity and implement safeguard policies together with 
the National Roads Directorate (articulating with the MEGA 2007 procedures), the Provincial 
Roads Directorate. For minor works included in Component 3, said manual will provide the 
specifications to deal with environmental and social issues. These specifications would be an 
annex of bidding documents and an obligation for contractors.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSEN) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a category B project. Based on the information available at this stage, the project is 
not likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or 
unprecedented. Given the nature and scope of civil works to be included in the #Road Safety 
Corridors#, as well as the civil works to be requested under the output based approach 
component, impacts may not affect an area broader than the sites or facilities subject to physical 
works of sub-projects. However, and given that all the sub-projects are expected to have some 
negative impacts at site level, the Borrower will adopt a process to examine during project 
implementation, through EA the projects potential negative and positive environmental impacts, 
and to identify in specific EMPs any measures needed to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or 
compensate for adverse impacts and improve environmental performance. Before appraisal, the 
Borrower will prepare and Environmental and Social Management Manual which will contain 
the guidelines, approach and procedures to prepare EAs and EMPs for the proposed subprojects, 
including the revision and articulation of already existing instruments in DNV and other 
participating jurisdictions. 
 
Although there is no concrete definition of the works to be financed, it is assumed that a 
number of civil works (to be determined) will produce short-term and long-term impacts which 
trigger OP 4.01. Should specific corridors be selected and works designed, an appropriate EA 
will be prepared prior to appraisal in addition to the framework for undefined project activities.  
Appropriate consultation activities would also be included in the preparation process consistent 
with Bank safeguard and disclosure policies. 
 
The project will incorporate or improve infrastructure to increase safety. The main direct 
impacts are expected to occur during construction and cause localized negative environmental 
impacts. Such impacts are expected to consist essentially of noise, vibration, dust, and traffic 
disruption. Additional negative impacts during construction will occur due to haulage and final 
disposal of materials. Most of these impacts can be mitigated by proper designs and 
environmental and social management plans that have to be followed. The civil works under the 
project, such as roundabouts, will follow the alignments of existing roads and right-of-ways as 
well the occupation of state owned properties and alternatives will be sought to prevent potential 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
impacts, especially to avoid resettlements. As works would be defined during project 
implementation, the Borrower will prepare a Manual with the guidelines and procedures to be 
followed in each site in each #Road Safety Corridors#. Each proposed work, especially 
roundabouts, will be screened for: 
 
#
The need for resettlement of families and businesses; 
 
#
Potential interruption or limitation of accesses to dwellings or businesses either 
permanently or temporarily (during construction); 
 
#
Encroachment/reduction of green areas, parks, and other recreational areas; 
 
#
Demolition of buildings of high architectural or historical value; 
 
#
Potential deterioration of urban quality and property value in the immediate vicinity of 
major infrastructure; 
 
#
The potential for increased traffic safety problems or accidents in areas with high density 
of schools, hospitals, and commercial use; 
 
#
The effect on urban infrastructure (sidewalks, power and telephone lines, water and 
sewerage mains, etc.); and 
 
#
Potentially unacceptable nuisances during construction (dust, wastes, and heavy 
construction traffic) especially in sensitive sites (hospitals, schools for instance). 
 
The manual will establish roles and responsibilities while including adequate funding for 
the screening and supervision processes. In addition, the incentive fund under component 2 for 
implementation of road safety policies and practices will include a positive list of activities that 
may be funded (both in terms of their dimension and investment levels) and a negative list of 
activities that may not be financed because of potential adverse social or environmental impacts. 
 
As it is proposed for all the Bank#s projects to be developed in the transport sector, 
environmental and social principles would be included into the design and construction of the 
projects. These principles will be detailed through specific recommendations for design and 
construction of all civil works, including: 
 
#
The designs should avoid or minimize the need for resettlement of population, as well as 
the impact on green and recreational areas and buildings of historical or architectural value. If 
above impacts are unavoidable, resettlement plans, mitigation and compensatory measures will 
be included in project costs.  
 
#
Access to dwellings and businesses should be guaranteed for both the construction and 
operational phases. Any restriction or limitation to accessibility to properties should be properly 
mitigated or compensated. 
 
#
Safe and secure pedestrian and bicycle crossings should be integrated into the design and 
construction of all works. 
 
#
The design should harmonize with urban surroundings including landscaping and 
planning for other uses for all additionally created spaces in order to minimize negative impacts 
on environmental quality and property values. 
 
#
Alternative solutions and final designs should be subject to public and community 
consultation with special emphasis on the property owners directly affected, and community 
organizations, and business and professional organizations. 
 
#
To minimize public nuisances, construction activities should follow strict environmental 
guidelines. Construction schedules and the timing of necessary interruption of public utilities 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(electricity, water and telephone) should be informed to the affected community. 
 
#
All areas and infrastructure affected during construction should be restored to their 
original condition, specially sidewalks, green street dividers, gardens, sidewalk trees, utilities, 
and side streets impacted by traffic diversion. 
 
#
Inclusive design of bus lanes and stations to guarantee accessibility to handicapped 
citizens.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project is not expected to finance works which will adversely affect critical and other 
natural habitats as defined under the policy. Nevertheless, the sub-project early screening process 
and project specific EA undertaken for specific sub-projects during project implementation has 
confirmed this assumption. And if this is the case, the subproject will avoid this kind of areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not affect forests as defined under the policy nor will it promote forest 
management of any type. No actions are expected under this policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Although it is not expected that the project would directly finance procurement of pesticides, 
ongoing operations and maintenance of the transport system includes the potential for use of 
herbicides in maintenance operations and brush clearing as well as rodendicides for rodent 
control in some urban infrastructure.  This policy is therefore triggered and the environmental 
management framework developed for the project would establish the procedures consistent with 
the Bank safeguard for the use of these substances in addition to the existing national regulations 
and guidelines of the DNV manual on environmental assessment and management (Manual de 
Evaluacion y Gestion Ambiental de Obras Viales).   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is possible that the civil works and consequent transport improvements might directly 
and/or indirectly affect cultural property in some locations. These could include known local 
structures or sites of historic or culturally importance. The project screening and EA process 
during project implementation will ensure that such sites will be identified and appropriate 
actions taken if necessary.In addition, all construction contracts will include chance find 
procedures which will define specific measures to be taken in the event that PCR as defined 
under the policy are found during construction. All possible impacts on buildings or other sites of 
historical or archaeological significance will be mitigated as necessary.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
In principle, the team considers that the project will not affect indigenous peoples# lands, 
values or practices when civil works are implemented.  However, if action geared to capacity 
building on road education and prevention reached indigenous communities, it would be 
necessary to use culturally adequate tools. Therefore, the team considers that the Indigenous 
Peoples policy is triggered. An Indigenous People Planning Framework will be prepared during 
project preparation so that, in the unlikely event that indigenous peoples are located in the area of 
intervention, culturally adequate tools are designed as part of the implementation of road safety 
educational programs and other activities along these lines.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy has been triggered in order to attend eventual cases of resettlement in the 
implementation of road safety actions. Given that actions resulting from the #Safe corridors# and 
the Incentive Fund for the Implementation of Road Safety Policies and Practices (Component 2) 
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
will not be identified until the competitive funds are allocated, a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) will be prepared. The RPF will aim at preventing negative impacts on population affected 
by involuntary resettlement, creating a framework for the preparation of Resettlement plans were 
applicable for defined projects.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
No dams will be constructed under this project.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
No sub-projects affecting international waterways will be financed under this project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
No sub-project within disputed areas as defined under the policy will be financed.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
February 2010.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Veronica Ines Raffo 
08/31/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/31/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maria Marcela Silva 
08/31/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
