Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3729
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P110462 
Project Name:  Argentina Mining Environmental Restoration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Carter J. Brandon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (80%);Central government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.50
7.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed project are to: (a) strengthen GoA’scapacity 
to assess and mitigate environmental risks associated with closed uranium mines, 
processing sites, and related mining sector investments, in accordance with international 
good practice; and (b) reduce potential economic and health damages associated with a 
closed uranium milling site in Malargue, Mendoza.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance investments to remediate the closed uranium processing site in 
Malargue, Mendoza, and will provide technical assistance in three areas: (a) to develop 
CNEA's environmental management capacity to plan and carry out sustainable and 
technically sound remediation interventions throughout the uranium sector; (b) to support 
technically, environmentally, and socially responsible planning of the remediation needs 
of the other seven priority sites across the country; and (c) to introduce concepts of 
environmental risk management more broadly in the mining sector, including the 
Secretariat of Environment and Secretariat of Mining.  
 
The proposed project includes three components.  
Page  2
Component 1. Remediation of the Malargue Site  
 
•
Remediation of the Malargue site. The site, which was donated by the Provinceof 
Mendoza to CNEA, is located at the northern limit of the city of Malargue (about 270 km 
south of Mendoza city). The project will fund remediation works, including the safe 
disposal of 710,000 tons of tailings and soils, structures to prevent groundwater 
contamination and dust, and measures to abate radiation and radon emissions. Given the 
delays in processing this loan, contracting has been done in conformance with World 
Bank procedures and civil works have already begun (as of March, 2008, the required 
investment is about 30% complete). Independent construction supervision conducted by a 
Bank-hired technical expert has reviewed the design and certified the quality of 
construction to date.  An EIA following the requirements of applicable national laws and 
provincial law No. 5961, and detailed engineering plans for this site have been prepared 
and approved by the provincial and national (Nuclear Regulatory Authority, or ARN) 
authorities.  
 
Component 2. Mine Restoration Planning and Institutional Strengthening  
 
•
Develop remediation options for other sites. In addition to Malargue, seven other 
closed uranium sites have been inventoried. The project will provide technical assistance 
to study and design remediation options to clean up the additional sites, and support the 
environmental and social consultation processes required as per international best 
practice. The project would also fund an international advisory panel to advise on the 
approaches being suggested for each site. Members of the international panel might 
typically come from Australia, Canada, Europe (Germany, Spain) and the USA (UMTRA 
program).  
 
•
Strengthen the CNEA Environmental Management Unit (UGA). The UGA is 
CNEA’s relatively new Environmental and Waste Management Department. This 
component will:  
 
•
support its organization, staffing, financial resources, work methodology, 
providing training as needed in any of these areas;  
 
•
develop and implement an Environmental Management and Information System 
(SIGA) including a Geographic Information (GIS) and site-specific monitoring; and  
 
•
develop and implement improved and systematized public consultation and 
information processes, under the responsibility of the newly created Community 
Relations Unit.  
 
•
Strengthen environmental management in the mining sector. This subcomponent 
will fund the promotion of good environmental practices more broadly in the mining 
sector by strengthening the environmental entities in the two key agencies involved in the 
sector, i.e., Secretariat of Mining and the Secretariat of Environment. The specific 
activities under this component would cover a range of technical assistance topics related 
to environmental risk and risk management, such as:  
 
•
Good practice for closings of both uranium mines and other minerals, in such 
areas as: tailings dumps and tailings dam restoration, land reclamation, and processing 
waste (both liquid and solid) remediation. This subcomponent could include study tours 
and a best practice manual based on the Malargue experience.  
Page  3
•
Completion of baseline surveys (in general) and site-specific baseline data 
requirements for on-going monitoring and compliance.  
 
•
Handling and treatment of mine tailings and effluents for operating mines.  
 
•
Design of monitoring and control mechanisms.  
 
•
Early-warning impact evaluation methodologies and more detailed impact 
evaluations as part of site-specific risk analysis.  
 
•
Public awareness and communication strategies concerning sustainable mining 
practices, such as land use management, risk management, community consultation, and 
public disclosure of data from site remediation monitoring.  
 
Component 3. Project Management: the project implementation unit of the UGA will be 
responsible for project implementation, reporting, project monitoring, and impact 
evaluation of key interventions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Malargue site in the province of Mendoza is one of eight sites of abandoned/inactive 
uranium mines and milling sites that have been inventoried by CNEA to date. It was the 
site of uranium milling, active between 1954 and 1986. Component 1 of the proposed SIL 
will finance remediation investments at the site.  
 
The site occupies an area of 42 hectares and is located at the north east edge of the city 
of Malargue, a city with a population of about 20,000 inhabitants, in the province of 
Mendoza. Within a radius of 500m from the plant’s boundary, one encounters an 
industrial zone and a railroad right of way; agricultural (potato seedlings) farms and cattle 
pastures; and a 9-ha bioremediation experimentation site leased by CNEA. SW of the 
site, located at least 250 meters away, there are 19 run-down residences with 112 
inhabitants, including 54 minors. There are two provincial protected areas within the 
limits of Malargue County, the Fauna Reserve of Laguna Llancanelo (40km away) and 
the Total Reserve El Payen (230km away).  
 
Malargue’s climate is cold sub-arid, with average annual temperature of 11.7 0Cand 
relative humidity of 59%. There are two predominant wind directions: mild (10-12 
km/hour on average), northern to northeasterly winds, blowing from the site towards the 
city, and stronger (19-22 km/h on average but with gusts up to 174 km/hour) western to 
southwesterly winds, blowing away from the city. Only the latter winds are capable of 
causing significant particulate dispersion from the tailings.  
 
The site is underlain to a depth of 23m by a substratum of young alluvial and aeolian 
deposits consisting of gravel, sand and finer sediments. These highly permeable 
sediments host the phreatic aquifer. An impermeable, 3m-thick clay layer underlies this 
aquifer. Another layer of sand and gravel underneath the clay hosts a pressurized, 
confined aquifer. The waters of the phreatic and confined aquifers flow away from the 
city and toward the NE at a gradient of 0.6% and at a flow rate of 500m/year.  
 
Drinking water, supplied by Obras Sanitarias Mendoza S.A., is extracted from two 
sources located up-basin from the site. The primary source - the Malargue River, is 
Page  4
supplemented by a 160 m-deep well, located about 4 km SW from the site. Site activities 
pose no contamination risks to drinking water supplies, as both sources are located far 
upstream.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Yewande Aramide Awe (ENV) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
Mr Jose Maria Ghio (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed SIL will support investments to remediate the Malargue site by undoing, 
where possible, and/or mitigating the adverse impacts of undesirable environmental 
legacies left behind from the former use of the site as a uranium ore processing site. The 
project addresses the legacy of poor site management and through the proposed 
remediation measures will greatly reduce or eliminate the existing exposures to 
radioactive materials and the associated health and environmental impacts.  
 
The uranium mining and extraction process leaves two classes of wastes of radiological 
concern: (i) mine overburden and low grade ore that are too low in uranium to process 
economically, but above typical background radioactivity; and (ii) tailings from any of 
several processes used for the extraction of uranium from the ore. The Malargue site 
contains tailings, not mine overburden. Tailings havesome residual uranium, and a suite 
of radioactive decay products, of which radium-226 and radon-222 are the most 
important.  
 
These tailings differ from those arising from the milling of other metallic ores (copper, 
gold) only in the fact that they have a greater concentration of residual radioactivity. 
However, the concentration of radioactive contaminants in uranium mill tailings is 
normally low, and exposure to humans presents little hazard except when it is extended 
Page  5
over a long period of time.  The tailings are significantly different from high-level waste 
materials resulting from the generation of nuclear power.  The standards which have been 
applied to the restitution of Malargue are dictated by federal government and Mendoza 
provincial legislationswhich are in fact more stringent than international good practice.  
 
There are two types of environmental risks and health risks associated with this project.  
First are the risks of continued exposures due to the legacy of poor site management.  
Second are the risks associated with the construction activities required to complete the 
site remediation measures.  There are at least four principal exposure pathways at this 
site: exposure through contaminated groundwater; surface water; airborne gases and 
particles; and contact with contaminated soils.  Existing risks of each of these will be 
significantly improved with the project.  
 
(i) Potential health risks associated with continued radon exposure.  Without 
remediation radioisotopes will continue to be released from the tailings piles.  The 
pathways for human exposure will continue to be through the atmosphere, the soils or 
through ground and surface water bodies.  Currently the values of radon flux, reported at 
the top of the tailings piles , range between 6.1-10.1 Bq/m2s, or about an order of 
magnitude above the USEPA standard of 0.74 Bq/m2s.  Radon concentrations , measured 
0.5 m above the tailings , range between 584 and 5,062 Bq/m3.  
 
The principal hazards to human health without the project arise from the potential of 
continued inhalation of radon gas; inhalation of dust particles containing radio-nuclides; 
or from ingestion of dissolved radium or uranium in water, or from contamination 
through the food chain.  All of these forms of radiation exposure bring increased risks of 
serious health problems such as lung and bone cancers. The EIA estimates that 
individuals residing permanently along the site’s perimeter would be exposed to an 
annual dose of 5-6 mSv per year.  It is estimated that in order to receive the maximum 
allowable dose of 0.1mSv/year from direct exposure, an individual would have to spend 
about 10-30 hours in a year on the pile of tailings.  
 
Projected risks of contracting cancer as a result of radon inhalation and exposure to 
Gamma radiation, have been calculated by CNEA based on two hypothetical scenarios. 
In the first scenario, a hypothetical resident living permanently (7,000 hrs of annual 
exposure) and with no shielding on top of the tailings would receive a combined dose of 
157 mSv/year through direct exposure and inhalation. According to published models of 
life expectancy reduction, this could shorten his life expectancy by almost 10 years. In 
the second scenario, an individual living on the perimeter of the site would face a 
combined dose of 6.8 mSv/year.  This could shorten his life expectancy by about Â½ 
year.  
 
The amount of radiation projected for a frequent by-passer or for occasional visitors 
(e.g., 1,000 hrs of annual exposure) is well within the international standards. The 
radiological effect on the town’s population is even more negligible. Based on these 
projections, it is concluded that the radioactive residues at the CFM would pose a 
radiological risk only to a hypothetical group that would choose to live at the site’s 
Page  6
perimeter 
–
which will not be permitted under the environmental management plan -- but 
not to occasional visitors.  
 
(ii) Impacts on groundwater – As early as 1988, shortly after site manufacturing 
activities ceased, studies showed that leachate from the mine tailings had infiltrated into 
the subjacent phreatic aquifer .  The composition and concentration of dissolved 
constituents in this aquifer suggest that a plume extends from beneath the tailings a few 
hundred of meters to the northeast of the site.  Sampling indicates high levels of 
contamination compared with unaffected areas.  
 
The phreatic aquifer showed maximum conductivity values of 5930Âµmho/cm 
(compared with 986Âµmho/cm in an unaffected, up-gradient location) some 900m to the 
southwest, with the key contaminants being uranium (8.3ppm vs. 0.004ppm in the 
unaffected location), radium 226 (0.684Bq/l vs. 0.031Bq/l), nitrate (550ppm vs. 7.6ppm), 
sulfate (4050 ppm vs. 382ppm), Ca (564ppm vs. 163ppm), sodium (760ppm vs. 16ppm), 
magnesium (186ppm vs. 16ppm) and manganese (120ppm vs. 0ppm).  
 
In addition, the pH was lowered to 4.4 as compared to a pH of 7.2 up-gradient.Sampling 
indicates elevated levels of copper, zinc, arsenic, cadmium, chromium and lithium (up to 
a
maximum of 0.6ppm), none of which was detected in the unaffected location . 
Maximum contamination occurred in the first 10m immediately below the tailings and 
extended, at gradually decreasing concentrations, down gradient (to the NE) while 
dissipating steeply in a lateral direction.  There was also a steep -- about 50% -- 
diminution in the total ionic concentrations at a depth of 16m.  
 
Between 1988 and 2006 there has been an overall trend of declining contaminant 
concentrations due to natural attenuation. Sample results from piezometer #56 at the site, 
show that concentrations of representative constituents dropped within that time .  This 
trend was punctuated, however, by intervals of spiked concentration associated with 
excessive ascent of the phreatic aquifer during wet years.  The surging aquifer leached 
the bottom of the tailings, increasing solvent contents while reducing the pH of the 
inundated area; once the aquifer’s level subsided, the residual marsh was subjected to 
high evapo-transpiration rates resulting in salts coming to the top soil.  
 
In contrast to the phreatic aquifer, the confined aquifer underneath the impermeable clay 
unit has been exhibiting both ionic compositions and concentrations that are 
indistinguishable from those of groundwater elsewhere in the region. The emerging trend 
of natural attenuation within the 18-year period since 1988 strongly suggests that once 
the tailings are encapsulated, one can expect further decrease in the level of 
contamination of the phreatic aquifer subjacent to and down gradient from the tailings. 
The attenuation process will continue to be monitored through extensive sampling of 
soils and ground water.  
 
(iii) Impacts on soil (with special reference to cultivation of potato seedlings) – Studies 
of uranium concentration in potato seedlings cultivated in areas were conducted in 2003 
east of the site showed a value of 0.008ppm.  This value compares favorably, with values 
Page  7
of 0.11ppm, reported for potato seedlings from other Cordillera piedmont areas such as 
Tupungato (Mendoza Province) and Tucuman (Tucuman Province) that are located 
hundreds of kilometers to the north, and with values reported elsewhere in the world 
(0.003 to 0.015ppm). A high-resolution spectrometric analysis established the absence of 
radioactive contamination, confirming that the seedlings qualify for commercial 
distribution. Soils with elevated uranium values correspond to the area that is frequently 
inundated by the shallow phreatic aquifer; these concentrations quickly decrease to 
background levels in areas on the external periphery of the wet, impacted tailings fringe.  
 
These results all underscore the need to implement remediation activities at the site.  
 
The following paragraphs describe the application of World Bank safeguards policies:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01):  For the Malargue works, an early draft 
EIA was published in Spanish on the CNEA website in August 2001 
(http://www.cnea.gov.ar/). Review of this process and of the outputs confirmed that the 
EIA was consultative (extensive open discussions locally and at the provincial level), that 
a
range of realistic alternatives was evaluated, and that the final design takes into account 
all the environmental issues identified. The extent of the consultations held has been 
documented in the EIA, and their comprehensiveness was confirmed through 
independent additional surveys (December 2001 and July 2005) as well as at meetings 
and workshops involving local authorities and community members with participation of 
Bank staff (November 2005, August 2006 and February 2007). A Project Information 
Center has been built and was formally opened in November 2005 at the Malargue site. 
In May 2007, the Malargue site EIA was finalized by CNEA and re-posted, and a revised 
Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMP) was finalized in March 2008 (and is posted both 
on the CNEA website and in the Infoshop).  
 
Under Component 2 of the project resources will be provided for technical studies, 
planning and design of remediation options for up to seven additional closed uranium 
sites.  The preparation of these plans, including disclosure and consultation, will be 
conducted in accordance with the applicable World Bank safeguards policies. At this 
point there is no plan to finance the implementation of such plans so it is not possible to 
say that the policies must apply during implementation.  However, it is important to note 
that CNEA is fully committed to meeting the Bank’s standards for all technical assistance 
activities.  
 
Dam Safety (OP/BP 4.37): Based on technical review of the containment structure at 
Malargue it is apparent that the project does not involve the construction of a tailings 
dam. Rather, the tailings are being encapsulated within a fully enclosed and sealed 
structure which is essentially a hazardous landfill. Therefore the dam safety policy does 
not apply.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP4.10):  The people affected by the project are the townspeople 
of Malargue and farm owners in the immediate vicinity of the project.  Theresidents of 
Malargue are not considered indigenous people under the Bank’s definition and therefore 
Page  8
the policy does not apply to the Malargue site.  As part of the planning process for the 
other remediation sites an evaluation of the status of the affected people will be 
conducted and,
 if necessary, an Indigenous People’s Plan will be prepared in accordance 
with the Bank requirements.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12): The implementation of the project at the Malargue 
does not require the acquisition of new land. All project activities will be carried out 
within the area granted for uranium mining and processing.  This land had been public 
lands donated by CNEA by the province of Mendoza.  There are no permanent 
settlements which require relocation or remediation. There are temporary structures 
located near the perimeter of the site but will not be relocated as the exposure to 
hazardous materials does not present significant risk to these households.  CNEA 
currently has a long term lease of land from Finca Cabus and is currently in the process 
of purchasing this land from the owner.  As part of the planning process for the other 
remediation sites, assessments to determine the need for land acquisition or resettlement 
will be conducted and, if necessary, resettlement planning will be conducted in a manner 
consistent with the Bank requirements.  
 
Alternatives Analysis: A thorough analysis of alternatives was conducted which 
considered five main alternatives, including: (i) no action; (ii) management of tailings at 
their existing location; (iii) management of tailings by relocation within the existing site; 
(iv) management of tailings by moving to a southern site 35 km from Malargue; and (v) 
relocation to CMFSR by rail about 180 km. from Malargue. Option (iii) was the preferred 
option with regard to government regulations, mitigation effectiveness, social 
acceptability and cost considerations.  
 
Technical standards to guide monitoring of radiation levels are well defined for the 
project and as mentioned previously the site must reduce exposure levels at the site to 0.1 
mSv/year.  Standards for the remediation of other, non-radioactive contaminants in the 
soil and groundwater are defined in Law Number 24.051, addressing handling of 
hazardous materials. Where national or provincial law does not cover potential 
contaminants, the project has adopted technical standards defined by the USEPA control 
requirement 40 CFR 192.  These standards are identified and defined in the EIA.  It is 
important to note that monitoring programs are already underway at the Malargue site.  In 
addition to the baseline data collection efforts done as part of the EIA, CNEA is 
undertaking routine monitoring in accordance with the proposed monitoring plan.  
 
Public Consultation and Disclosure:  During project preparation a special unit was 
established within CNEA to carry out the consultation processes which are described in 
detail in Annex 10 of the Project Appraisal Document. This unit will continue throughout 
the project and beyond and function as CNEA’s overall Environment Management Unit.  
One sub-component of the project is designed to support CNEA in establishing a process 
for regular and open consultation in relation to the remediation program and to site-
specific works for which remediation works are planned.  Consultation, disclosure, and 
Page  9
reporting will also be key elements of the Environment Information and Management 
System to be established under this project.  
 
International Panel of Experts (POE):  As noted in Section 4, the project will provide an 
International Panel of Experts to advise on international best practice with respect to the 
planning and design remediation efforts at the other seven sites.  The POE will also be 
available to monitor and advise on the implementation of the Malargue site.  In their 
advisory capacity, the POE will work closely with CNEA and also with ARN, the 
government’s independent oversight authority for nuclear waste management issues.  
 
Contractor construction guidelines.  The construction and environmental measures to be 
followed by construction contractors on-site are addressed in a construction contractor’s 
quality assurance manual.  This manual defines requirements for day to day operations 
including dust and noise control, operational procedures for on-site transport of 
contaminated materials, worker health and safety requirement, and other procedures on-
site.  It also specifies arrangements for supervision, technical oversight and inspection of 
contractor works.  CNEA has shared a copy of this manual with the World Bank.  The 
content, relevance and utility of the manual will be reviewed and modified as needed 
during project implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term activities proposed for the closed site.  The Malargue site will be 
monitored by CNEA for a period of 20 years following closure of the site. In addition, 
site security measures and restricted access will continue to be in place, as they currently 
are, to ensure protection of the management system and monitoring points, and to avoid 
human settlement on or near the site.  
 
Assessment of health risks associated with remediated site: the existing and projected 
health risks due to exposed and unmanaged tailings are described under item 1, above. It 
is envisaged that the proposed tailings management system, which includes a multi-layer 
capping system, will mitigate the risks associated with the tailings. In response to a 
recommendation by a technical expert hired by the World Bank to assess the remediation 
activities at the Malargue site, CNEA conducted an assessment of health risks that would 
be associated with the site after it has been remediated and the tailings encapsulated. The 
results of that risk assessment indicate that the resulting dose of radioactivity associated 
with the managed site would be less than 0.1mSv/year, or lower than the limit established 
by the Argentina Nuclear Regulatory Authority (ARN).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The selection of the preferred mitigation option for the Malargue site was guided by the 
following considerations:  
 
Page  10
•
Ensure that the release of contaminants to the environment is kept below regulatory 
limits and in accordance with the concept of ALARA (As Low As Reasonably 
Achievable);  
 
•
Prevent the establishment of permanent human habitation at, and the use of materials 
for construction and engineering infill from the remediated site;  
 
•
Provide a design that would minimize institutional maintenance and control;  
 
•
Avoid forming new sites encumbered with the waste;  
 
•
Whatever the selected alternative, impose restrictions on the future land useof the 
designated area; and  
 
•
Establish a verification period to evaluate the performance of the adopted system in 
comparison to the model.  
 
The alternatives analyzed for management of the tailings at the Malargue site are 
summarized in the table below. A detailed discussion is presented in the Environmental 
Impact Assessment.  
 
[Table is available within signed ISDS]  
 
The Selected Alternative  
 
The management option that was selected was to manage the tailings by relocation 
within the Malargue site. This option was considered as providing the best mitigation 
benefits with reasonable cost. The selected alternative comprises two key activities: (i) 
relocating the tailings from their current location that is subjected to frequent flooding to 
the highest location at the site, and (ii) encapsulating the relocated tailings so as to 
comply with the established radiation standards. To ensure the containment of the 
mineral waste piles, CNEA adopted an engineering solution comprising a system of 
multiple and redundant barriers for their encapsulation, and designed a semi-peripheral 
drainage system in order to depress the level of the phreatic aquifer below the relocated 
tailings’ site. A schematic representation of the selected remediation option is illustrated 
in the figure below.  
 
Figure: Schematic representation of encapsulation of tailings at Malargue site [ Figure is 
available within signed ISDS]  
 
The main features of the multi-barrier encapsulation system are described below:  
 
Bottom barrier – The bottom barrier features multiple layers as follows:  
 
-
0.4m-thick cap of porous material (to stabilize the foundation and prevent 
capillary fluid movement);  
 
-
0.15m-thick sandy-clayey soil cap (to prevent intrusion of the superjacent, clayey 
cap into the subjacent porous cap);  
 
-
0.5m-thick, very low permeability (between 10-8cm/sec and 2.9x10-9cm/sec), 
low-plasticity compacted clay-cap (a dual-purpose barrier against downward infiltration 
of contaminated water and ascent of phreatic groundwater into the tailings).  
Page  11
Top barrier 
–
The top barrier also features multiple layers as follows:  
 
-
A
0.5m-thick, very low-permeability (between 10-8cm/sec and 2.9x10-9 
cm/sec),low-plasticity compacted clay-cap, where water saturation will be maintained so 
as to minimize radon emissions;  
 
-
A
0.8m-thick, compacted sandy-clayey soil cap (permeability of 10-4cm/sec), to 
maintain water saturation in the subjacent clay cap and protect it from the superjacent 
riprap cap, and;  
 
-
A
0.5-0.7m-thick, compacted riprap cap comprising scoriaceous volcanic rocks 
with inter-granular voids filled with clayey soil to provide a substrate for stabilizing 
herbaceous vegetation. This layer is intended to protect the top barrier against erosion, 
control radon emissions and Gamma radiation, and prevent biointrusion and long-term 
tampering.  
 
Lessons Learned - In designing the remediation option for Malargue site, lessons 
learned were incorporated from past domestic remediation activities of mining sites, 
drawing on the expanding international experience with respect to environmentally 
appropriate closure of uranium mines in Canada, Germany and the U.S.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of the Environmental Impact Assessment for the Malargue site, CNEA has 
prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) including a plan for monitoring of 
the project during implementation of remediation activities and post-closure of the site. 
Elements of the EMP are summarized below, and further details are contained in the EIA 
for Malargue. 
 
(i) Environmental Management of Construction Activities 
 
The execution of the project tasks involves activities that cause temporary and localized 
environmental impacts. To mitigate these impacts, and to comply with the Argentine 
legal framework, the following measures would be applied to address project-execution 
related impacts on water, soil, air and vegetation, as well as cultural, noise and visual 
impacts. Issues related to occupational safety and exposure are also addressed. The 
requirements for implementation and supervision of environmental management of 
mitigation activities and provisions for occupational safety and protection are included in 
the contract documents for the contractors. 
 
•
Hazardous waste: The execution of the project would involve the extensive useof 
machinery and trucks, entailing the generation of hazardous waste such as used oil, filters 
and pneumatic fluids. Both national and Province laws regulate the management of these 
materials. Potential impacts on soils and water would be minimized by adhering to these 
laws, as well as by constructing properly protected storage areas for temporarily storing 
the waste, and contracting with a company that specializes in its transport and disposal.  
 
Page  12
•
Impact of relocating the mineral waste piles: The primary impact of this taskis the 
risk of causing both workers and the public to inhale suspended particles in the course of 
the removal and the nearby re-placement of the waste piles. To minimize dust, the work-
face would be kept wet, and once wind velocities exceed 20 km/h, activities would be 
suspended. 
 
•
Extraction and hauling of soils: The construction of encapsulation requires five 
types of natural materials: rocks, clay, riprap, sandy-silty soil and silty soil. The source 
quarries are located within a distance of 3 to 20 km away from Malargue. Some concerns 
common to all quarrying activities include the need for minimizing impact on flora and 
fauna to be removed from the designated quarry sites and their access routes and their 
post-closure restoration; contingency plans for accidental spills during material transport; 
licensing and control of explosives and of incendiary and hazardous materials; and the 
disposal of municipal- and sanitary waste. 
 
•
Superficial soil contamination outside the site: A 7.5ha area immediately adjacent 
to the NE site area has been leased from the owner so as to treat a localized portion of the 
plot, which was found to be contaminated. The soil on this plot will be treated in the 
same way that the contaminated onsite soils are to be treated: by removal of the 
contaminated layer and its replacement with clean soil. This remediation would then 
allow the planting of annual crops. 
 
•
General provisions for worker and passer-by protection:  In compliance with all 
applicable labor and sanitation regulations, changing rooms, sanitation- and medical 
facilities, personal radiological and safety protection and controlled site access apply. The 
different site areas would be classified with respect to radiological safety (i.e., access-
free, supervised and controlled) and appropriate signage would be installed. With respect 
to dust control, workers are required to wear protective coveralls which are washed three 
times per week. Showers are taken after each half-shift. Haulage trucks are sprayed with 
water before leaving the site. Indicator tests are taken on urine samples of workers on a 
weekly basis. 
 
(ii) Environmental Monitoring – CNEA would be responsible for environmental 
monitoring at the site and ARN is responsible for regulating monitoring activities through 
control and auditing. PRAMU’s approach to environmental monitoring envisages three 
stages described below. The collected data will be shared with the potentially affected 
communities. 
 
•
Prior to launching of a restoration sub-project, the establishment of a baseline for 
assessing the effectiveness of the restoration work; 
 
•
During reclamation work, to ensure improvement in key environmental 
parameters; and 
 
•
Post closure, to ensure the stability of the tailings ‘dam’, compliance with the 
pertaining environmental standards, and placating the public that the restored area no 
longer presents a risk to the current or future generations. 
 
Page  13
Monitoring measures will be put in place during the remediation work to monitor 
emission levels and restricting exposures to level that are as low as reasonably achievable 
(ALARA) . Following a 20-year period of site monitoring to verify the successful 
performance of the mitigation measures, the final use of the land on the restored site 
would be determined by public consent and endorsement of the authorities at all levels. 
Access to the site will be very restricted and permanent dwelling on the site will not be 
allowed. 
 
(iii) Activities supported by proposed loan to foster institutional strengthening: Despite 
CNEA’s long history of activity in the nuclear energy fuel sector, dating back to the 
1950s, it has limited experience with mine closure, site clean-up and remediation. To 
strengthen CNEA’s capacity to implement the safeguard issues, the proposed SIL will 
support the strengthening of the capacity of CNEA to manage abandoned and/inactive 
uranium mining and processing sites in Argentina. Specific institutional strengthening 
activities that will be supported by the proposed loan include  the activities listed under 
Component 2 above. Moreover, it is expected that the experience gained from the 
remediation of the Malargue site will provide a strong institutional base for GOA to 
design and implement appropriate solutions for remediating other important sites in 
Argentina.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the general population of the city of Malargue, non 
governmental organizations in Malargue, and the provincial and municipal government 
authorities in Mendoza. Even prior to the involvement of the Bank in the proposed 
project, and as part of the process for conducting the environmental impact assessment, a 
consultative approach was adopted by CNEA. The consultative process in Malargue has 
been extensive and conducted over a long period of time, i.e., from 1994 through 2005.  
 
Public hearings: long before the World Bank was involved, the first public hearings 
were conducted in July of 1994 to make public a report on the environmental impacts of 
the project and a conceptual framework for the proposed engineering solution for 
remediating the site. In December 2004, another hearing was conducted, which included 
an examination of the detailed framework of the engineering solution. In both cases, 
announcements about the hearings were disseminated through mass media, publication of 
notices in newspapers that had wide distribution in the region. Participants at the hearings 
included representatives of the Ministry of Environment of the province and the 
Department of Mining, departmental authorities, representatives of the Poder Legislativo, 
General Department of Irrigation, Malargue chamber of commerce, the National 
University of Cuyo, Inspector de Cauce, and members of the medical profession. About 
100 members of the public including, among others, teachers, students and traders 
participated in the hearings. As a result of a proposal by a participant that the tailings at 
Malargue be transferred to San Rafael, CNEA examined this option in the analysis of 
alternative of remediation options as part of the EIA (see table in section 3 above).  Based 
on this review process, a Declaration of Environmental Impact (DeclaraciÃ³n de Impacto 
Ambiental, DIA) was issued for the project in April 1995, by the Provincial Office of 
Page  14
Environmental and Public Works. The DIA is a legal instrument, which commits CNEA 
to execute the remediation works at Malargue.  
 
Workshops 
–
were also convened by provincial representatives in July of 1996 
tofacilitate wider dissemination of activities related to the proposed mitigation solutions 
in Malargue and the opportunity for participants to express their views and concerns. This 
activity was very positive and contributed to incorporating transparency in the decision-
making process.  
 
Consultations with representatives of various organizations – consultations were held in 
with representatives of several organizations including, among others, government, 
universities, non-governmental organizations (see EIA for names of organizations). 
Through these consultations, participants received a draft of the Environmental Impact 
Assessment and provided their feedback and comments.  
 
Community Perception Surveys – Community surveys conducted, in the city of 
Malargue, in December 2001 and July 2005 confirmed the comprehensiveness of the 
public consultations conducted. In both surveys, over 70% of the surveyed population 
expressed that the issue of uranium tailings was the most important environmental 
problem in the region.  
 
The 2001 survey aimed to obtain the community of Malargue’s perception of the issue 
of uranium tailings and the management plans proposed by CNEA. The survey covered 
almost 9,000 persons over the age of 18. Participants in the survey had the opportunity to 
express their views on various topics including prioritization of environmental problems 
in Malargue, environmental aspects related to the tailings, sense of security with respect 
to the environmental situation of the uranium tailings, coverage of the public hearings, 
the selected tailings management solution, knowledge on tailings management 
(encapsulation), and confidence in government and non government organizations. 
Although responses of participants varied on many of the topics treated in the survey, a 
very high percentage (94.5%) of those interviewed indicated that encapsulation of the 
tailings at the Malargue site should begin immediately.  
 
The follow-up community survey in 2005 aimed to obtain the local community’s 
perception of the progress of the works implemented by CNEA. Some of the 
recommendations from the NGOs interviewed during the 2005 survey called for 
expanding the scope of PRAMU, increased information dissemination to the public, 
implementing the remediation works quickly and properly with adequate supervision. All 
the NGOs interviewed confirmed knowledge of CNEA and were aware of its 
environmental remediation policies being implemented through PRAMU.  
 
The findings and conclusions from both surveys were presented in November 2005 to 
an audience including members of the national Poderes Ejecutivos y Legislativos, 
provincial and municipal governments, members of the Council Deliberante of the 
municipality of Malargue, Boards of local schools and the technical school, community 
organizations and the general public. The meeting confirmed that there was little 
Page  15
community anxiety about the remediation works at Malargue and an increased sense of 
security with respect to environmental protection as a result of the activities of CNEA. In 
parallel, a Project Information Center has been built and was formally opened in 
November 2005 at the Malargue site.  
 
During project preparation a special unit was established within CNEA to carry out the 
consultation processes over the longer term. This unit will continue throughout the 
project and beyond and function as CNEA’s overall Environment Management Unit. One 
sub-component of the project is designed to support CNEA in establishing a process for 
regular and open consultation in relation to the remediation program and to site-specific 
works for which remediation works are planned. Consultation, disclosure, and reporting 
will be key elements of the Environment Information and Management System to be 
established under this project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/24/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  16
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The disclosure dates shown above date to 2006, when the first full EIA for the Malargue 
was completed and disclosed by CNEA, and sent by the Bank to the Infoshop and Board.  
(The project code at that time was P057124, but was changed in late 2007 due to redesign 
of the project).   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  17
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carter J. Brandon 
06/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
06/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman 
06/10/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/11/2008 
Comments:  The team has done an examplary job on addressing environmental and social issues, 
and is to be congratulated. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
06/11/2008 
Comments:   
