Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3308 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P105680 
Project Name: AR Matanza-Riachuelo Basin (MRB) Sustainable Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Horacio Cristian Terraza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Central government 
administration (30%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Analysis of economic growth (S);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
640.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
160.00
160.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s main objective is to improve the quality of life and the sanitation services in the 
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin, as well as to improve water quality of the main water courses crossing 
it.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
An integrated approach to the clean-up of the M-R basin requires coordinated action in three 
areas, followed by a fourth project component for technical assistance and project management.  
 
Sanitation component, designed to eliminate sewage discharges into the M-R River through the 
provision of infrastructure works such as collectors, preliminary treatment plants, and sub-
aquatic outfalls which will discharge effluents to the La Plata River. This infrastructure is 
fundamental to: (i) limit domestic and industrial wastewater discharges into inland rivers such as 
the MR and protect these receiving bodies, which have limited autopurification capacity, by 
diverting all collected wastewater to Rio La Plata, thus making use of its major autopurification 
Page  2
capacity; (ii) Distribute the flow between two plants in order to provide greater flexibility and 
security to the sewerage and treatment systems; (iii) Allow industries located in the AySA served 
area, which have pre-treated their wastewater to the required level, to connect to the sewerage 
network limiting the level of in situ treatment and avoiding surface and groundwater 
contamination. While the total level of investment required for these investments is 
approximately US$1.5 billion, the government has formally requested World Bank financing of 
US$532 in the first phase, and has indicated its interest for additional financing in the future.  
 
Industrial pollution abatement component, designed to eliminate all industrial wastewater 
(organic as well as toxic effluents) discharges directly into the Matanza-Riachuelo River. 
Through a combination of technical assistance to improve monitoring, control and enforcement 
by the M-R Basin Authority, and matching grants to support private sector investments in 
pollution control and cleaner production measures, this component will aim to reduce industrial 
effluent discharges and aid in the environmental recuperation of the MR. World Bank financing 
of US$50 million has been requested for this component. In parallel, a further US$80 million in a 
Cleaner Production project tentatively scheduled for Board delivery next fiscal year has been 
requested as well.  
 
Territorial Development component, designed to address the high environmental degradation 
levels especially in unregulated-low-income urban areas. This component seeks to contribute to 
the appropriate urban development expansion and improving the living conditions of the poor. 
This component is composed of three interventions namely: (i) Institutional development 
through the strengthening of institutional capacity in territorial planning basin-wide; (ii) Support 
sustainable urban expansion in the basin, by consolidating areas largely inhabited by low-income 
population that are already incorporated in the urban expansion and are appropriate for urban 
use; and (iii) Flood control, by finance structural and non structural activities for addressing 
flooding in the basin; non structural activities refer to accompanying technical assistance 
knowledge and management plans, and structural activities refer to investments in drainage 
systems. The government has requested US$50 million in World Bank financing for this 
component, while recognizing that the cost of the required interventions are much higher and 
will likely need follow-on financing.  
 
Technical Assistance and Project Management component, including the financing of 
additional studies required during the course of project implementation, the design of subsequent 
phases of the project, expert support (including international expertise and a possible 
international oversight panel), communications and community outreach, impact monitoring, and 
overall project management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project area of influence is quite large. It comprises not only the MR Basin but different 
zones of direct influence of complementary works that in one way or the other affect the 
environmental quality of the basin. The area of influence involves the following and sometimes 
overlapping areas:  
 
-
The entire Matanza-Riachuelo Basin  
 
-
The entire AySA concession area  
 
-
The fluvial sector of the
 Lujan River, from the mouth of the Reconquista River until it’s 
confluence into Rio de La Plata  
 
-
The sector of the Rios de la Plata between the coast and the outer limit of the so-called 
“Parana de las Palmas Flow Corridor”.  
Page  3
-
The coastal sector between the coast of the Rio de La Plata, the neighborhood access road 
to the river at approximately 14,000 m southeast of the boundary of the General Belgrano plant 
site, the Boca railroad, and the boundary between the districts of Quilmes and Berazategui.  
 
Infrastructure development will take place in mostly within the MR borders, the AySA 
concession and the Rio the La Plata. All of these areas in the Buenos Aires Province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project has several counterparts: the Matanza-Riachuelo River Basin Authority, the federal 
Secretariat of Environment, the water utility company AySA, and the City and Province of 
Buenos Aires.  The category A designation is mainly due to works to be implemented by the 
federal government on behalf of AySA.  
 
AySA has technical responsibility for the design, analysis of environmental impacts, 
supervision of construction, and operation of the project-financed sanitation works.  As a 
company recently formed (in the mid-2006) from the private European-owned Aguas 
Argentinas, it has inherited an established capacity and track record that includes safeguard-
related due diligence on major investments in the 1990s.  Those investments include sewage 
treatment plants.  
 
The industrial pollution component has as its objective the mitigation of private sector-
generated pollution.  The investments to be made, with incentives provided by the government, 
will be private sector investments in pollution control and cleaner production.  While the 
proposed investments will be screened for viability, it is not expected that much environmental 
due diligence will be required by any level of government authority.  
 
The urban rehabilitation component will primarily address issues under the jurisdiction of the 
Province and City of Buenos Aires. The capacity of these counterparts remains to be assessed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The sanitation works, including sewage tunnels (collectors), treatment plant, and a sub-
aquatic outfall, will require a full EIA. The level of environmental analysis of other project-
financed activities, such as urban drainage works in the lower river basin, remains to be 
determined.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Since the project expects to contribute to the significant improvement of water quality 
conditions in the Matanza-Riachuelo basin, this is expected to have significant positive impacts 
for the natural riverine habitats found in the project area.  An area of the receiving waters in the 
Rio 
de
la Plata will be degraded as a result of the pollution discharge from the waste water 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
treatment plant.  Models developed for the outfalls indicate that the discharge plume is expected 
to be fully contained within a relatively small area of the receiving waters.  The pollution is not 
expected to affect downstream coastal areas designated as conservation areas. This will be 
covered with the full EA in order to minimize any possible impact   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Preliminary site evaluations for proposed civil works construction do not provide any 
evidence of cultural property which will require mitigation or management measures.  However, 
all construction contracts will include *chance finds* clause which will require contractors to 
stop construction in the event that any underground cultural property sites are encountered 
during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Since the vast majority of construction will take place underground or on sites that do not 
require any land acquisition or resettlement the project expects minimal need for resettlement.  
However, as a precaution the project has development a Resettlement Framework in the event 
that there will be any unexpected land acquisition.  Among other things, the RF spells out the 
eligibility criteria, forms of compensation, and dispute resolution mechanism which will be 
available to potentially affected people.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Since the Rio de la Plata is the main receiving water of the discharge from the outfalls is an 
International Waterway as defined under the policy, Argentina will be required to notify 
Uruguay of its intent to construct the project and seek Uruguay no-objection to proceed with the 
project.  Initial notification process has been started to notify Uruguay   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
The initial scoping consultations were held in July and the dissemination workshop(s) will 
be held in September.  The first draft of EA has been disclosed in August 18th, 2008. The 
final report is expected in October  
 
Detailed data collection and modeling of the sub-aquatic outfalls, which will the most 
important part of the EIA, are already underway.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Menahem Libhaber 
08/21/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
09/03/2008 
Comments:   
