Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3709 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/20/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P110498 
Project Name: AR PERMER Renewable Energy Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Todd M. Johnson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 11, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (89%);Sub-national government administration (11%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (P);Other 
financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Additional Financing operation would support the same type of activities carried out under 
the original operation, including those added with the approval of six amendments to the original 
loan and grant agreements during the period of project implementation.  Specifically the 
objectives are the following: (a) to provide rural areas with reliable electricity supply in a 
sustainable manner using renewable energy technologies, when feasible; (b) to support the 
creation of sustainable business operations for rural energy in Argentina; (c) to support the 
expansion of private sector participation in the provision of electricity in rural areas and the 
corresponding strengthening of provincial government capacities to regulate private sector 
participation; and (d) to advance the reform of the energy sector in critical areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The PERMER project is structured around the following four components:  
 
(1) Acquisition and/or installation of: a) solar home systems (SHS) for households; b) 
photovoltaic systems for public service institutions such as schools, hospitals, and public 
buildings; c) mini-hydro plants, diesel or diesel-RET hybrids, other low-carbon electricity 
systems (including stand alone or collective grid electricity systems); d) solar thermal systems 
Page  2
for water and space heating; and e) water pumping stations, and energy efficient equipment.  
Supply would be by either public or private concessionaires.  
 
(2) Acquisition and/or installation of wind home systems (WHS), following the community-
based pilots instituted under PERMER, by either public or private concessionaires.  
 
(3) Capacity building and technical assistance activities.  
 
(4) Project administration.  
 
Under the scaled-up activities of the Additional Financing operation, support will be provided 
for the installation of 13,726 solar home systems, 21 mini grids, 138 solar-thermal systems, 606 
solar PV systems to supply rural schools and public services, 30 solar powered water pumps and 
2
biomass generation projects. It is estimated that about 18,926 households be benefit from the 
proposed scale-up of Project activities.  
 
The current project has not encountered relevant environmental and social issues.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The operation further seeks to expand the geographic scope of the original Project, both within 
existing project provinces as well as in new provinces, such as the Provinces of Mendoza, San 
Luis, La Rioja, Catamarca and Chaco where feasibility studies will be conducted to assess new 
rural electrification initiatives.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In preparation of the AF, the PCU has produced an Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) which updates and improves original procedures and incorporates best practice. In 
particular, the ESMP establishes a screening procedure to ensure that no rural electrification 
initiative supported under the scaled up activities results in significant environmental impacts, 
including the provision that no Category-A projects would be supported under the program.  
 
The primary targeted beneficiaries of the scaled-up operations continue to be dispersed rural 
households and communities across the country. A percentage of these beneficiaries is expected 
to be from indigenous communities, and although the original project had not explicitly triggered 
OP 4.10, the proposed extension of project scale would formally trigger this policy. Accordingly, 
the PCU has prepared (i) a comprehensive analysis of the social context and the applicable legal 
and institutional framework, (ii) baseline information on the targeted indigenous populations, 
(iii) a review of stakeholder dynamics including institutions (as part of the ESMP), and (iv) an 
Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) to ensure a free, prior, and informed consultation 
process at each stage of project implementation. An Indigenous Peoples Provincial Plan (IPPP) 
will be prepared by Provinces where Project activities trigger OP 4.10.  
 
In accordance with OP 4.10, the PCU has conducted a structured consultation with a wide 
audience of key stakeholders at the Federal level including the National Institute of Indigenous 
Peoples Affairs (INAI) to assess the potential impacts as well as concerns associated with the 
scaled-up activities. The consultation process has placed special emphasis on the implementation 
of a feedback mechanism to ensure that all stakeholder concerns are identified and that 
appropriate preventative and mitigation measures are put in place. The ESMP includes a strategy 
for a continuous public consultation at the Provincial and community levels, and mechanisms for 
periodic dissemination of information associated with the Project and scaled-up activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSHS-DPT) 
Page  3
Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Although the scaled-up project supports the same type of activities as the original operation 
in terms of geographic areas and type of beneficiaries, supervision activities for the original 
project and preparation of the Additional Financing operation have provided an opportunity to 
enhance the existing social and environmental framework. In addition to O.P. 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment, the proposed operation would trigger O.P. 4.10 on Indigenous 
Peoples. The operation would remain a Category B project and an appropriate Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) including an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) for the expanded activities has been developed in accordance with the national 
regu
lations and the Bank’s safeguard policies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) for the expanded activities has been 
developed in accordance with the national regulations and the Bank’s safeguard policies. As with 
the original Project, the Additional Financing operation poses no resettlement, land acquisition or 
significant social development issues.  As the overall objective of the project is to improve 
access to rural energy services, it is expected to have a positive net social impact on the rural 
poor.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/24/2008 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), including the Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework (IPPF), was disclosed to the public on 04/08/08; it can be found on the 
PERMER Project website at (http://energia.mecon.gov.ar/permer/permer.html). The ESMP 
was submitted to Infoshop on 05/22/08. Consultations for the IPPF were conducted in June 
2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Todd M. Johnson 
10/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
10/15/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
