Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC4683
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P095485 
Project Name:  Urban Transport  in Metropolitan Areas 
Task Team Leader:  Andres G. Pizarro 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 3, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 20, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (80%);Public administration- Transportation (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (50%);Other public sector governance 
(20%);Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (15%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (10%);Land administration and management (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
37.60
37.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project (APL1) development objectives contribute to the overall program 
development objective by: (i) supporting the design and creation of a multijurisdictional 
Metropolitan Transport Agency for the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA); (ii) 
strengthening the Authorities# capacity in decision making, planning, priority setting, and 
resource allocation in urban transport; (iii) improving the quality and performance of 
urban transport infrastructure and/or services in medium size Metropolitan Areas; and 
(iv) improving the physical integration and access to public transport networks in the 
Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area   
 
3. Project Description 
This project will be supported by a two-step Adaptable Program Loan (APL). The 
possibility of structuring the operation as an APL has been discussed and accepted by the 
GoA. The first phase of the APL would finance a set of investments for up to US$150 
million.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Creation of a Metropolitan Transport Agency (MTA) for the Buenos 
Aires Metropolitan Area (US$28.5 million without contingencies). The objective of this 
component is to strengthen the capacity for transportation planning and management at 
the metropolitan level. This component will prepare the legal, technical, financial and 
institutional conditions for the creation of a Metropolitan Transport Agency (MTA). The 
existence of an agency for the AMBA is a prerequisite to rationally restructure inter-
jurisdictional bus routes, coordinate bus and subway services, implement multimodal 
integration, especially fare integration, smart card compatibility, subsidy and uniform 
tariff policies etc. Furthermore, this component will finance the consolidation of a solid 
transport database, building on the database created in the PTUBA, and consolidating it 
through the creation of the Urban Transport Observatory. Finally, the operation will 
support the Electronic Ticket project (SUBE) initiated by the GoA by financing Project 
Management consultancy and technical assistance. Both the Observatory and SUBE 
projects are the necessary building blocks to support a possible change in the existing 
subsidy scheme which this operation will also support with individual consultants.  
 
This component is divided into the following sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 1.1: Agency Structuring (US$1.0 million without contingencies): 
Development of adequate legal and institutional frameworks for the new Metropolitan 
Transport Agency. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Consolidation of Transportation Planning in Buenos Aires 
(US$13.0 million without contingencies): Support for necessary technical efforts for 
transportation planning activities. This includes: (i) continued development of the AMBA 
Urban Transport Model (US$2.0 million); (ii) An AMBA Transport Master Plan (US$2.0 
million); (iii) Feasibility Studies and Design Studies for a major multijurisdictional 
project in AMBA (US$6.0 million); (iv) Transport Planning data collection and updating 
(US$3.0 million). 
 
Sub-component 1.3 Urban Transport Observatory (US$1.1 million without 
contingencies): Finance for the creation of an Observatory which will collect, process and 
maintain all the urban transport and air quality databases. 
 
Sub-component 1.4 Fare System Consolidation (US$10.5 million without 
contingencies): Faciliatation of the provision of a single fare media payment technology 
across all transportation modes in AMBA. This sub-component will finance supervision 
and project management consultant services only.  
 
Sub-component 1.5 Staff and Operational Expenses (US$2.9 million without 
contingencies): Financing of the necessary staff, office and other operational 
expenditures of the Metropolitan Transport Agency for the duration of the project. This 
may include a seed group of professionals destined to become part of the MTA, to work 
on the activities financed by component 1, prior to the legal creation of the MTA.   
 
Component 2: Urban Transport Improvements in Argentina#s medium size 
Metropolitan Areas (US$62.9 million without contingencies). The objective of this 
component is to enhance the mobility conditions of Argentina#s medium size 
Metropolitan Areas. Five Metropolitan Areas have been selected to participate from the 
program (Mendoza, Posadas, Tucumán, Córdoba and Rosario). The eligibility criteria for 
Page  3
a
city or Metropolitan Area to participate in the PTUMA Program are the following: (i) 
An urban transport policy or strategy that favors public transport; (ii) A Master or 
Strategic Transport Plan for the Metropolitan Area that has been adopted, is duly 
recognized, and has been published; (iii) An origin-destination household survey that 
provides information on mobility indices in the Metropolitan Area; (iv) A working 
computer-based transport model for the Metropolitan Area. Other cities or Metropolitan 
Areas may participate in the Program provided they meet the eligibility criteria. The 
Program provides financing for interested cities or Metropolitan Areas for assistance in 
attaining the eligibility criteria. 
 
Therefore, the component will finance: (a) one or more priority projects that are in an 
advanced state of planning and have been evaluated from social, environmental and 
economic perspectives. (b) a set of specific feasibility studies and/or final designs for 
future projects that result from comprehensive transport studies currently under way and 
studies to support interested cities in meeting the eligibility criteria so that they may 
participate in the Program in APL2. 
 
This component is divided into the following sub-components:  
 
Sub-component 2.1 Metropolitan Area of Mendoza(US$9.8 million without 
contingencies): Paving works for Colector Papagayos.  
 
Sub-component 2.2 Metropolitan Area of Posadas (US$14.6 million without 
contingencies): Construction of segregated busway on Uruguay Avenue. 
 
Sub-
component 2.3 Metropolitan Area of Tucumán (US$22.5 million without 
contingencies): Paving and storm water drainage for Barrio 11 de Marzo. 
 
Sub-component 2.4 Metropolitan Area of Córdoba (US$2.0 million without 
contingencies): Preparation studies for Mitre Intermodal transport terminal. 
 
Sub-component 2.5 Metropolitan Area of Rosario (US$4.0 million without 
contingencies): Preparation studies for High Quality transit for the Corredor Norte-Sur 
Project. 
 
Sub-component 2.6 Technical assistance (US$10 million without contingencies): 
Financing of feasibility and/or design studies or other studies supporting interested cities 
in attaining eligibility criteria for the Program. Financing the strengthening of 
institutional capacity of participating Metropolitan Areas in environmental and social 
management. 
 
The works sub-projects prepared in APL1 up to detailed design will be financed in 
APL2, specifically the sub-projects presented by Córdoba and Rosario. However, all sub-
projects that comply with preparation criteria (economic, social and environmental 
assessments), have a detailed design and come from eligible Metropolitan Areas (i.e. 
those that comply with the criteria set for Metropolitan Areas) may be considered for 
financing in APL2; these may include Metropolitan Areas not yet identified. In the case 
of the Metropolitan Areas that have already had .sub-projects financed in APL1 
(potentially Tucumán, Posadas and Mendoza), they will need to show progress in the 
institutional set-up regarding multijurisdictional coordination to be considered in APL2, 
Page  4
in particular the way they implement the Metropolitan Area transport plan in multiple 
jurisdictions. 
 
Component 2 addresses sectoral issues such as the underinvestment in road maintenance 
and road infrastructure, increased traffic congestion in urban areas, the decreasing quality 
of public transport service and the limited intermodal integration. The target groups are 
the future users of the infrastructure projects, the residents of surrounding neighborhoods 
and the commercial areas adjacent to the projects. The main outputs of this component 
are the road improvements and new public transport infrastructure in Mendoza, Posadas, 
Tucumán, Córdoba and Rosario as well as a set of feasibility and/or design studies for 
previously identified projects. 
 
Component 3: Public Transport access and modal integration in Buenos Aires 
Metropolitan Area (US$53.6 million without contingencies). The objective of this 
component is to improve current accessibility to and mode integration of the public 
transport network in the AMBA. This component will include infrastructure works on 
transfer centers, train stations and grade-separated crossings. It will also feature 
operational improvements in the current train signaling system. This component provides 
an integral strategy to improve service quality by acting simultaneously on bus-train 
physical integration, accessibility to stations, railway signaling improvements, and rail-
road crossings. The combination of these actions will improve the perceived quality of 
suburban train services in the AMBA. The area of intervention is considered one of the 
poorest in the country, the types of works are relatively low-cost and will have significant 
impacts, and the users will be public transport passengers, thus the benefits will be, to a 
great degree, accrued by the some of poorest sectors of the population. 
 
This component is divided into the following sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 3.1 Transfer centers (US$5.0 million without contingencies): Detailed 
design studies for improvement infrastructure works in three intermodal centers of the 
AMBA. 
 
Sub-component 3.2 Station Accessibility (US$30.6 million without contingencies): 
Works to improve the access conditions around train stations in the AMBA. This 
component is demand-based. A universe of stations eligible to have their access 
conditions improved has been identified and ranked on the basis of poverty indicators of 
the area, number of passenger boarding and alighting, and train frequency. The 
corresponding interested Municipality will present the project concept, within the 
framework of the type of works that are considered eligible, and if the PIU approves it, 
the project design will be carried out.  The eligible types of works are small, such as road 
and sidewalk paving, urban furniture, street lighting, bicycle facilities etc. The works per 
station will be limited to approximately US$1.0 million without taxes. Technical and 
economic studies justifying small increases in specific cases will be accepted. 
 
Sub-component 3.3 Grade separated crossings (US$17.5 million without contingencies): 
Works to build one grade-separated crossing at a critical railroad intersection. 
 
Sub-component 3.4 Train signaling System (US$0.5 million without contingencies) 
Train signaling system: Study to design the best strategy to improve the train signaling 
system. 
Page  5
Component 3 addresses sectoral issues like the underinvestment in rail infrastructure 
such as stations and transfer centers in the AMBA, the high accident rates at rail 
crossings, and the inefficient barrier and signaling systems. The target group will be the 
commuter train passengers and the surrounding communities. The main outputs of this 
component are the improvement of access conditions to existing rail infrastructure. 
 
Component 4 Sectoral Training: Urban Transport Planning Master (US$2.5 million 
without contingencies). The objective of this component is to improve academic training 
in urban transport. The component will design a postgraduate course (Masters) in urban 
transport including all the component disciplines such as engineering, planning, 
economics, etc. The component builds on the course designed and carried out with the 
support of the PTUBA AF loan, and will attempt to follow the academic curriculum 
designed then, but adapted so as to become a permanent course in the participating 
universities.  
 
This component seeks to bring together the Universities of Buenos Aires, Cuyo, 
Córdoba and Rosario to develop and implement this course. The course is planned to be 
shared by the participating universities and would be given in class and through a virtual 
platform (Internet, videoconferencing, etc.), so that students in each of the universities 
would follow the same curriculum but based in their own city. 
 
This component is divided into the following sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 4.1 Institutional and Academic Development (US$0.64 million without 
contingencies). The institutional and academic design of the course with the objective of 
obtaining permanence for the courses through accreditation by the Ministry of Education. 
 
Sub-component 4.2 Implementation of the course (US$1.76 million without 
contingencies). The sub-component will finance education fees and a limited amount of 
scholarships for students. The program will finance the first two promotions and from 
then on the course will be self-sufficient. 
 
Sub-component 4.3 Teacher training program (US$0.1 million without contingencies). 
This sub-component will finance the implementation of a teacher training program for the 
teaching staff that will participate in the Masters course.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will execute work sub-projects the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA) 
and in three medium size Metropolitan Areas (Mendoza, Tucumán and Posadas), all these 
Metropolitan Areas contain densely populated urban areas with low-income citizens. All 
the target areas share environmental problems of congestion, air quality, road safety and 
land development. Therefore, all project related works will take place in consolidated 
urban areas, with the exception of Mendoza, whose urban are is not as dense as the 
others. No adverse effects are expected on natural habitats, natural resources or 
ecologically fragile zones, which have been confirmed through the EIA process. Special 
attention has been given to the potential impacts of construction not only because the 
Page  6
operation#s sub-projects will be located in highly urbanized areas and their potential 
impacts, especially on surrounding communities, but also in terms of modification of the 
drainage systems. Only one sub-project (grade-separated crossing in Monte Grande, 
Esteban Echeverria), involves the transformation of cultural heritage and local landscape 
around a railway station.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario (LCSSO) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The Borrower has prepared four 
Environmental Assessment (EA) packages (one for each sub-project, Component 2), 
including expedite site-specific EA which include a first stage of public consultations and 
a
set of environmental management measures, as part of an Environmental and Social 
Management Manuals. An overall environmental analysis of minor improvements in 
railway stations (Component 3) was carried out, based on the review of a sampling 
exercise and of a bidding document. EA process has indicated that the main direct 
impacts are expected to occur during construction and cause localized negative 
environmental impacts. Such impacts are expected to consist essentially of noise, 
vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. Additional negative impacts during construction 
will occur due to haulage and final disposal of materials. Access to commercial sectors 
and houses will be affected temporarily; however, the mitigation measures already 
designed will reduce unnecessary interference in commercial activities. Based on the 
available information, no involuntary resettlement will result, with the exception of the 
Mendoza sub-project, which requires specific resettlement measures. Most project 
impacts can be mitigated by adequate design and environmental management plans. 
Water management and design of adequate drainage systems will be critical to ensure the 
Page  7
environmental feasibility of sub-projects, as well as to avoid and minimize the eventual 
impact of floods in vulnerable populations, particularly in Tucumán and Mendoza sub-
projects. Although they are not expected as part of this project, eventual indirect impacts 
linked to changes in land-use, changes in traffic volumes, or specific impacts on 
commercial activities will be addressed by the project if they are detected during the 
public consultation process to determine they are in line with Bank#s safeguards policies. 
 
In all the feasibility studies, detailed design, transport master plans, and eventual land 
use plans under Component 1 or 2 of the Project, the Borrower shall ensure that the terms 
of reference for all studies include a provision to incorporate the World Bank Safeguard 
Policies in them. 
 
The sub-project in Esteban Echeverría, to be partially funded with this loan proceeds 
from Component 3, has received criticism from a local community group. This group has 
sent its comments to the Bank, the PIU and the Municipality. The Bank team and the PIU 
have met with the citizen#s concerned and the PIU and the project team have considered 
their concerns. The Bank team has been monitoring the process and has supported the 
PIU to ensure safeguard compliance, as well as implementation of public consultations 
and public information disclosure. The Borrower has been proactive, not only improving 
the EA to include a technically sound analysis of alternatives acceptable to the Bank, but 
also offering permanent dialogue and access to project information to reach consensus on 
the proposed project by the participating municipality. Background information regarding 
this project is available in project files.  
 
In conclusion, the project complies with environmental safeguard requirements. Project 
implementation will be guided by the use of detailed environmental management plans, 
promoting public consultation processes and detailed EA at project design level. In 
particular, safeguard implementation will be ensured by a central PIU which will 
coordinate the supervision and approval of local procedures and monitoring with sub-
national units in each participating Metropolitan Areas. A strengthening plan will be 
prepared before appraisal to ensure proper environmental management conditions in the 
PIU and in participating Metropolitan Areas. For works under the demand - driven 
Component 3, a framework approach is being followed. All projects, identified during the 
phase of loan implementation, will be subject to the EA process included in the 
Environmental and Social Management Manual prepared by the Borrower. Screening and 
Expedite EA will be prepared for each particular sub-project. 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Since all works are expected to be in densely populated 
urban areas, the project is not expected to finance works which will adversely affect 
critical and other natural habitats as defined under the policy. The sub-project screening 
process and project specific EA undertaken for specific sub-projects has confirmed this 
assumption.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The project will not affect forests as defined under the policy nor 
will it promote forest management of any type. No actions are expected under this policy. 
 
Page  8
Pest Management (OP 4.09). The project will not finance the procurement or use of any 
pesticides. The Tucuman sub-project would promote the planting of trees associated with 
the paving of roads in Barrio 11 de Marzo but will not use pesticides. 
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). Given that this loan involves projects with 
civil works that could affect cultural resources, this policy is triggered. Even though the 
EA process conducted so far indicates there is no expectation that cultural property is in 
the project areas, the Environmental and Social Management Manual sets forth "chance 
find" procedures in the case that such property is encountered. 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). No indigenous people are likely to be affected by the 
project. The proposed action will not directly affect or involve indigenous peoples. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Most of the civil works under the project will 
follow the alignments of existing roads and rights-of-way, reducing the likelihood of 
involuntary displacements. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was 
prepared for the project, because all component 2 sub-projects are presented at a 
preliminary design level, so sitting alignments are not yet final (detailed designs will be 
completed during implementation), and sub-projects under sub-component 3.1 are 
demand-based so their final location and designs are not known at this stage. The RFP 
will be applied where physical and/or economic resettlement occurs. 
 
In component 2, according to the sub-project#s preliminary designs submitted by the 
PIU, field visits, and work with the Borrower and local counterparts, an Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plan was deemed to be necessary for one sub-project in sub-component 2.1, 
Colector Papagayos in Mendoza.  The Plan was presented to the Bank and it was found 
that it complied with OP4.12; it was published in the Borrower#s webpage and in the 
Bank#s Infoshop. It will be necessary to acquire a small fraction of one land plot (less 
than 200 m2), belonging to a firm, talks have already been initiated with the owner and 
there will be a voluntary ceding of the property by the firm. This acquisition or voluntary 
donation of land is not considered involve a high amount, and will be paid by the 
Municipality of Mendoza.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). No dams will be constructed under this project. 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). No sub-projects affecting 
international waterways will be financed under this project. Drainage works related to the 
proposed subproject for Barrio 11 de Marzo in Tucuman city will not change the quality 
and quantity of water flows. In addition, the project is related to a tributary (canal) which 
runs exclusively in Argentina, where this country is the only riparian. 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60). No sub-project within disputed areas as 
defined under the policy will be financed.   
 
Page  9
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to have positive environmental impact in the long-run, since it 
aims at improving access and quality of public transport and reducing conflicts between 
rail and motorized traffic, which will provide access, reduce congestion and emissions, 
and improve traffic safety. The increase in car ownership and the inefficient management 
of an aging public transport fleet, combined with the proliferation of old and polluting 
micro-buses and deficiencies in bus inspection and maintenance have led to increased 
congestion and high levels of traffic-generated air pollution. The proposed project, 
especially where blended with GEF support (P114008), will (a) promote the use of low-
emission modes such as high-capacity, clean buses, suburban trains and non-motorized 
transport, (b) improve traffic flows through the removal of traffic bottlenecks such as rail-
road at-level crossings and (c) improve the local governments# capacity to monitor air 
quality and set better emission standards, in a country where air pollution data and 
monitoring equipments are very scarce and where standards are obsolete.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative selected and presented in public consultations meeting for the sub-
projects in Tucuman, Posadas and Mendoza has shown an important degree of social 
acceptability. These selected alternatives tend to minimize adverse impacts. In the case of 
the grade # separated crossing in Monte Grande, Esteban Echeverria, the proposed 
alternative was opposed by a group in the local community. To address their concerns the 
Borrower requested the preparation of a detailed EIA, which includes an analysis of 
alternatives and an improvement in the impact analysis. The new EIA was presented to 
the community, additional opinion surveys are being gathered and the Borrower is 
preparing the conclusions to this new round of consultations. The Borrower has been 
proactive and has shown strong commitment to solve the issues raised by the community 
and has supported a permanent consultation process with stakeholders in the city and 
with the participating municipality.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Development of expedite Environmental and Social Assessments of proposed sub-
projects were finalized and reviewed before appraisal and the analysis of the 
environmental and social impacts (positive and negative) were completed at a 
preliminary design level. The steps outlined below correspond to the process described in 
the existing Environmental and Social Management Manuals. As a first step, Preliminary 
Screening was carried to collect and compile basic environmental and social data to 
detect impact for each of the proposed project alternatives and to confirm the 
environmental assessment category by the Bank. The screening exercise identified the 
potential of physical resettlement and economic displacement, vegetation to be affected, 
flood risk, potential effects on land owners, effects on natural or cultural heritage and on 
urban infrastructure and equipment, etc. An already prepared Screening Datasheet has 
guided the procedure. This datasheet was completed in the field, by sub-national 
counterparts, with the support and overview of the project#s preparation team. After the 
Page  10
screening stage, the project team requested the municipalities prepare an Expedite 
Environmental Assessment to analyze specific environmental and social impacts, 
identifying the need for future additional studies, following the local regulation and Bank 
safeguards, such as Environmental Impact Assessment Reports. Already prepared 
Expedite Environmental Assessment Guidelines have oriented the procedure. These 
guidelines have been applied in the field, by sub-national counterparts, with the support 
and overview of the project preparation team. The Bank received the following 
documents: 
 
#
Mendoza Metropolitan Area, Colector Papagayos project, EA package including 
project description, screening, site-specific expedite EA, consultation report and 
environmental management manual. 
 
#
Tucumán Metropolitan Area, Barrio 11 de Marzo # Corredor Central Sur project, 
EA package including project description, screening, site-specific expedite EA, 
consultation report and environmental management manual. 
 
#
Posadas Metropolitan Area. Avenida Uruguay project EA package including 
project description, screening, site-specific expedite EA, consultation report and 
environmental management manual. 
 
#
Environmental Assessment for the grade-separated crossing in Esteban Echeverria 
This sub-project is comprised of a grade-separated crossing. Its detailed engineering 
design is already prepared. As part of the sub-project a detailed site-specific 
Environmental Impact Assessment report was prepared. It was submitted to public 
consultation with the local community. As a result of the consultation, and criticism from 
a
group of neighbors regarding the scale and scope of analysis, quality of information, 
and the lack of analysis of alternative locations, a new version of this Environmental 
Assessment was prepared. This new assessment incorporates the issues raised by 
consultations with local population and concerns expressed by neighbors. The 
assessment, confirms that the proposed road/ rail crossing will not have adverse impacts, 
which cannot be mitigated through an environmental and social management plan 
focused on the problems identified at local level.  
 
The Bank team and the PIU have met with the citizen#s that voiced concerns and the 
PIU and the project team have considered their observations. The Bank team has been 
monitoring the process and has supported the PIU to ensure safeguard compliance, as 
well as implementation of public consultations and public information disclosure. The 
Borrower has been proactive, not only improving the EA to include a technically sound 
analysis of alternatives acceptable to the Bank, but also offering permanent dialogue and 
access to project information to reach consensus on the proposed project by the 
participating municipality. Background information regarding this project is available in 
project files.  
 
#
Analysis for improvements in Station Accessibility. These interventions will bring 
the existing stations and access roads to a state of good repair. These improvements are 
expected to enhance the attractiveness of public transportation and provide more 
seamless transfers for intermodal trips. This sub-component is an extension of the 
PTUBA work program to a new set of railway stations in the AMBA.  
Page  11
The Borrower presented a document prepared by a Consultant to assess a sample of 
proposed small projects. Based on this list, two criteria were defined to analyze the 
projects according to the potential environmental and social complexity: (i) nature of the 
works (such as painting, urban furniture, elevators, fences, sidewalks, paving, etc.), and 
(ii) socioeconomic characteristics of the areas where the works will take place (such as 
number of transport customers, population density and percentage of poor population). 
The document shows that the specific works can be characterized as follow: 
 
#
Minimal or no impacts: painting, parking, signalization, illumination, urban 
furniture, bus stops, ramps for disabled people, fences, bike parking facilities, and 
 
#
Minor impacts: sidewalks, pathways, drainage improvements; bike paths, road 
crossings near stations; and,  
 
#
Medium: pedestrian tunnels or bridges, paving. 
 
In addition to the above mentioned analysis, the Bank team revised the template of the 
bidding document applied to this kind of works, and conducted a field visit to a sample of 
railway stations to determine the impact of on going works financed under the PTUBA 
loan. The Bank team concluded that screenings and expedite EA should be prepared for 
this sub-component, during project implementation and once the specific sites for 
investments were identified, to determine specific physical impacts as well as potential 
involuntary resettlement situations. Protocols for EA are included in the ESMM prepared 
by the Borrower and approved by the Bank. In general terms, these sub-projects will have 
no significant impacts that cannot be addressed through the measures of the ESMM and, 
more specifically, through the Environmental and Social Contract Clauses, and will not 
cause involuntary displacement. However, as a precautionary approach, screenings and 
EAs will be developed for each proposed work.  
 
#
Feasibility studies for Cordoba and Rosario cities have not been included in the 
EA process at this stage, as APL1 will only finance the initial studies and design. The 
screening, as well as site-specific environmental assessments, all in accordance with 
environmental and social Bank#s safeguards, will be prepared during the design of these 
projects, but after loan approval. For this case in particular, project legal documents will 
indicate that during the preparation stage of feasibility studies/final designs, the Borrower 
will need to ensure that Bank#s safeguard policies will be incorporated into these 
studies/designs. 
 
The Borrower will be the GoA and the Executing Agency would be located in the 
Secretaría de Transporte de la Nación, which would play the same management and 
coordination role as for the ongoing operation, the #Urban Transport Project for Buenos 
Aires# - PTUBA (Loan 4363-AR and AF Loan 7442-AR) and for the GEF Regional 
Project #Sustainable Transport and Air Quality Program# (P114008). In addition, cities 
will be encouraged to form counterpart teams who will lead the local level institutional 
development efforts as well as form the core technical team where appropriate. Through 
these operations, the National Secretary of Transport, as well as the sub-national 
counterparts, has been exposed to the Bank's safeguard policies and are now familiar with 
Page  12
them. The team in the national PIU has hired an Environmental Specialist who supervises 
safeguard related issues. Another environmental specialist will be hired to ensure proper 
supervision of safeguards issues not only in the field of interior cities but also for the sub-
projects to be financed in the AMBA. Expertise in social issues will also be incorporated. 
Implementing agencies involved with sub-projects will also include relevant expertise 
both on environmental and social issues. 
 
During preparation of the additional financing for PTUBA, the team prepared a Manual 
for Environmental ands Social Management, dated February 12, 2007. This Manual was 
considered as acceptable to the Bank, and it was disclosed at http://www.ptuba.gov.ar. 
Given that the nature and scope of proposed activities and sub-projects for this loan are 
similar to those financed by the PTUBA project, the proposed project (PTUMA) has 
applied the guiding principles of this Manual on those that have been prepared by the 
participating cities for the recently approved GEF project. These Manuals provide the 
same guidelines as Environmental Management Plans for the proposed activities. All sub-
projects have been screened and site-specific expedite EAs with EMPs included in the 
Manuals have been prepared. 
 
During the preparation of an additional financing operation for the PTUBA project 
(Loan 7442-AR), the team conducted an assessment of the experience under the PTUBA, 
and conducted a screening of a sample of the additional works that were proposed (all 
rail-road crossings and a representative subset of accessibility improvements to suburban 
rail stations). Based on this evaluation, the Bank recommended improving the technical 
procedures for environmental and social assessment and public consultation. The above-
mentioned Manual was developed to document and standardize common procedures. 
However, during supervision phase of the PTUBA project, the Bank detected some 
inconsistencies in the follow-up of Environmental Assessment reports. During October 
2008 a group of stakeholders, affected by a sub-project in the South of Greater Buenos 
Aires Metropolitan Area (Monte Grande, Esteban Echeverria) sent a letter to the Bank 
with a complaint about the quality of an Environmental Assessment report disclosed by 
the project. The Bank#s team reviewed and verified that some basic environmental 
assessment standards for Category B projects were not being followed by the 
participating municipality and PIU, what was immediately corrected upon Bank#s 
supervision.  
 
The Borrower has conducted an updated survey to assess institutional capacities in 
participating municipalities from the Greater Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area and from 
cities of Mendoza, Tucumán and Posadas. A template for this survey is included in the 
above mentioned Manual for PTUBA. Based on the findings of these surveys, the project 
team has determined the strengthening needs in terms of environmental and social 
management in each sub national counterpart and proposed specific activities tailored for 
each city team. 
 
Mainstreaming of Environmental and Social Issues in Transport Planning. As the 
proposed project will support the creation of a new institution with a relevant role in 
transport planning at regional level (Area Metropolitana de Buenos Aires), the project 
Page  13
team will prepare Terms of Reference for the creation of an environmental and social 
division as part of the proposed Metropolitan Transport Agency for Buenos Aires. The 
same approach will be applied for a Transport Planning Master included under 
Component 4.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The screening exercise identified the need for community consultation in the area of 
influence of the proposed works. During project preparation, between February and June 
2009, the Borrower consulted target groups in Mendoza, Tucuman, Posadas and Monte 
Grande. 
 
A
community consultation methodology was designed (see section on environmental 
assessment for sub-projects) which includes a set of consultation sessions encompassing 
broad and specific areas of influence of the sub-projects. The application of this 
methodology in the above mentioned cities included specifically designed presentations 
for: (a) public and community organizations; and (b) the community in general. The 
public and community organizations to be consulted included: (a) local professional 
associations (including engineering and architectural associations); (b) local chambers of 
commerce and industries; and (c) community organizations (neighborhood 
organizations).  
 
The public and community participating in the consultation process can be divided into 
two groups so far: (a) public at large in the area of influence; and (b) affected community 
in the immediate area of proposed works. The consultation process involved both formal 
and informal presentations and meetings with the target groups as well as information 
dissemination through newspapers and radio announcements.  
 
As a result of the consultation process, with the exception of Esteban Echeverría sub-
project, it can be concluded that there is an important level of consensus among 
organized groups, and the public at large about the need of the project. The consultation 
process implemented during preparation confirmed the benefits of the sub-projects: (a) 
there is consensus in the public at large about the need for the sub-projects in the 
proposed sites (excluding E. Echeverría where a group of neighbors is against the 
proposed alternative for the project); (b) a first set of specific recommendations for the 
sub-projects location and design have been obtained from meetings; (c) property owners 
whose accessibility to their houses or to their economic activities would be permanently 
diminished have found a mechanism to start a dialogue with the municipalities to reach 
different mitigations measures (see social safeguards section); and (d) a sense of 
ownership is being achieved both with the neighborhoods and the municipal institutions. 
Reports on the consultation meetings are available in the project files and have been 
disclosed together with the Environmental Assessment packages. 
 
During the implementation of PTUBA project, an important degree of public interest 
was focused on the progress of the project and the results of consultation activities. The 
PIU and the participating municipalities will work together to ensure close collaboration 
Page  14
related to public disclosure of environmental reports and data throughout the life of the 
project. The PIU has already established a public website (http://ptuba.gov.ar/ ) where 
environmental assessment reports and other information are already available.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/31/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/02/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  15
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andres G. Pizarro 
09/02/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/01/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
09/01/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman 
09/01/2009 
09/01/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
09/02/2009 
Comments:   
