Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4096 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P114294 
Project Name: Rural Corridors and Biodiversity 
Task Team Leader: Robert Ragland Davis 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 6, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
2.30
15.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is: Conserve globally important biodiversity of 
Argentina through the strengthening of the Federal Protected Areas System and development of 
conservation corridors in priority ecosystems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To reach the project development objective, the following components are proposed:  
 
A. 
Federal Protected Areas System strengthened in its planning, management, legal, and 
incentives structure (GEF 0.96 million)  
 
This would be achieved through several outputs including: (i) Development of a Federal 
Protected Areas Action Plan through a thorough consultation process, legal, cost and institutional 
analysis and guided by ecoregional gap analysis (ii) Development and implementation of 
financial incentives models for conservation on public and private lands (iii) Legal and 
Page  2
regulatory framework for private conservation (iv) Provincial capacity assessments (v) 
Increasing natural resources and protected areas management capacities  
 
B. 
Conservation Corridors developed in the Grand Chaco and Patagonian Steppe (GEF $1.8 
million)  
 
The protected areas system would make incremental investments in developing two ecoregional 
conservation corridors. The Grand Chaco corridor is presently more advanced in its technical 
design and consultation process than the Patagonian Steppe.  Among the outputs for this 
component are: (i) implementation of the strategic plan for conservation corridors of the Gran 
Chaco including strengthening provincial conservation capacity, management committees, legal 
and regulatory framework for the corridor, pilot activities in 3 provinces and plans for expansion 
to the remaining 4 provinces (ii) Design of a strategy for conservation in the Patagonian Steppe 
including agreements among the provinces, technical design of the corridors, and consultation 
processes.  
 
C. 
Protected Areas System increases ecosystem representation (GEF $4 million  
 
Based on a National Gap Analysis the protected areas system would be strengthened and its 
representation for conservation of priority ecosystem increased.  Up to six new protected areas 
would be strengthened or created within the SIFAP and incremental investments made to ensure 
management effectiveness. Protected areas would fall within both national and provincial 
categories.  
 
D. 
Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (GEF $0.7 million)  
 
The project would be mainstreamed and led by APN. Sub-components would include: (i) 
Project Management for technical and fiduciary oversight and support to APN. 2) Monitoring 
and Evaluation to ensure adequate monitoring of impacts and to assist in strengthening the 
quality of implementation and, 3) Dissemination of on-going project innovations, lessons-
learned, impacts, and other communication aspects needed to strengthen outcomes.  
 
Beneficiaries  
 
The main project beneficiaries will be (i) the rural poor whose livelihoods depend on the natural 
resource base, particularly in the Argentine Steppe and Chaco; (ii) the total supply-chain 
involved in Argentina's nature-based tourism; and (iii) and civil society as beneficiaries of the 
project . In addition, the project would aim to bolster the technical capacity and outreach of 
federal and provincial organizations working in natural resource issues to provide technical, 
policy and regulatory leadership within the field of natural resource management and fostering 
inter-institutional coordination and collaboration between many of the agencies involved in 
environmental and natural resources management.  
 
The project’s total costs of US$ 22.30 million consist of a GEF donation of US$7.0 million and 
US$ 15.30 in co-financing to be implemented over a five year period. As required by GEF 
policy, the Agency Fee would be an estimated $0.7 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project geographical scope is national as it potentially includes all terrestrial and marine 
ecoregions of Argentina.  The corridor activities will concentrate on the Chaco (with initial focus 
on Formosa, Chaco, and Santiago del Estero provinces) and the Patagonian Arid Steppe 
(including Neuquen, Rio Negro, Chubut, Santa Cruz, and Tierra del Fuego).  Based on a gap 
analysis, approximately six protected areas will receive investments in infrastructure and 
strengthened management capacity.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
APN is a strong, autonomous federal institution with increasing resources and manages one of 
the oldest parks systems in the hemisphere.  They have successfully implemented several Bank 
and GEF funded projects while maintaining high standards in regard to environmental review 
and safeguards.  The institution has its own policies and procedures in regard to social and 
environmental assessment as well.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No large-scale impacts are expected given the focus on biodiversity conservation with 
important investments in capacity and institution-building.  However, an EA will be done as part 
of project preparation to identify the project’s potential impacts, to develop appropriate 
mitigation measures for the possible limited negative impacts, and to recommend enhancement 
measures for positive impacts, as needed or required. These mitigation and enhancement 
measures will be summarized in an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that will include 
screening criteria and environmental procedures. The EA will also evaluate whether other 
environmental safeguards are triggered, and develop appropriate procedures, if necessary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project seeks conservation of natural habitats, therefore will seek to enhance biodiversity 
within protected areas (national, provincial, and private) and increase mainstreaming of 
conservation in the productive landscape outside protected areas. Procedures will be developed 
within the EMP to ensure no natural habitats are affected by infrastructure.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will seek to increase protection of native forests and will not promote its 
degradation or conversion.  The corridors component would seek to improve conditions for 
forest protection and conservation by supporting the creation of financial incentives.  Incentives 
would be directed towards conservation and protection rather than use of forests however some 
flexibility may exist in this regard and provisions within the EMP will seek to ensure conformity 
with the applicable safeguard regarding sustainable use of forests as well as national 
conservation and forest legislation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
No pesticides are to be employed.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
No physical cultural resources have been identified given that protected areas 
to be included 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
in the project are not yet selected however many areas in Argentina have such resources.  The 
APN policy in regard to cultural resources seeks protection and enhancement of these resources 
consistent with Bank policy in this regard.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
APN will carry-out a social assessment as pertains in particular to the establishment of 
corridors in the Chaco and Patagonia. Based on the designs and planned implementation 
activities for the corridors, an IPP will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No involuntary resettlement is planned or expected under the project, however activities 
within protected areas and corridors may potentially limit access to resources of certain 
communities and groups (to be determined during preparation).  In this regard, the social 
assessment will incorporate a resettlement process framework if identified as necessary during 
project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguards assessments initiated February 2009 and Final in September 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Ragland Davis 
02/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
03/09/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
