Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
Date prepared/updated: 9 September 2009  
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  91659 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
3676 (GEF ID) 
Project Name:  
Grasslands and Savannas of the Southern Cone of South America: Initiatives for their 
conservation in Argentina and other MERCOSUR countries
 
Task Team Leader:  Marcelo Acerbi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 14 September 2009 
Estimated Board Date: NA 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  GEF Mid Sized Grant 
Sector:  Environment 
Theme: Biodiversity 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.9
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Environmental Category: 
B
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [X] 
    No [ ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises 
and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
The project objective it to assist the Government of Argentina in its efforts to develop, disseminate, and 
promote biodiversity conservation by mainstreaming it with livestock grazing systems in Argentina's 
highly valuable grassland areas. The Global Environmental objectives of the project are to conserve 
grassland biodiversity of global and national importance, protect vital ecosystem services, and develop 
and implement a strategy for sustainable management that combines conservation with production. 
 
3. Project Description: 
 
Through improved collaboration with stakeholders in the conservation community, especially producers 
and landowners, the project will coordinate efforts and execute the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity of global importance in selected sites of the 
Argentinean Pampas.
 
The global importance of the 
Pampas
 ecosystem is recognized given that it harbors many endemic and 
globally threatened species of plants and animals. Its significant biodiversity includes 1,600 species of 
vascular plants that 
grow in Argentina’s Pampas, with 2,500 in Uruguay’s grasslands, and 3,000 in 
Brazil’s Campos Sulinos. Of these, native grasses—the most abundant plant group—total about 400 
51230
Page  2
2
species. The diversity of vertebrate species is also high: the Pampas provide habitat for 69 species of 
mammals, 211 species of birds, 31 species of reptiles, 23 species of amphibians, and 40 species of fish. 
Endemic species of plants and vertebrates include several small reptiles and rodents, and three species of 
birds restricted to the Endemic Area for Birds (AEA 077), also 
known as the “Grasslands of the Argentine 
Mesopotamia.” The project comprises the following components: 
 
Component 1: Development of a sustainable management model.
 The objective of this component is 
to establish a grasslands sustainable development model that includes specific environmental, social, 
economic and market dimensions. To achieve this model, 4 main outputs to be co-financed with GEF 
resources are proposed: (i) an updated assessment of the threats and conservation status of the grasslands 
(including recommended actions to ensure their viability); (ii) a relationship model between stakeholders 
(government, market, producers, etc.) and grassland ecosystems; (iii) an assessment of economic and 
market incentives with a focus on natural grassland beef; and (iv) a set of good agronomic practices for 
productive grassland ecosystems. In addition, using a participatory approach, this component will support 
the design of a program to easily transfer good practices of grassland management between users of 
grassland landscapes. To this end, GEF resources will be invested in identifying methodologies and 
adequate instruments for knowledge transfer and promoting the participation of specific actors.  
 
Component 2: Validation and demonstration of the sustainable management model in grasslands, 
pilot certification of sustainable management practices and national-level dissemination of results.
 
The objective of this component is to implement and adapt the sustainable management model to the 
field. To this end, the grassland sustainable management program will be implemented in 4 pilot sites. At 
least sixteen livestock producers are expected to adopt the program and contribute to the development of 
good agronomic and sustainable practices for livestock in the first stage of the pilot. These areas have 
traditionally been used by grassland livestock, but at present they suffer from pressures of intensive cattle 
ranching activities as well as impacts from the expanding agricultural frontier and forestry activities using 
non-native species. All 4 pilot sites have been identified as key biodiversity areas (TOP 20), and are 
increasingly recognized as tourist destinations. Moreover, Aves Argentinas and Fundación Vida Silvestre 
Argentina have already carried out different extension works in the selected sites, including identifying 
interested actors and compiling a significant amount of biological information that will allow for the 
model’s adjustment. GEF resources will be invested in technical assistance, implementation of 
demonstration activities in the field (both in production and commercialization), promotion activities of 
the program and participatory workshops to adjust sustainable management practices to each of the 
selected pilot sites. Additionally, the strategy aims to establish pilot experience for the certification of 
natural grassland beef. With respect to this aim, GEF resources will be assigned to create producer and 
marketer networks, and to develop certification standards adapted to the local reality and which are 
acceptable to the International market. The third aspect of this strategy is to disseminate, at the national 
level, the experiences learned at the pilot sites. To this end, GEF resources will enable: (i) the creation of 
a
database of experiences learned in each pilot site; (ii) the establishment of “Centers of Reference” to 
ensure the dissemination of the information; and (iii) the establishment of a system to monitor and adjust 
practices implemented in and the conservation status of the pilot sites, which will also reflect each 
practice’s contribution to biodiversity conservation.  
 
Component 3: Large-scale, regional communication strategy
.
The objective of this component is to 
disseminate and implement grassland sustainable management models on a large scale, to promote 
responsible consumption, and to allow for knowledge sharing with relevant actors in grassland areas of 
other MERCOSUR countries. To this end, the GEF grant will co-finance the publication of handbooks on 
grassland conservation in livestock activities. The handbooks will be targeted to producers, technicians 
and decision-makers. Additionally, communication tools will be generated for a broader audience and 
informative meetings will be planned in different areas of the region, as well as an International Seminar 
at the MERCOSUR level. The project also proposes to strengthen regional efforts promoting the 
Page  3
3
Grasslands of the Southern Cone, in order to consolidate a vision shared by Argentina’s provinces and 
MERCOSUR countries. Such management and communication will strengthen the collaboration of a 
group of NGOs that are currently carrying out conservation efforts at a regional scale. For example, 
BirdLife International is carrying out the Alliances for the Grasslands project 
(
http://www.pastizalesdelconosur.org
)
with key participation from AA, and IUCN is carrying out the 
Temperate Grasslands Conservation Initiative 
(
http://www.iucn.org/where/america/sudamerica/projects.cfm
)
in which FVSA plays a key role. 
 
Component 4: Advocacy for and institutionalization of grasslands sustainable management
.
The 
objective of this component is to sensitize decision-makers and the private sector to a natural grassland 
conservation strategy based on the good management practices documented by the Project. To achieve 
this objective, GEF funds will support the incorporation of project findings into a national grasslands 
conservation strategy, as well as the drafting of a section of grassland conservation guidelines to be 
included in the Livestock Plans in at least two of the provinces in which the Project will be implemented 
(i.e. Buenos Aires). At the same time, there would be a strong outreach campaign based on two main 
ideas: i) biodiversity conservation as a sign of social responsibility in agribusiness, and ii) environmental 
health as a condition to human health in order to warn society about the disadvantages of pollution 
derived from feedlots. This campaign will include a series of meetings and workshops supported by GEF 
resources.
\02
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
While the policy and diseminattion work of the project will be targeted to the entire Pampas ecoregion in 
Argentina, and it valuable grasslands site, the pilot activities will be focused in 4 sites. These sites are: (1) 
Bahía de Samborombón’s coastal grasslands, in the province of Buenos Aires; (2) the savannas in the 
buffer zone of Gualeguaychú, Entre Ríos; (3) the savannas of San Javier and Alejandra in the province of 
Santa Fe; and (4) the savannas of the Arroyo Aguapey basin in the province of Corrientes.  
 
The Grasslands of the Southern Cone of South America, commonly known as Pampas, are spread over an 
area of approximately 1 million square kilometers and constitute one of the world’s few temperate prairie 
and savanna ecosystems. The biome is currently recognized as an ecosystem of very high priority for 
conservation in the Neotropical Region. The agricultural, livestock, forestry, and agro-industrial activities 
carried out in the biome are strategic for one of the most important commercial blocks: MERCOSUR. 
However, these activities have led to the transformation and fragmentation of the grassland territory, 
consequently causing a severe impact on its biodiversity. Public and private protected areas account for 
no more than 2% of the biome’s land area, and the creation of new conservation units is urgently needed. 
In the Province of Buenos Aires, Argentina, nearly 30% of native grasslands have been converted to crop 
lands, and 65% of the remaining grasslands have been profoundly changed by grazing. Meanwhile, in the 
Provinces of Entre Ríos and Corrientes in Argentina, over 400,000 hectares (ha) of grasslands have been 
converted into planted forests, with severe changes to the structure and function of the landscape. The 
current status of wild birds in Argentina’s grasslands clearly illustrates the problem. Numerous species 
have lost their habitats and, consequently, have disappeared or are decreasing; a total of 17 bird species 
are endangered and one is considered extinct. The outlook for wild mammals is even more discouraging: 
Pampas deer today occupy less than 0.5% of their original range. Direct threats to grassland biodiversity 
include: i) agricultural expansion, ii) increased forestation, iii) intensification of cattle ranching, iv) 
biological invasions, v) excessive use of agrochemicals, and vi) unplanned burning of grasslands. Due to 
the adverse impact of these threats as well as their worldwide economic importance, the Grasslands of the 
Southern Cone of South America are now recognized as a biome of high conservation priority.  
 
Page  4
4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Mrs. Beatriz Nussbaumer, LCSAR 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
This project will have positive impacts. No potential large scale, significant or irreversible 
impacts are expected. Among other strategies to address the challenges above, the development 
and dissemination of economically and environmentally compatible land use models is one of 
the most important topics. Large-scale sustainable cattle ranching on native grasslands, 
sustainable agriculture, forestation with biological corridors, and nature and scientific tourism 
are all promising economic activities in the region. However, there is currently a lack of 
information or experience regarding these activities specifically for grassland systems. The 
present proposal draws from available technical information on grassland management in 
livestock activities and involves conservation efforts at various territorial scales in key areas in 
order to contribute to the conservation of grasslands in Argentina. The proposed project will be 
carried out through the implementation of four components described before which have no 
negative impacts in the environment.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Potential indirect and long term impacts connected to project will be highly positive. The project 
seeks to preserve the integrity of the last remnants of grasslands in the Pampas while promoting 
sustainable use of resources. Other impacts are not expected. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
 
Page  5
5
Adverse impacts are not expected in this project. Different options for sound management of 
grasslands will be discussed with stakeholders during project implementation. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
As a part of the ongoing conservation activities at the Pampas grasslands, and in line with this 
proposed grant, Aves Argentinas, 
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina and the National Institute 
for Agriculture and Technology (INTA) have launched a technical document focused on the 
main environmental issues addressed by the project.  
 
The document (with a guide format) presents information about the ecology and sustainable 
management of the native grasslands of Argentina. One of the main issues is the understanding 
of the major ecological forces that drive the functioning of the grassland in the context of cattle 
raising activities. Native plants and birds are presented like bio-indicators, as tools that can be 
used by the cattlemen to recognize the range condition and the conservation status of the 
grassland.  
 
Based on scientific literature, this manual offers an in depth assessment of the key issues that the 
project addresses, namely: (i) the biodiversity of the natural grasslands in the Pampas region; (ii) 
the main degradation causes that affect these habitats, and (iii) the optimal relationship plant – 
herbivore from a conservation and socio-economic benefit perspective. Regarding the latter, it 
introduces some practices that enhance or maintain the wildlife of the Pampas while maintaining 
current levels of livestock production. The handbook focuses particularly on practices like 
grazing management that can be relatively easily adopted by ranchers.  
 
To date, there has been no guide for ranchers providing advice in relation to cattle management 
practices that support biodiversity on ranches but also increase agricultural yields to meet the 
growing demand. Available literature has only presented the practices without mentioning 
benefits to biodiversity.  
 
The guide is written in a simple Spanish style and illustrated with several pictures and figures. 
Moreover, some of the grassland species are pictured in a high definition brochure, which can be 
used at the field for the recognition of the different habitat quality.  
 
This handbook starts with a background to ecology and biodiversity, with a description of the 
ecosystem services provided for the grassland. The second part describes the different practices 
that can be adopted by ranchers, specifically: 1) grazing management, 2) reseeded and 
fertilization, 3) prescribed fire and 4) water excess management. The convenience and 
advantages of the production and certification of the friendly grassland beef are also clearly 
pointed.  
 
Finally, as a response of the growing pressure on it, the native grasslands are valued in the 
economic and sustainable development sense. Hence, topics like fragmentation and the 
importance to buffer the natural protected areas, the biological invasions and the illegal hunting 
are addressed in the final part of the book.  
Page  6
6
The Recipients has proposed the adoption of this guide as the main safeguards instrument for the 
project, which, at the same time is fully compatible with the project’s objective. 
 
The project will be executed by Aves Argentinas (AA) and the components described will be co-
implemented with the Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina (FVSA) according to the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) already signed by both institutions. Both partner NGOs 
have strong experience in the assessment of grassland biodiversity and conservation on private 
lands. In addition, they maintain working relationships with local farmers and ranchers. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Key stakeholders for this project are: local farmers and ranchers. Public agencies such as the 
National Secretary of Environment (SAyDS), the INTA and the environment and rural 
ministries/secretaries in the provinces are involved with the project. Rural and cattle – ranching 
associations and chambers will be involved. The National Parks Administration will play a key 
as its direct involvement in one of pilot sites (Campos del Tuyú). Three key public agencies have 
endorsed the project (APN and INTA by providing co-financing, and SAyDS has provided the 
GEF focal point endorsement. 
 
Stakeholders’ participation during project preparation has been part of the implementation of a 
PDF Block B GEF project, which was essential to agree the basis for the proposal. At the same 
time, the Recipients have an extensive program of activities targeted to grasslands conservation 
which have been vital to built strong partnership with local farmers and ranchers as well as with 
the government. 
 
There is an extensive disclosure of information, as well as of safeguards related report, easily 
accessible at: 
http://www.vidasilvestre.org.ar/programaDescripcion.php?idSeccion=30
and 
http://avesargentinas.org.ar/cs/conservacion/pastizales.php
.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 09-07-2009 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04-01-2009 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10-14-2009 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09-09-2009 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
NA 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 NA 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
Page  7
7
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 NA 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 NA 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
NA 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
The project will promote and 
implement best practices to manage 
natural grasslands. 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Page  8
8
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
NA 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
NA 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
NA 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
NA 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
NA 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
NA 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
NA 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Page  9
9
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
NA 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [ TBD ]          No [  ]          N/A [  
]
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Marcelo Acerbi 
09/10/09 
Environmental Specialist: 
Beatriz Nussbaumer 
09/10/09 
Social Development Specialist 
NA
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
NA
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
09/10/09 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Laura Tlaiye 
09/10/09 
Comments:   
(Template Version November 2007)
 
