Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3239 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P106684 
Project Name: Second Provincial Agricultural Development 
Task Team Leader: Alvaro J. Soler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (85%);Agro-industry 
(10%);Agricultural marketing and trade (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (S);Land 
administration and management (S);Managing for development results (S);Regional 
integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main development objective would be to increase the productivity and profitability of small 
and medium-size farmers supported by project activities, with the overarching goal of enhancing 
the agricultural competitiveness of the rural economy. To achieve this, the project would finance 
public investments in rural infrastructure and ancillary producer services, as well as co-finance 
complementary on-farm investments to supplement private sector contributions, thus ensuring a 
balanced implementation of the off and on-farm investments required for full achievement of the 
intended outcomes by project interventions. In addition, based on lessons learned from the 
preceding operation, the Argentina Provincial Agricultural Development Project (PROSAP),  
and client demands, the project would also put in place pilot mechanisms that: (i) support the 
integration of value chains in areas that have the potential to sustainably develop agricultural 
production based on better use of natural resources and improved market linkages; and (ii) 
promote the formation of participatory innovation networks at the provincial level, with both 
public and private actors.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project (US$250 million total project cost; US$200 million Bank financing) would 
be implemented over a period of six years and would have the following two components: (1) 
National and Provincial Sub-projects (95% of total project cost) and (2) Project Management 
(5% of total project cost).  
 
Sub-projects would cover the following areas:  
 
Public Goods and Services. Building on the experiences of PROSAP and the demands received 
during preparation, investment focus would include, inter alia: (i) traditional areas of support 
such as (a) rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems; (b) rehabilitation of feeder roads; (c) 
rural electrification; (d) animal and plant health; (e) TA linked to the aforementioned activities, 
covering extension, generation and transfer of technology, and capacity building activities; and 
(f) TA in product marketing, standards, quality and good practices; and (ii) new areas of support 
such as (g) infrastructure and services to improve commercial development; and (h) support, on a 
pilot basis, to the development of value chains and, eventually, agro-industrial clusters using a 
territorial approach at micro-regional levels. As in the first phase, the project would promote 
sound, sustainable, environmental management, precluding Category A activities that involve, 
inter alia, a significant loss or degradation of natural habitats or interventions in protected areas, 
direct or extractive use of threatened ecosystems, promotion of technologies considered risky for 
the sustainable use of natural resources, construction of dams (over 10 meters in height) or new 
roads, etc.  
 
Based on experiences from the first phase, special emphasis would be given to well-phased, 
comprehensively designed, and completely integrated TA and capacity building activities. The 
development of networks for TA delivery, involving local institutions (municipalities, 
universities, INTA, etc.) would be stressed in order to strengthen the involvement of the local 
knowledge base and capacity building, as well as the long-term sustainability of TA activities. 
These two strategies are considered vital to ensuring efficiency and sustainability of the sub-
projects’ outcomes.  
 
The support to the development of value chains and clusters is a result of demands stemming 
from territories/micro-regions that have clear comparative advantages for certain products, but 
those advantages have yet to materialize into commercial growth. The project would support the 
development of business plans to promote coordination between production and markets, and it 
would finance, along with public and private partners, related investments.  
 
Co-financing Private Investments. A co-financing line for private on-farm investments would 
be established to complement public investments supported, so that implementation of private 
investment plans would be explicitly incorporated in public investment sub-projects. The design 
of this activity would build on the technical strategy and implementation arrangements of the 
pilot co-financing experiences of the PROSAP/IDB component, “Development of Rural 
Businesses based on Non-reimbursable Contributions.”  
 
Capacity Building. At the provincial level, related activities would focus on strengthening the 
institutional capacity to design and implement agricultural strategies, as well as to prepare, 
Page  3
implement, and evaluate projects (following experiences from the first phase, this activity would 
be demand-driven and specifically adapted to the needs of each individual province). At the 
central level, capacity building activities would support: (i) continued policy development; (ii) 
the ongoing strengthening of the Proje
ct Implementation Unit’s (PIU) management capacity (this 
would be undertaken in conjunction with the IDB since both banks are operating under the same 
operating structure); and (iii) the development of a proposal for a new institutional framework 
through which to channel PROSAP’s contribution, as well as updating the long-term rural 
development policy framework of Argentina’s Secretariat of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries 
and Food (SAGPyA).  
 
Participatory Innovation Networks. The formation of participatory innovation networks with 
public and private sector actors would serve as a platform for coordination between the 
government, the business sector, and civil society, and would encourage the discussion, 
definition, and prioritization of research and development activities (this would broadly include 
all aspects of entrepreneurial development) at local and provincial levels. In addition, these 
networks would contribute to building institutional capacity at the provincial level and promote 
investments in agricultural and agro-industrial activities.  
 
Provincial sub-projects would be implemented through participating provinces, defined 
according to provincial priorities and integrated within their respective rural developmental 
plans. Building on the experiences of PROSAP and the increasing demand for resources, the 
evaluation and selection of sub-projects for this new operation would include stricter criteria, to 
be applied with participation of SAGPyA and the provinces. The two-tiered resource allocation 
structure, as earlier described in the Lessons Learned section, would further ensure balanced 
access by all provinces, transparent procedures, open competition, and support for more 
comprehensive and market-oriented proposals.  
 
Public investments would build-on PROSAP’s successful model, as such resources would be 
on-lent to participating provinces. Project proposals would be evaluated through a participative 
process and would include a Program Investment Committee at the national level to oversee the 
sub-project selection process (see the Institutional Arrangements section below). Strict targeting 
mechanisms would further promote transparency to ensure that resources reach small and 
medium-size rural producers.  
 
Support to private investment associated with public investment would be a new initiative that 
was not a part of the original PROSAP. Such projects would be implemented by beneficiary 
businesses and related organizations according to detailed plans approved by SAGPyA. Related 
investment rules and procedures would be clarified at a later stage of preparation (i.e., in-kind 
contribution amounts, financing ceilings, and selection processes).  
 
Institutional Arrangements. The PIU structure for PROSAP II would build on the experiences 
gathered during the original operation, as well as on the dialogue carried out by SAGPyA, IDB, 
and the Bank over the past three years. As a result, changes were introduced into the project’s 
PIU structure and procedures, and newinstruments were implemented. The GoA has already 
agreed on improved institutional arrangements and administrative and safeguards controls for the 
implementation of a new IDB Conditional Credit Line Investment Project (CCLIP), including an 
Page  4
Institutional Development Strategy, which would be significant for the proposed project since 
PROSAP II and the CCLIP would utilize the same PIU structure.  
 
The detailed institutional arrangements would be determined during a later stage of project 
preparation (see Annex 3 for proposed structure). Tentatively, the Ministry of Economy and 
Production would oversee the project, and SAGPyA, through its PIU, would be responsible for 
project implementation. The institutional structure would include a Program Investment 
Committee (PIC) as the central coordinating body. The (PIC) would consist of five 
representatives from main project stakeholders (i.e., SAGPyA, PIU, and beneficiaries) and would 
have the ultimate decision-making authority for sub-project proposals based on relevance to 
program criteria and objectives. The PIU, at the central level, and Provincial Liaison Entities, 
Financial Administration Entities, and Project Implementation Entities, at the provincial level, 
would be in charge of day-to-day implementation activities.  
 
Other key aspects regarding institutional arrangements would include investments in the 
establishment of a system of participatory M&E that enables all key participants to provide 
feedback on a regular basis, new safeguards management and monitoring units, as well as the 
completion of a Management Information System in order to improve the quality and 
opportunity of all types of information produced in the PIU and in the provinces.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Although the proposed project would be national in coverage, activities would be concentrated in 
non-Pampean agricultural areas. The mechanisms for the distribution of support would take into 
consideration the differences in capacity and autonomy between large-scale and small-scale 
agriculture, as well as the need for public financing in promoting equity and spatially 
equilibrated development. The project would achieve this by focusing in areas with larger 
concentrations of small and medium-scale producers with the potential to fully participate in 
modern, competitive, agribusiness systems.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The capacity of the implementing agency was satisfactory during the first operation. 
Nevertheless capacity-building measures would be built into the project design as a corollary to 
the assessment carried out during the course of project preparation to ensure safeguards 
compliance. Such activities would also be based on a July 2007 assessment of the GoA’s 
safeguard performance under PROSAP, as well as its framework for activities to be financed by 
the IDB’s CCLIP, which considers safeguard issues that would be similar to those under 
PROSAP II.  The following recommendations were issued by the report: (i) it is important to 
develop a common methodology to achieve a coherent follow-up of projects and to improve the 
environmental management of PROSAP II activities; (ii) provinces should ensure the 
compliance of measures and recommendations included in the EMPs of sub-projects; (iii) the 
PIU should expand its technical staff for environmental management issues; (iv) baseline 
information and indicators should be established to ensure appropriate monitoring of sub-
projects; (v) the Environmental Manual for the PIU should be improved in terms of contents, 
details, and structure of the EMPs for sub-projects; (vi) EIA documents should demonstrate that 
public consultations were carried out; and (vii) the EIA should include information that is clearly 
mapped and discuss cumulative impacts. The aforementioned recommendations are being 
Page  5
incorporated into the Environmental Manual that the PIU is preparing for the IDB parallel-
financed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While the project aims to have an overall highly positive impact on the environment by 
improving the efficiency of ag
ricultural productivity in Argentina’s provinces, OP/BP 4.01 
would be triggered because the physical interventions resulting from the implementation of 
Component 1 could have negative impacts on the environment.  
 
The project is not expected to result in significant negative environmental impacts. The 
majority of project activities are expected to be low-impact activities, including rehabilitation or 
improvement of existing infrastructure (such as rural roads or irrigation subprojects), or limited 
new construction in low-sensitivity areas (such as the sanitary barriers or lab construction). 
Potential negative environmental impacts could include soil erosion or nutrient loss, water 
quality effects, and increased use of pesticides and/or chemicals for animal health control. These 
impacts would be thoroughly described in the project’s Environmental Assessment (EA).  
 
Rather, the project is expected to result in positive environmental outcomes, through 
attempts to improve the efficiency of agricultural productivity in Argentina’s provinces. 
Improvements in water allocation and efficiency, coupled with technical assistance to encourage 
integrated pest management and modern production methods, are likely to result in improved 
environmental management in the rural sector. Cumulative impacts are not expected to be 
significant, as the project is nationwide (but limited) in scope, and all activities would be 
implemented in areas already under agricultural production.  
 
As in the first operation, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) would be 
developed as part of the EA to set forth the specific measures to mitigate all identified impacts, 
including screening criteria for sub-projects and sites. The EMF would include a construction 
management plan, which would address traffic, impacts to minor infrastructure (livestock-
related), waste management, worker and road safety, impacts to public services and 
infrastructure (roads, railroads), environmental protection measures (soil, air, water, and 
landscape), and public information, among others. Likewise, the EMF would include guidelines 
for measures to be implemented over a four-year period following completion of the works, 
including the installation of a monitoring and alert system for water, soil and vegetation, and 
technical assistance to farmers for natural resource management.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
All project activities would be implemented in areas already under agricultural production; 
therefore, OP/BP 4.04 would not be triggered. However, the connection with critical natural 
habitats would be explored. The EA would evaluate whether policy applies, and, if so, 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
appropriate measures would be taken. The project is national in terms of its geographic scope. 
However, the sub-projects would be of various sizes and widely dispersed. Projects could be 
located in areas close to critical natural habitat or protected areas. Neither the proposed sub-
project types nor any other project activity contemplated imply significantly degrading or 
converting of natural habitat. In fact, the focus of increasing small and medium-size farmer 
productivity with regard to agricultural production would help to reduce the degradation of 
natural habitats and minimize the use of pesticides potentially benefiting biodiversity. Projects 
within protected areas (national and provincial) would not be eligible for funding. Areas with 
other conservation statuses (Ramsar sites, Birdlife’s IBAS, etc.) would be considered ineligible 
unless compatible with the EMF.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
A
pre-screening would be undertaken at a later stage to determine whether OP/BP 4.36 is 
triggered by the physical investments under Component 1 (i.e., if they would affect the rights and 
welfare of people dependent on forests and would bring changes in the management, protection, 
and utilization of natural forests).   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project would trigger OP 4.09. Integrated pest management (IPM) would be a part of 
sub-project activities under Component 1. It is also likely that the procurement of pesticides 
would occur. A positive list would be prepared to identify pesticides that can be used. A Pest 
Management Plan would also be prepared and included as part of the EMF. In addition, training 
activities would be on-going with respect to the EMF and continue during the first year of the 
project, which would include IPM-related issues.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is not expected that project implementation would have any negative impact on physical 
cultural resources. However, “chance findings” during implementation activities are possible so 
OP/BP would be triggered to handle potential findings. While Argentina has a well-developed 
legislative and normative framework in place, SAGPyA has proven experience and appropriate 
procedures to recover “chance findings” in line with these procedures and rules.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Although the proposed project would not target indigenous people as a beneficiary 
population, its intended coverage of non-Pampean agricultural areas means that it is possible that 
members of one or more of Argentina’s 30 indigenous groupswould be found to be present 
within the project’s physical influence area. In order to avoid potentially excluding such groups 
from project benefits, or otherwise affecting them in an adverse way, the project would trigger 
OP/BP 4.10. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) would therefore be prepared 
consistent with such frameworks that have been prepared for other, recent projects in Argentina 
to strengthen and coordinate overall attention to indigenous peoples’ participation. In addition, 
the specific sub-project Environmental Management Plans to be developed under the project 
would include pre-screening. In the case that IP would be affected, then a site specific 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan would be developed following the directives as outlined 
in the IPPF.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
PROSAP II includes rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems, rehabilitation of feeder 
roads, and rural electrification works. Since all of these could potentially require land acquisition 
and/or easements, the project would exclude any investment that might entail resettlement as 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
defined by OP 4.12 (loss of assets, physical displacement, or livelihood losses). Therefore the OP 
4.12 would be triggered, to ensure that processes involving sub-project selection, alternatives 
analysis, and appropriate support to potentially displaced persons are incorporated into the 
project. The appropriate instrument in this case would be a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF), which would be prepared by the Borrower prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/10/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of safeguard-related studies would include an analysis of the Environmental 
Manual in preparation between the PIU and the IDB and its correlation with Bank safeguard 
policies. If this comparison indicates that operational policies or Bank procedures have been 
omitted, the Environmental Manual would have to adapt to terms and conditions acceptable 
to the Bank.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
12/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
01/07/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
