Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC1892
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P090119 
Project Name:  Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaoping Wang 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
15.16 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
43.36 
 
GERMANY: German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ) 
0.74 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
40.00 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
0.18 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
0.00
84.28 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to increase the efficiency in the use of 
energy, which would reduce energy costs for consumers and contribute to the long-term 
sustainability of the energy sector.  
 
The global objective of the project is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the 
climate change risk, by systematically removing the barriers that prevent activities and 
investments in energy efficiency and energy conservation. (GEF Operational Program 
No. 5).   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
To achieve its development objective, the project consists of three main components, 
each described below with the estimated budget indicated in Table 1: Component 1: 
Development of the Argentina Energy efficiency Fund; Component 2: Development of a 
utility program to accelerate the phase out of incandescent bulbs with CFLs; and 
Component 3: Capacity Building and Project Management.  
 
Component 1: Development of the Argentina Energy Efficiency Fund (AEEF) (Total 
estimated cost US$2.18 million, of which US$1.8 million from GEF)  
 
This component includes two activities: (i) the development of a pipeline of bankable 
energy efficiency (EE) projects; and (ii) the creation of the structure of the Argentina 
Energy Efficiency Fund (AEEF).  
 
Grant Facility for the development of a pipeline of energy efficiency projects. Lack of 
support for identification and preparation of EE projects is viewed as a significant 
constraint to EE investments in Argentina. This facility will share the cost of performing 
audits and preparing studies for bankable EE projects.  
 
Development of the AEEF.  The central objective of the AEEF is to demonstrate the 
commercial viability of investment in energy efficiency by reducing the risk perception 
that currently impedes such investments. When capitalized, the AEEF will support 
investments in the EE projects prepared with the assistance of the Grant Facility. The 
Bank and the government have agreed to finance the AEEF under a follow-up Bank loan 
for EE.  
 
Component 2: Development of a Utility Program. (Total estimated cost US$90.5 
million, of which US$9.2 million from GEF)  
 
This component, which will be implemented with the participation of the power 
distribution utilities, will contribute to the national program designed to phase-out 
incandescent bulbs by 2012.  This is wel
l
aligned with the GEF “Ban the Bulb” initiative 
to transform the global market toward efficient lighting technologies through accelerated 
phase-out of inefficient lighting.  
 
The national phase-out program will include a dissemination campaign to educate 
residential customers on the advantages of replacing CFL by incandescent bulbs and 
providing at least two CFL to each residence, for a total of about 25 million lamps, in 
four years. Some special incandescent lamps will be replaced by other low consumption 
lamps. In parallel, the GOA will support the conversion of a local factory of incandescent 
bulbs to eliminate local production of inefficient lamps and start production of CFLs 
before the phase-out date.  
 
The GEF grant will contribute to the financing of 25 million CFLs that will be 
distributed by the utilities to residential customers and will support the information 
dissemination, training and monitoring and evaluation activities for the phase-out 
Page  3
program. The dissemination activities under this component are related to the information 
and dissemination campaign in Component 3. However,  the former will be carried out by 
the utilities with the residential users as the target group,  and the latter will be carried out 
by the Energy Secretariat with a broader focus on energy efficiency.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building and Project Management (Total estimated cost 
US$6.755 million, of which US$4.155 million from GEF).  
 
This component will build capacity within the private and public sectors and strengthen 
the incentives for investment in energy efficiency. Activities will include: (a) Preparation 
of energy sector, tax and financial policies and regulations for the promotion of EE 
activities; (b) Standardization, testing, certification and labeling program; (c) ESCO 
capacity building; (d) Information, training and dissemination programs and (e) Project 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project has a national scope as the project focuses on increasing energy efficiency 
and demand-side management nation-wide. The beneficiaries include individual 
households, electric distribution utilities, small and medium enterprises, energy service 
companies, and the general public.  
 
5. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
Yes 
No  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)  
X  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
X  
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario (LCSSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
As the global objective of the project is to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the 
impact of the project on the global environment will be positive. By reducing peak 
energy demand and postponing expansion plans for power plants    the project will also 
have a positive impact on the local environment with the reduction in local air pollutants 
(particulates, SOX, NOX, HC).  
 
The specific EE investments supported by the project are related to Component 2 of the 
project to replace incandescent bulbs with compact florescent lamps (CFLs) in individual 
households.  No significant negative environmental impacts will be caused by the 
investment of the project.  The only safeguard issue is related to the recollection and 
disposal of the used incandescent bulbs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect or long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As will be described in the Framework Agreements between the participating electric 
distribution utilities and the Energy Secretariat, the electric utilities will be responsible 
for distribution of CFLs and recollection of the used incandescent bulbs. The utilities will 
also be responsible for proper disposal of the used bulbs in compliance with Argentinean 
Page  5
environmental law, policies and procedures and with the World Bank safeguards policy 
(OP/BP/GP 4.01). Argentina has made significant progress in adapting its Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) system to international norms.  Specific handling and disposal 
measures will be require
d
and included in the project’s operational manual.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholder groups are as follows: (i) SMEs mostly in the industrial and the 
service sector, municipalities and housing cooperatives/associations; (ii) ESCOs and EE 
consulting firms; (iii) electric utilities and their customers; (iv) academic entities and 
laboratories, and (v) local environmental and EE advocacy groups and NGOs.  
 
The project components have been discussed with a broad cross section of stakeholders.  
Broad-based participation and public involvement are incorporated in the project design. 
Organized outreach and public information campaigns are included in the TA component 
of the project.  Discussions have been held with numerous electric utilities as potential 
participants in the project. One of the major energy efficiency programs upon which this 
project builds is the PIEEP project for improving energy efficiency and productivity in 
small and medium enterprises.The project has been discussed with the key stakeholders 
involved in the PIEEP project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaoping Wang 
02/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Rafael P. Rofman 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/28/2008 
Comments:  Agree with change in category, based on our discussion. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
