Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2009 
Report No.:  48253
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P105680 
Project Name:  Matanza-Riachuelo Basin (MRB) Sustainable Development Adaptable 
Lending Program 
Task Team Leader:  Menahem Libhaber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Central government 
administration (30%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Analysis of economic growth (S);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
840.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
160.00
160.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project (APL-1) is to (i) improve sewerage services in the M-R 
Basin and other parts of the Province and City of Buenos Aires by expanding capacity; 
(ii) support the reduction of industrial discharges to the M-R River, through the provision 
of industrial conversion grants to small and medium enterprises;(iii) promote a 
participative approach to environmentally-sustainable land use and drainage planning and 
to pilot urban drainage and land use investments in the M-R Basin; and (iv) strengthen 
ACUMAR’s institutional framework for ongoing and sustainable cleanup of the M-R 
Basin.   
 
3. Project Description 
The government’s medium to long term objective under the PISA is the progressive 
elimination of point source discharges to the M-R River, which would result in water 
quality improvements in a 15 – 20 year timeframe. The proposed project isa building 
block towards this goal by supporting the following integrated activities: (i) the 
Page  2
construction of a collector along the left bank of the M-R River (Colector Margen 
Izquierdo, or CMI), diversion of the wastewater collected by this collector to the 
Riachuelo preliminary treatment plant and discharging its effluent to the La Plata River 
via an effective sub-aquatic outfall, (ii) the construction of a collector from the upper M-
R
Basin along the right bank of the M-R River (Colector Margen Derecha, or CMD) 
which will convey the wastewater collected by this collector and that collected in the 
southern part of the city (the right bank of the M-R River) to the Third Trunk Sewage 
Pipe (Tercera Cloaca Troncal Maxima), (iii) technical assistance for designing an 
industrial control program reducing industrial (both organic and toxic) discharges to the 
M-R River by connecting these industries to the AySA sewerage network after pre-
treatment of toxic effluents, i.e. by means of an industrial collector, and (iv) design and 
implementation of a comprehensive inter-jurisdictional land use plan including the 
provision of basic infrastructure services.  
 
The project comprises two overlapping phases to be executed over the 2009
–2019
period, each phase to be implemented over 6 years. The first phase (APL-1) will extend 
from 2009 to 2015 for a total loan amount of up to US$840 million. The second phase 
(APL-2), for a total loan amount of $1,160 million, is expected to begin after 
achievement of defined targets, overlapping in time with APL-1 as new interventions are 
ready to be implemented.  
 
Phase 1 (APL-1): Phase 1 of the program includes four components under two macro-
components which finance a subset of activities set out under the PISA.  
 
Macro-component 1:  
 
(i) 
Investments in sanitation infrastructure and technical assistance for the 
supervision of works prioritized by the GoA, including the Industrial collector, the Left 
Bank collector and the Right Bank collector.  
 
(ii) 
 collector, the Baja Costanera bypass collector, the Riachuelo preliminary 
treatment plant, inflow and effluent pumping stations at the Riachuelo preliminary 
treatment plant, and construction of the Riachuelo outfall. The Right Bank collector will 
be designed with capacity to convey the discharges from both the upper and middle 
sections of the basin.  
 
Macro-component 2:  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance to improve environmental monitoring and enforcement of 
environmental targets for selected industrial activities, as well as financing of cleaner 
production investments to enhance and support environmental compliance among 
polluting small and medium size enterprises;  
 
(iv) 
Technical assistance for land use and urban planning and financing for pilot urban 
and drainage works; and  
 
(v) 
Financing for technical studies to support project implementation (components 1, 
2
and 3); a communication strategy to inform key stakeholders; project management 
activities; and support for the institutional strengthening of ACUMAR.  
 
Page  3
Phase 2 (APL-2): Phase 2 of the program incorporates infrastructure investments under 
the sanitation component that are complementary to those initiated in Phase 1. These  
include (i) the Baja Costanera collector, (ii) Berazategui preliminary treatment plant; (iii) 
the new Berazategui outfall, (iv) the effluent pumping station at Berazategui, and (v) 
primary and secondary sewerage networks in various parts of the basin. The Berazategui 
preliminary treatment plant is functionally part of APL-2 as it will be connected to the 
new Berazategui outfall, but is temporally concurrent with APL-1 as the government 
already contracted its construction.  The investments for the industrial pollution and 
territorial management components will incorporate the lessons learned from APL-1 and 
will scale-up successful activities.  
 
Macro-component 1: Sanitation  
 
Component 1: Sanitation (US$ 1,309 million total, US$694 million in loan proceeds)  
 
This component aims to progressively collect, convey, treat, and dispose of wastewater 
from the M-R Basin along with wastewater from the AySA concession area. Sewage 
works included in this component are essential to improving the coverage and quality of 
sanitation services in the M-R Basin and the entire AySA service area, to enhancing 
water quality, and to expanding the potential uses of the water bodies in the M-R Basin 
and southern coastal strip of La Plata River. The infrastructure system selected is based 
on the principle of intercepting most of the domestic and industrial wastewater in the 
AySA concession area (except wastewater that is diverted to the North treatment plant, 
which discharges its effluent to the Reconquista River), as well as the wastewater of the 
municipalities in the upper-middle M-R Basin. This entire wastewater flow will be 
diverted to La Plata River through two new sub-aquatic outfalls, (the Riachuelo and 
Berazategui outfalls) after preliminary treatment. Specific sub components financed 
under this project are detailed further below.  
 
Construction/extension of collectors and complementary works. Over the course of two 
APL stages, the new wastewater collection system and its conveyance to the two 
preliminary treatment plants will consist of (i) the Left Bank collector, with a total length 
of approximately 12 km, in the lower part of the basin (the diameter varies between 0.8 m 
and 2.9 m); (ii) the Baja Costanera bypass collector with a  length of 5 km and a diameter 
of 4.5 m; (iii) the Baja Costanera expansion collector (Radio Antiguo section); (iv) the 
Baja Costanera expansion collector (Capital Federal
–Vicente Lopez section); (v) the 
Right Bank collector, with a total length of about 37 km with an internal diameter ranging 
from 2.3 m to 3.5 m; and (vi) an industrial waste conveyance pipe and pumping station 
on the right bank of the M-R River to collect the industrial effluents and discharge them 
to the existing Wilde pumping station and from there to Berazategui. Under APL-2, this 
component will also include the construction of primary and secondary sewerage 
networks in Lomas de Zamora, Lanus, A. Brown, and other municipalities. APL-1 will 
include the Left Bank collector and the Baja Costanera bypass collector, the Right Bank 
collector and the industrial wastes collector.  
 
Treatment plants and pumping stations. Prior to its discharge through each outfall to the 
La Plata River, the wastewater will be subjected to preliminary treatment in two plants 
Page  4
namely the Riachuelo preliminary treatment plant located on the right bank of the M-R 
River at its confluence with La Plata River at Dock Sud, and the Berazategui preliminary 
treatment plant at Berazategui on the banks of La Plata River near the location of the 
current Berazategui outfall. The construction of the Berazategui preliminary treatment 
plant has already been contracted and has sufficient capacity to treat the wastewater flows 
coming from the upper and upper-middle sections of the M-R Basin, in addition to the 
flows generated on the right bank of the lower part of the basin.  The Berazategui 
preliminary treatment plant is being financed by the government using its own funds 
complemented by a loan from Brazil’s BNDES.  
 
Construction of new sub-aquatic outfalls. This project will also finance the construction 
of two new sub-aquatic outfalls over the two APL phases. The Riachuelo outfall, 
financed during APL-1, will be located in the Dock Sud area. This outfall will measure 
3.8 meters in internal diameter, and is expected to be 11.5 km long, of which the final 2.3 
km are the diffuser section. The Berazategui outfall, expected to be financed under APL-
2, will be located near the existing short outfall, measuring 3.8 meters in internal 
diameter and 7.5 km in length, of which the final 3.5 km will be the diffuser section (The 
dimensions presented are indicative. AySA is in the process of finalizing bidding-stage 
designs. Final designs will be prepared by construction contractors).  
 
Construction of primary and secondary sewage networks (APL-2). Included only under 
APL-2, is the construction of primary and secondary sewerage networks in the 
municipalities of the M-R Basin which currently lack coverage (for instance in Lomas de 
Zamora, Lanus, A. Brown, and other neighborhoods, but not in the city of Buenos Aires, 
which already has full coverage).  
 
These infrastructure works, as well as other sewerage expansion investments executed 
by AySA under its master plan, will directly benefit approximately 2.4 million people in 
the 14 municipalities of the M-R Basin, and about 1.2 million who live along the banks of 
La Plata River. Indirect beneficiaries include about 10 million people who will benefit 
from an improved and secure collection, conveyance and wastewater disposal system.  
 
Macro-Component 2: Industrial Pollution Abatement, Territorial Management and 
Institutional Strengthening  
 
Component 2: Industrial Pollution Abatement (US$ 75.4 million total, US$ 60.3 million 
in loan proceeds)  
 
Based on initial estimates, there are approximately 4100 industries in the M-R Basin 
area that contribute a significant portion of the total organic load discharged to the M-R 
River in addition to virtually all toxic discharges. Of these, approximately 1600 are 
connected to the AySA network, while the remaining 2500 currently discharge effluents 
directly to the M-R River. ACUMAR will first focus on the 50 main industrial polluters 
that contribute approximately 95 percent of the total industrial organic load and 170 
industries with the highest toxic loads that current discharge to the M-R River, using 
some of the technical assistance made available through this component. As part of the 
Page  5
government’s strategy, plans for industrial restructuring (Planes de Reconversion 
Industrial, or PRIs), including indicators, targets, and deadlines will be developed and 
signed with these industries.   
 
Activities under Component 2 will complement those under Component 1, thereby 
contributing to the cleanup of the M-R River. Technical assistance activities will be front-
loaded in APL-1 to support ACUMAR in developing and signing PRIs with the highest 
organic and toxic industrial polluters, and in improving overall monitoring, control, and 
enforcement. These include (i) supporting pollution diagnostics and policy analysis; (ii) 
improving the monitoring system for industrial wastes by supporting pollution control 
institutional infrastructure; (iii)  support for adjustments to the strategy for industrial 
discharges; and (iv) designing and implementing a program for encouraging corporate 
environmental responsibility.  
 
Additionally, within APL-1, a matching grants program will support an initial batch of 
private sector investments in cleaner production processes. This program will target a 
limited number (20 - 50) of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) which have weaker 
financial and technical capacity to comply with environmental regulations. Enterprises 
that are eligible for participation in the matching grants program shall (i) be categorized 
as an SME (Under Article 1 of Title I of Law No. 25,300, as regulated by article 1 of 
Resolution 24/2001 of the Secretariat of Small and Medium Enterprises dated February 
15, 2001 (as amended), companies are considered to be Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises according to the registered maximum annual sales, excluding value-added tax 
and internal tax); (ii) have a signed PRI; and (iii) lack access to commercial credit. 
Detailed eligibility criteria for assistance to SMEs, as well as the specific disbursement 
modalities will be defined and disclosed in the project’s Operation Manual to ensure 
transparency of resource allocation.  
 
Component 3: Territorial Management (US$81.9 million total, US$65.5 million loan)  
 
This component’s main objective is to improve public policies on territorial 
management within the M-R Basin. Towards this end, the component seeks to improve 
territorial planning and develop pilots of integrated investments in basic infrastructure 
services and flood control to improve urban living conditions in selected low-income 
areas of the basin.  
 
The component includes the following four sub-components: (i) Institutional 
development for territorial planning, supporting technical assistance for ACUMAR to 
promote territorial planning with a comprehensive development perspective for the M-R 
Basin and to incorporate social  and environmental dimensions of planning efforts; (ii) 
Institutional development for flood control, supporting technical assistance to improve 
and update hydrological studies and management tools to control flooding events; (iii) 
Investments in basic infrastructure for territorial development, financing pilot 
interventions to improve infrastructure in low-income urban areas in both the lower and 
middle sections of the basin and additionally to manage sustainable urban expansion in 
the middle and upper sections of the basin (Basic infrastructure includes (a) secondary 
Page  6
networks for water and sanitation and the connection of those networks to the main 
existing water and sanitation systems, (b) micro drainage and the section of macro 
drainage required to operate the micro drainage system, (c) secondary streets, and (d) 
recreational areas.); (iv) Investments in basic infrastructure for flood control, financing 
mainly micro-drainage systems and specific macro-drainage works associated with the 
selected micro system. Areas that will receive investments in drainage systems will be 
selected through a comprehensive socio-economic cost-benefit analysis in consultation 
with provincial and municipal governments. It is anticipated that two low-income 
settlements encompassing approximately 20,000 households will benefit from this sub-
component. After construction, these systems will be operated by the respective 
municipal governments  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$18.2 million 
total, US$18.2 million loan)  
 
In line with the development objectives, a separate TA component has been prepared to 
support the design and implementation of measures required in both the short and long 
term to establish the necessary institutional capacity for the new basin authority.  
 
The component has been divided into five sub-components: (i) Institutional 
Strengthening of  ACUMAR to adapt its current organizational structure to better respond 
to its institutional responsibilities. A new structure will be designed through a 
participatory process and using proven methodologies and strategies. This subcomponent 
will support the necessary activities such as workshops, consultants, and infrastructure 
investments to support the new institutional structure; (ii) Communication Strategy to 
inform key actors and stakeholder groups in the basin about the project in a transparent 
manner; to strengthen the credibility of and support for the project; and to contribute to 
the overall consultation and participation framework of the project; (iii) Establishment of 
a
public information office in ACUMAR supporting the necessary investments for the 
proper functioning of a public information office such as human resources, office 
equipment, infrastructure and logistic tools; (iv) Technical and monitoring studies 
financing for additional studies required during the course of project implementation, 
providing expert support (including a panel of experts recognized in such fields as 
environment, engineering, biodiversity, modeling etc.), supporting impact and water 
quality monitoring, implementing a groundwater study to gain knowledge on the control 
of the high level of the groundwater table in the basin area, identifying additional and 
complementary infrastructure works, auditing for monitoring indicators and updating 
engineering designs. Finally, (v) Project management, supporting human resources, 
physical space and equipment within SAyDS/UCOFI to strengthen purchasing, 
contracting and procurement processes.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project’s area of influence is quite large, with most of the proposed investments and 
programs to be located within the M-R basin, the AySA concession area and the La Plata 
River – all within the City and Province of Buenos Aires. The project’s area of influence 
Page  7
involves the following (often overlapping) areas: (i) the entire Matanza-Riachuelo Basin; 
(ii) the entire AySA concession area; (iii) the reaches of the Lujan River, from the mouth 
of the Reconquista River to its confluence with the La Plata River; (iv) the reaches of the 
La Plata River between the coast and the outer limit of the so-
called “Parana de las 
Palmas Flow Corridor”; and (v) the coastal section between the coast of the La Plata 
River, the neighborhood access road to the river at approximately 14,000 m southeast of 
the boundary of the General Belgrano plant site, the Boca railroad, and the boundary 
between the districts of Quilmes and Berazategui.  
 
Key considerations relating to the physical location and characteristics of the project 
area include the large numbers of poor and vulnerable communities that live in close 
proximity to the M-R Basin and who are most exposed to the uncontrolled and untreated 
discharges; the specific water quality characteristics of the M-R Basin and the La Plata 
River; and the international riparian issues relating to the La Plata River.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the environmental benefits of the project are expected to outweigh the 
environmental costs of the project. The expected benefits include : (i) improved quality of 
life for the 3.5 million inhabitants of the M-R Basin; (ii) improved sewerage and drainage 
services in the M-R Basin and other parts of Buenos Aires by expanding the coverage of 
the sewerage network to 1.7 million people in the basin (from 35 percent to about 75 
percent), especially in poor marginal areas; (iii) improved environmental quality for 
rivers and tributaries crossing the urban area and the pollution of the Rio de La Plata 
through investments in industrial pollution control; and (iv) improved urban living 
Page  8
conditions associated with territorial development and reduced flooding in the M-R 
Basin.  
 
The project poses potential environmental risks during both the construction and the 
operational phases. During the construction phase, the main environmental risks are 
associated with the management and control of temporary risks of the large scale 
construction of the various civil works. These risks include the normal impacts associated 
with large scale construction such as dust and noise control; management and disposal of 
hazardous materials at construction sites; control of erosion and sedimentation near 
sensitive water bodies; disposal of tunnel spoil and large earth movement; local 
disruption of traffic flows; and occupational health and safety. During construction there 
will also be risks associated with the disposal of large volumes of tunnel spoil and the 
risks associated with re-suspension of river sediments during dredging operations.  
 
During the operational phase, potential environmental risks will include those associated 
with the increased contamination of the Rio de la Plata due to the operation of the sub-
aquatic outfalls; nuisance noise and odor associated with the treatment plant operations; 
and disposal of the solid wastes generated by the treatment plant. A summary of all 
potential environmental impacts, risks, mitigation and management measures is presented 
in Annex 10 of the PAD.  
 
Environmental risks associated with components 2 and 3 are, by their nature, much less 
significant and are expected to be almost entirely positive. Any adverse impacts will 
mostly be associated with small-scale construction of civil works for flood control. Since 
most of the investments under these components have yet to be identified, it is not 
possible to say with absolute certainty what the risks will be. Thus, for both these 
components, an environmental management framework (EMF) has been developed 
which will require screening and scoping of issue for all proposed investments and, 
where appropriate, the development of management and mitigation measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As mentioned above, the long term environmental impacts of the project are expected to 
be positive.  There will be some adverse impacts associated with the operation of the 
treatment plant and subsequent discharges into the Rio de la Plata. The pollution loads 
are expected to affect a relatively small area of the Rio de la Plata, especially given the 
very high dilution factors of the river. As the project's area of influence is one of intense 
urbanization and industrial development, the overall success of the project will be 
determined, to a certain extent, by how successful governments are at encouraging the 
closure or relocation of highly polluting industries and the long term ability to control 
future growth and industrialization in the highest risk areas.  
 
On the basis of these potential risks the project is being processed as an environmental 
risk category A project.   
 
Page  9
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
variety of technical alternatives were considered for the sanitation component 
(Component 1).  These included the level of wastewater treatment, the length of outfalls, 
and the number and location of the wastewater treatment plants. A summary of the 
description of the alternatives and the reasons for rejection of those that were not selected 
is presented in Annex 12 of the PAD.  
 
An issue of major importance for the project is the choice of preliminary treatment of 
the wastewater coupled with discharge of the effluent into the La Plata River through a 
long, effective outfall. The decision to choose a lower level of treatment over a higher 
level has been questioned in some stakeholder meetings. However, the choice of 
preliminary treatment is considered a meaningful strategy for the protection of Buenos 
Aires from the negative impacts of the effluent discharges into the M-R river.  Discharges 
from the treatment plants will be further processed by the oxygenation capacity of the La 
Plata River into which it drains. Choosing a higher level of treatment (secondary) and a 
shorter outfall would not be fully justifiable (or sustainable) as it would be significantly 
more expensive and probably unaffordable both in terms of capital investment as well as 
operation and maintenance costs. Furthermore, the alternative with secondary treatment 
and an effective outfall is equivalent, in terms of risks to humans and to the environment, 
to the selected alternative (preliminary treatment and an effective outfall).  
 
These conclusions are partially based on the findings of mathematical modeling of the 
implications of the various alternatives on the water quality of the La Plata River. They 
are also consistent with the recommendation from the World Health Organization (WHO) 
that, from the public health standpoint of human exposure to wastewater, additional 
treatment higher than preliminary prior to the discharge does not reduce health risks. That 
is to say, the health risk associated with a system comprised of preliminary treatment 
followed by an effective outfall is identical to that from a system comprised of secondary 
treatment followed by an effective outfall. The WHO report refers to risk related to 
human exposure through bathing, which is not exactly the risk in the case of discharge to 
the La Plata River; but as the main risk of effluent discharge is imposed by pathogenic 
organisms, the WHO exposure risk measure serves as a reasonable proxy.  
 
For the industrial pollution component (Component 2), two alternatives were 
considered, viz. (i) a high level of treatment of all industrial wastes and discharge of the 
effluents, except those which contain toxic matter, to the M-R river, and (ii) a lower level 
of treatment of all industrial wastes and discharge of the effluents, except those which 
contain toxic matter, to the municipal sewerage network for further processing with 
domestic wastewater. Alternative (i) was rejected since it was found, through 
mathematical modeling that even after a high level of treatment, the discharge of 
industrial effluents to the M-R River will still render it anaerobic. So that the only way to 
induce aerobic conditions in the river and recover its water quality is through Alternative 
(ii).   
 
Page  10
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The environmental risks, impacts, and 
benefits of the project have been analyzed at two different levels using two closely 
related environmental assessment approaches.  The environmental impacts (both positive 
and negative) of specific project components have been assessed through a detailed 7 
volume EIA conducted for specific works proposed under Component 1 and through 
separate Environmental Management Frameworks (EMF) prepared for activities to be 
carried out under Components 2 (Industrial Pollution Abatement) and 3 (Territorial 
Development).  In addition to the site-specific EIA and the EMF, an Integrated 
Environmental Assessment (IEA) has been prepared which serves two purposes: first, it 
summarizes the main findings of the more detailed EIA reports; second, the IEA presents 
the overall regional context and strategic goals for the long term recovery and 
management of the Matanza-Riachuelo basin in its entirety.  
 
At the site-specific level, a detailed EIA report was prepared for each of the major civil 
works that will be constructed during the early years under Component 1 (Sanitation). 
Supplemental EIA's for other works to be constructed towards the end of APL-1, for 
which designs will be prepared during the course of APL-1 will be reviewed by the Bank 
during project implementation. A seven-volume EIA was prepared under the general 
direction of the AySA Environmental Management Unit using independent 
environmental engineering consultants for key aspects of the analysis. These assessments, 
which were coordinated with associated modeling and other technical evaluations, 
indicate the overall environmental viability of the proposed project activities. The EIA 
provides a thorough assessment of the project’s environment impact during the 
construction and operational stages for theproject's main civil works. The EIA for 
Component 1 includes specific volumes on the general conditions and background of the 
project; a description of AySA’s corporate Master Plan (Plan Director); the proposed 
Riachuelo preliminary treatment plant; the pumping stations; the Riachuelo sub-aquatic 
outfall; as well as the colector margen izquierda and colector baja costenera.  In addition, 
the site-specific EIA includes baseline data, legal and institutional capacity assessments, 
an environmental management plan and site specific management measures. 
Furthermore, since the government advanced the construction of the Berazategui 
preliminary treatment plant (BPTP)(In the 1970’s, Obras Sanitarias de la Nacion, the 
public water and sewerage authority for the Buenos Aires Metropolitan area that 
preceded Aguas Argentinas, constructed a 2.5 km sub-aquatic outfall in the municipality 
of Berazategui to discharge sewage from its service area to La Plata River. In 2004, the 
municipality of Berazategui and local residents initiated judicial proceedings against 
Aguas Argentinas for discharging sewage to the La Plata River without adequate 
treatment. In 2006, the case was elevated to Argentina’s Supreme Court, which ruled in 
favor of the municipality and local residents and ordered the construction of a 
preliminary treatment plant. After Aguas Argentinas’ concession was rescinded in March 
of 2006, AySA assumed responsibility for complying with the Supreme Court ruling and, 
in 2008, awarded a contract for construction of the Berazategui sewage preliminary 
treatment plant. While work on the BPTP is expected to be carried out in parallel with 
APL-1, from a technical standpoint, the plant complements a Bank-financed civil work 
Page  11
under APL-2 (i.e. the Berazategui sub-aquatic outfall) and has therefore been included as 
a
counterpart work under APL-2, an EIA was prepared in July 2007 and has been 
disclosed in-
country by AySA (The executive summary of the EIA is on AySA’s 
website; the complete report is available at AySA’s library in Buenos Aires). The Bank 
team has assessed the EIA and found it to be broadly acceptable. Additionally, a revised 
Environmental Management Plan for the BPTP, acceptable to the Bank, will be presented 
by AySA within 6 months of loan effectiveness.  
 
The Integrated Environmental Assessment was prepared under the overall guidance of 
ACUMAR and corresponds to a regional, basin-wide assessment of environmental risks 
and benefits.  The IEA describes the baseline conditions of the Matanza-Riachuelo Basin, 
the legal and institutional setting and the strategic challenges and options that underpin 
the choice of the specific project components and investment activities. This IEA was 
used to evaluate the regional strategic objectives of the project (including infrastructure 
works that belong to the PISA but that will not be financed through the proposed Bank 
loans such as the Berazategui preliminary treatment plant) and to provide a clear rationale 
for the project components that respond to these objectives. The IEA also describes the 
structure of the project as a whole, including a detailed description of the environmental 
risks and benefits of the three project components and the institutional arrangements for 
implementing the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the project.  
 
Social assessment process: Given the complexity of the Project, two complementary 
social assessments were prepared for ACUMAR and AySA during project preparation. 
ACUMAR’s social assessment was a basin-wide study, describing the social baseline 
conditions which exist in the M-R Basin, identifying stakeholder perceptions, positions, 
and influence on the project, highlighting the existing communication channels, 
pinpointing the overall social impacts of the project, and assessing its various risks. 
AySA’s social assessment, on the other hand, explored theopinion of stakeholders about 
the proposed infrastructure works to be carried out by the company.  
 
Both SAs were developed based on available project information and consultations with 
relevant stakeholders. The teams that conducted the SA carried out 45 meetings with 
stakeholders including representatives of community organizations, NGOs, the industrial 
sector, provincial and municipal officials, and members of academia. Stakeholders also 
participated in workshops, including those for the presentation of the TOR’s for the EIAs 
and the draft EIAs themselves.  
 
Regarding the BPTP, the World Bank team was recently informed (March 2009) that 
the construction site required resettlement of 18 families that had illegally occupied the 
site and erected precarious sheet-metal dwellings. In October 2008, families were 
relocated to new concrete houses approximately 2-3 km from the BPTP site. The Bank 
considers that the relocation of families from the BPTP site does not require application 
of OP 4.12 since construction of the BPTP is neither directly related to the project (APL-
1) nor necessary to achieve its objectives. This conclusion notwithstanding, the Bank 
team conducted a preliminary assessment of the resettlement program and has found no 
evidence to indicate worsened living conditions. Families have been provided housing 
Page  12
built from concrete blocks on 300 m2 lots with running water. Schools and health 
facilities are nearby and transport services are accessible. The Bank will continue to 
monitor their living conditions going forward.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04).  Within the project’s area of influence, there are five 
known terrestrial ecological reserves and no existing aquatic reserves. Based on studies 
conducted by the GEF-funded FREPLATA project, future priority areas proposed for the 
protection of aquatic biodiversity have been identified but these areas are located far from 
the immediate impact zone and not likely to be affected by the project.  
 
Because the project aims to contribute to the significant improvement of water quality 
conditions in the M-R Basin and in the coastal areas of the Rio de la Plata, it is expected 
to have significant positive impacts for the coastal habitats found within the project area 
of influence.  
 
An area of the receiving waters in La Plata River will be degraded as a result of the 
pollution discharge from the wastewater treatment plants. Models developed for the 
outfalls indicate that the discharge plume is expected to be fully contained within a 
relatively small area of the receiving waters. The pollution is not expected to affect 
downstream coastal areas designated as conservation areas.  
 
Forests (OP 4.36). There are no forests affected by the project and there are no activities 
proposed which would promote improved forest management. Therefore no action is 
required under this policy.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). Preliminary site evaluations for proposed civil 
works construction do not show any evidence of physical cultural resources that will 
require mitigation or management measures. However, since many of the proposed works 
are underground or will require some excavation, all construction contracts will include a 
“chance finds” clause that will require contractorsto halt construction if any underground 
physical cultural resources sites are encountered during construction. Site specific 
management plans for any cultural property identified by chance finds procedures will be 
developed before construction can start up again.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). Because the vast majority of construction will take 
place underground or on sites that do not require land acquisition or resettlement, the 
project expects minimal need for resettlement.  However, given the complexity of works, 
and since the physical interventions of components 2 and 3 of the project have not yet 
been fully determined, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared for the 
project as a precaution. Among other things, the framework spells out the eligibility 
criteria, forms of compensation, and dispute resolution mechanisms that will be available 
to potentially affected people.  
 
Indigenous People (OP 4.10). There are no indigenous people affected by this project 
and therefore no action required under this policy.  
 
Page  13
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60). The project is not being implemented in 
any area known to be the subject of international dispute and therefore no action is 
required under the policy.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50). Since both proposed sub-aquatic 
outfalls (the Riachuelo outfall at Dock Sud during APL-1 and the Berazategui outfall in 
APL-2), discharge to the Rio de la Plata, a bi-national waterway shared with Uruguay, 
OP 7.50 is triggered. Notification to Uruguay is made through the bi-national "Comision 
Administradora del Rio de la Plata" (CARP). On 13 August, 2001, Argentina's then 
Ministry of Infrastructure and Housing submitted a request to CARP to authorize 
construction of an outfall at Dock Sud. CARP replied on 23 May, 2002, that it had "no 
objections" to the works, as long as several conditions were met (analysis of possible 
algae blooms in the diffuser area, establishment of an environmental monitoring & 
control program, determination of the types of wastewater that would be discharged and 
definition of pre-treatment standards for industries, etc.). On September 11, 2008, AySA 
(through the Sub-secretariat of Water Resources in the Ministry of Planning, Public 
Works and Services) presented an updated submission to CARP. Subsequently, on 27 
January, 2009, Argentine representatives gave a presentation of the project before CARP 
and answered questions from Uruguayan representatives. The Argentine government has 
received a formal written response from CARP that did not indicate any objection to the 
project(Acta 444 dated 27 January, 2009).  
 
Assessment of Borrower Capacity to Implement EMP. Borrower capacity to implement 
and achieve a fully successful EMP will be considerably improved during project 
implementation. While ACUMAR has some staff with very strong environmental and 
water resource management credentials, they currently have no stand-alone environment 
unit responsible for the tasks expected under the EMP. Such a unit is proposed, but it will 
take some time to develop and mature into a fully functioning unit. In the interim, 
environmental management functions will be assigned to the Environmental Management 
Director in the new organizational structure for ACUMAR until a dedicated unit is 
created. A subcomponent under Component 4 has been specifically designed to support 
any key activities that emerge from ACUMAR’s institutional strengthening plan, and will 
be vital in the creation of needed capacities.  
 
Within AySA, there currently exists a stand alone environmental unit with staff 
appointed to carry out a variety of corporate environmental functions.  So far, their work 
has been quite strong with respect to preparation aspects of the project. AySA will 
complete its team with a full range of skills necessary to carry out all the tasks related to 
project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the project preparation process, stakeholder consultation and information 
disclosure has been carried out using formal as well as informal methodologies. 
Information on the project and its components has been made publically available 
through stakeholder consultation and workshops. Informal focus groups discussions have 
Page  14
been conducted with NGOs, local government, affected people and beneficiaries at 
various points during preparation and appraisal. In addition, household and individual 
surveys done by the economic evaluation team have been used to disseminate 
information and gather stakeholder perceptions.  
 
ACUMAR and AySA are also establishing social expertise within their organizational 
structure. These teams have been established to lead efforts at stakeholder in constant 
contact with the local communities. ACUMAR, for example, has established a network 
of approximately 300 community and environmental NGOs that are part of its broader 
communications strategy relating to issues facing the M-R Basin. This network provides 
an opportunity for information disclosure not just on the project but on a wide array of 
development issues facing the basin. In addition to general public disclosure, several 
experts in the sanitation, engineering, environmental area have given advice and 
assessment to the project team.  
 
Two social assessments have been conducted for the project.  The first was a project 
level social assessment, describing the social baseline conditions which exist in the M-R 
Basin, identifying the stakeholders, highlighting the existing communication channels, 
and pinpointing the overall social impacts of the project. A second assessment 
commissioned by AySA explores the opinion of stakeholders about the proposed 
infrastructure works to be carried out by the company.  
 
The project stakeholders identified and contacted by the social assessment consulting 
teams include local and international NGO, neighbors associations, community groups, 
individuals, universities, national, provincial and municipal governments, industrial 
associations, and professional associations.  
 
The potential social impacts associated with the various components of the projects 
were also identified. For the sanitation component, some temporary social impacts are 
expected during the construction phase. These include restriction of access to some 
public areas, increased transit of trucks to the trenches and collector sites etc. However, 
the construction methods proposed (pipe jacking and tunneling) to be used for pipe 
installation have been explicitly designed to minimize impacts, including any 
resettlement. Pipe routes have been selected to be located in public areas and will not 
impact private property.  
 
The most important finding from the social assessments was that the project (as well as 
the sanitation component alone) will have a positive social impact on the population in 
the M-R Basin as well as in the Bs As Metropolitan Area. The investments will 
contribute to improving the quality of life of the basin population by improvements in the 
environmental conditions, as well as by increasing the capacity of the sewerage systems.  
 
A
first major consultation event was held in Buenos Aires on July 10th 2008, for the 
scoping of the terms of reference for the EIA. A second round of formal public disclosure 
of the advanced draft EIA report was conducted on November 7, 2008. The draft EIA 
reports are already available to the public through the AySA and ACUMAR websites, by 
posting of hard copies in ACUMAR as well as through the World Bank's InfoShop. Most 
of the identified stakeholders have taken part of these events. In order to foster 
Page  15
participation and to bring more information to stakeholders (one of the main finding of 
the social assessment), a communication strategy is being designed based on the main 
findings of the social assessments studies.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/13/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/18/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
08/18/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/18/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  16
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  17
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Menahem Libhaber 
04/02/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
04/02/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman 
04/02/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi 
04/02/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
04/03/2009 
Comments:   
