Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4038 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/22/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P115109 
Project Name: Access to Finance for Small and Medium Enterprises 
Task Team Leader: Michael Edwards 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed loan will support the project's development objective to increase Armenian small 
and medium enterprises access to medium-term finance. The project outcomes will be 
determined upon appraisal. The project would positively impact SMEs not only during the 
implementation period (2009-2012), but beyond, as the PFIs will use the repayments from the 
initial sub-borrowers to finance new investments before the funds are returned to the World 
Bank.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed US$ 50 million Access to Finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (AFSME) 
Project is designed to provide wholesale funding for on-lending to SMEs in urban, rural and peri-
urban areas. It is foreseen a number of local and foreign owned banks would be qualified as was 
previously done in 1999 through KfW  and since 2006 by the Bank under the Rural Enterprise 
and Small-Scale Commercial Agriculture Development  project.  
 
The envisaged AFSME project is to be implemented through the CBA’s existing PIU, the 
principle tasks of which would include: (i) help qualify PFIs; (ii) strengthen their capacity to 
evaluate SME credit risk; (iii) disburse wholesale funds to PFIs for on-lending; and (iv) monitor 
Page  2
the banks’ performance. The project will coordinate its activities closely with those donors 
already active in SME finance and/or capacity building, namely the SD led RESCAD project, the 
IFC, KfW, EBRD and USAID.  
 
The eligibility criteria for PFIs’ creditworthiness and operating systems wouldbe determined by 
the Bank in close collaboration with the CBA, as Armenia’s banksupervisory authority. 
Accordingly, credit extended by the CBA to the PFIs would be on market terms, as would PFI 
loans to SME sub-borrowers. All credit and associated risks (except foreign exchange risk, 
which the CBA will absorb if on-lent in local currency) would be fully borne by the PFIs which 
originate the SME loans. Some individual project limits may be considered to ensure the credit is 
widely accessed.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Yerevan, Armenia.   
 
E.
 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The PIU’s capacity to carry out environmental work required for the implementation of the 
project is limited and will require enhancement.  Although PIU has an experience of 
administering a donor-assisted sub-lending scheme similar to the one proposed by this project, 
the environmental oversight practiced for it is mostly limited to excluding non-eligible activities 
and does not focus on mainstreaming environmental good practice into the implementation of 
approved sub-projects.  
 
Therefore, PIU’s capacity is to be strengthened either through training of in-house staff of 
recruitment of a knowledgeable specialist in order to adequately handle its tasks.  Environmental 
good standards applied by potential PFIs are diverse. Due diligence of some commercial banks is 
limited checking compliance of their borrowers with the national legislation.  Others have their 
corporate environmental policies as well.  Despite the current practice, all PFIs will require 
introduction to the main principles of the Bank’s environmental safeguards and to the project 
OM through a start-up workshop or a similar short-term training.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECAVP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
4.  OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered by the project. As the project will 
support small and medium enterprises, it is not expected that any proposed activities will cause 
multiple, significant, and irreversible adverse environmental and/or health impacts. Despite a low 
likelihood of occurrence, sub-projects which would qualify for Category A for environmental 
assessment purposes are excluded from the activities eligible for the project support.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
private SMEs will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that they 
have not acquired and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with 
the project proceeds through a process which involved and/or would involve officially supported 
expropriation.  With these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 
Involuntary Resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/22/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
In accordance with the Safeguards consultation meeting held on November 13, 2008, 
documents for disclosure before appraisal would include the Environmental Framework (EF) 
for the project.  It was subsequently agreed with the Safeguards unit that a Resettlement 
Framework policy was not applicable to this operation.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Edwards 
12/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Daniel Pollner 
01/13/2009 
Comments:   
