Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4711 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/17/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Original Project ID: P087620 
Original Project Name: Social Protection 
Administration Project 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P118157 
Project Name: AM-Social Protection Add'l Financing 
Task Team Leader: Lire Ersado 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (70%);Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance 
(30%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (40%);Improving labor markets (30%);Social risk mitigation 
(30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PDO of this Additional Financing (AF) is the same as the original project, which is to 
improve performance (efficiency, effectiveness, quality) by public employment, pension and 
social assistance agencies in providing services to the population.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing would scale up the activities and investments under the on-
going project, and thus allow it to further improve efficiency and effectiveness of the overall 
social protection system.  The current project has successfully initiated several activities on pilot 
basis and additional efforts are needed to ensure sustainable benefit to the wider population.  
However, there are several outstanding activities that are essential for further improving and 
maintaining the efficiency and effectiveness of the social service delivery system, including (1) 
the rehabilitation of the remaining regional social service offices;  (2) ensuring the sustainability 
Page  2
and widespread use of the network of information flows; (3) institutional and reform bottlenecks 
for rural employment; (4) improvement in the targeting of the Family Benefit program; (5) 
rehabilitation and social integration of vulnerable groups; and (6) integration of social services. 
These are key priorities of the GOA, who recognizes the importance of lowering unemployment 
rates and enhancing targeting of social benefits in addressing poverty.  
 
The project will include civil works (minor refurbishment: painting of walls and ceilings; 
updating wiring, etc.) and provision of equipment, materials, technical assistance and training 
under the following five components: (i) general support to the social protection system; (ii) 
labor and employment services; (iii) improving social assistance; (iv) integration of the social 
protection system; and (v) project management, monitoring and evaluation.  
 
As is the case with the current project, the rehabilitation activities in the proposed additional 
financing will not include any new construction or resettlement activities so that the additional 
investments would not require any changes to the environmental category of the project or 
trigger any new safeguard policies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As has been the case with the current project, the additional financing will finance minor 
refurbishment. As with the current Project, the requirements of local environmental regulations 
will be fully met and the Borrower has adequate capacity to enforce them.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/28/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lire Ersado 
09/14/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathy A. Lindert 
09/14/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
