Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3767 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P107772 
Project Name: Second Education Quality and Relevance Project (APL#2) 
Task Team Leader: Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (45%);Secondary education (35%);Pre-primary education 
(20%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objectives are: i) Enhance and facilitate school learning in 
general education and improve the school readiness of children entering primary education; and 
(ii) Ensure equal access to and improve quality, relevance and accountability in tertiary 
education.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1. Enhancing the Quality of General Education (Estimated cost US$ 22.5 million)  
 
Subcomponent 1. Promoting School Readiness and Equal Opportunities at the Start of General 
Education (US$ 3.5 million). This subcomponent would support the implementation of the 
national strategy on preschool education for 2008-2015. Within APL 1, 20 preschool pilots are 
now being carried out in two Marzes through the provision of grants to local communities. APL 
2
will build on the lessons learned from those pilots in order to extend this scheme to all Marzes 
in Armenia. It will also support the development of a new preschool curriculum and the training 
of at least 250 teaching staff on new child-centered teaching methods. The objective is to 
increase enrollment in preschool and therefore to improve the school readiness of children 
Page  2
entering primary education. The focus will be on rural areas, where there is now a huge supply 
constraint of preschool services (enrolment rates are down to 9 percent).  
 
Subcomponent 2. Supporting further Improvements in the Quality of Education through 
Improved Teacher Education and Professional Development (US$ 4.0 million). This 
subcomponent would support the implementation of Teacher Education and Professional 
Development Strategy to be approved by the MoES. Its overall objective is to develop and 
implement a set of policies and measures to improve teacher quality, including measures to 
attract high-caliber graduates to the teaching profession, reformed pre-service training programs 
and institutions, clear and transparent selection and recruitment of new teachers, a more school-
based system of in-service training in the context of enhanced school autonomy, and a set of 
incentives designed to reward the best teachers and to keep them in schools.  
 
Subcomponent 3. Integration of ICTs in the Teaching and Learning Process. (US$ 6.0 million). 
The objective of this subcomponent is to ensure that all schools in Armenia are equipped with 
up-to-date technologies, connected interactively through the Internet, and ready to use all these 
technologies effectively to deliver the curriculum and to enhance and facilitate student learning. 
Investments in this sub-component will be decided on the basis of the evaluation of the 
Computer Revolving Fund and of the levels of use of ICT in Armenian schools (both already 
ongoing as part of the evaluation of APL 1 outcomes). This subcomponent should be part of the 
overall Government strategy for IT development in Armenia, which, among other things, implies 
that the Government contribution to the subcomponent should be substantial.  
 
Subcomponent 4. Supporting the Implementation of High School Reform (US$.9.5 million). 
This subcomponent would support teachers and schools in the successful implementation of the 
new 12 year curriculum and general education system, and establishing a new network of upper 
secondary schools. The Project would support the creation of resource centers, modern school 
libraries, and laboratories in 120 new high schools.  
 
Component 2. Supporting Tertiary Education Reforms in the context of Bologna Agenda 
(Estimated cost US$ 4.5 million)  
 
Subcomponent 1: Strengthening the Quality Assurance Mechanism (US$ 2.0 million). This 
subcomponent will support the government in strengthening the newly established National 
Center for Education Quality Assurance (NQAA) and advancing QA policies and practices 
aiming at the threshold standards and targets required by the Bologna Process. It will also 
support universities in setting up their internal QA units and procedures at the institutional level. 
This subcomponent will also assist the government in setting up priority areas and viable 
procedures for the operation of a future competitive fund scheme.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Setting a Student Loan Scheme (US$ 1.0 million). To ensure equal access to 
higher education for all socio-economic groups without additional burden on the public budget, a 
well-functioning loan system is necessary. This subcomponent will provide the MoES with 
technical assistance to conduct a graduate labor market survey in order to examine graduate 
salaries and repayment capacity and to set up a student loan system.  
 
Page  3
Subcomponent 3: Strengthening the Capacity of MoES and of Universities and Developing a 
Higher Education MIS (US$ 1.5 million). The success of all the previous subcomponents will 
heavily rely on
 universities’ capacities in strategic planning, financial management, and internal 
evaluation, and on the capacity of MoES in policy analysis, monitoring and evaluation. In 
addition to training of university administrators at the central and faculty levels, this 
subcomponent will support a management information system (MIS) which will provide 
consistent and comparable performance information that the Ministry can use for monitoring, 
evaluation, and planning processes. Moreover, since there is room for streamlining the existing 
network of universities and programs, this subcomponent will finance technical assistance to 
explore potential efficiency gains and to prepare a restructuring fund.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Estimated cost US$ 3 million)  
 
Implementation arrangements for the APL 2 would remain the same as for APL 1. The MoES 
would ensure overall leadership for the reform process, including policy regulations and 
implementation. Some departments of the MoES should take coordination responsibilities of 
specific project components/subcomponents. It is also expected that other government agencies 
and non-government organizations will play an important role. The new NQAA, National 
Institute of Education, National Center of Education Technologies, Assessment and Testing 
Center will all be implementing agencies for their respective project subcomponents. The 
responsibility for day-to-day project implementation will rest with the current PIU, whose 
capacity has been strengthened under APL 1. However, additional staff for the higher education 
component would need to be hired. UNICEF and OSI will support project implementation in 
preschool and tertiary education areas, respectively. Their specific contribution will be agreed 
upon during project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N.A. 
–
As no infrastructure activities are anticipated under the proposed project, no safeguard 
policies would be triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Category:   C - No adverse environmental impacts.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/03/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N.A.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
07/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alberto Rodriguez 
08/04/2008 
Comments:  Team informs that the Environmental and Social Specialists will be identified at the time 
of the Safeguards meeting 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
