Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC4482
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P115486 
Original Project Name: LIFELINE  
ROADS IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P116760 
Project Name:  Lifeline Road Improvement Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Satoshi Ishihara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 27, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (67%);Other rural development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
36.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
9.12
9.12 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO of this Additional Financing (AF) is the same as the original project, which is 
to upgrade selected sections of the lifeline road network and create temporary 
employment in road construction.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would scale up the activities supported under the original project by 
rehabilitating additional 140km of the existing Lifeline Road Network (LRN) within the 
current Right-of-Way (RoW). The original project aims to rehabilitate 100km of LRN 
and prioritizes regions where construction season is short due to harsh climate in winter. 
This Additional Financing has been prepared in response to the request from the 
Government of Armenia to quickly carry out "shovel ready" civil works and create 
temporary employment within this construction season. Thus the project road sections to 
be rehabilitated during the first year are selected from those regions that have longer 
construction season in 2009.  
 
Page  2
All project roads are local roads connecting villages with secondary or primary roads, 
the main function of which is to provide basic access.  No widening or realignment is 
anticipated, and rehabilitation of structures, such as bridges or tunnels will not be 
supported.  
 
The proposed AF will also support the capacity development of Armenia Road 
Directorate, road safety audit and a "safe villages" pilot program. The "safe village" pilot 
program will require land acquisition.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This AF will rehabilitate road sections in seven regions, namely, Armavir, Vayots Dzor, 
Shirak, Gegharkunik, Kotayk, Tavush, and Syunik marzes. All project roads are new 
additions to the project. All civil works will be conducted within the existing RoW. 
Below is the detailed list of road section to be rehabilitated under the project.  
 
1.  
Brnakot-Sisian (4.7km)  
 
2.
M12-Hartashen (6.5km)  
 
3.
Geghavanq-Kavjut-M2 (6.0km)  
 
4.
Alvanq-M17 (2.6km)  
 
5.
Shanidzor-M17 (1.66km)  
 
6.
M2-Levaz-Vahravar-Gudemnis-Kuris-Karjevan (5.3km)  
 
7.
M17-Meghri (3.0km)  
 
8.
M2-Vardanidzor (0.6km)  
 
9.
M2-Agarak (2.17km)  
 
10.
M2-Tkhkut (0.42km)  
 
11.
Agarak bypass (0.97km)  
 
12.
H62, Sisian-Aghitu (5.0km)  
 
13.
H3, Yerevan-Garni-Geghard (3.08km)  
 
14.
Tcambarak-Vahan (6.0km)  
 
15.
Gharibjanyan-Akhurik (1.8km)  
 
16.
Gyumri-Akhuryan-Musaelyan-Jrarat (18.1km)  
 
17.
Salvard-Hatcavan-Ashotavan-Sisian (12.5km)  
 
18.
Mutsq-Shaghat-M13 (6.0km)  
 
19.
Qirs-Qyurut (2.0km)  
 
20.
Geghi-Geghavanq (6.0km)  
 
21.
H39-Karmirgyugh-Gegharquniq (4.65km)  
 
22.
Gavar-Tsaghkashen (6.4km)  
 
23.
M10-Yeranos (2.0km)  
 
24.
Martuni-Vaghashen (2.5km)  
 
25.
H17-Armavir-Isahakyan-Gyumri (9.4km)  
 
26.
Achajur-M4 (2.0km)  
 
27.
Lusahovit-Khashtarak-M4 (4.0km)  
 
28.
Movsesgyugh-Norashen-Verin Karmir Aghbyur (8.6km)  
 
29.
M4-Approach to Tsakhkadzor sports complex (4.6km)   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This AF is not expected to have significant impact on environment. All planned physical 
works are limited to the rehabilitation of existing roads within the current RoW. No 
permanent acquisition of private land or other impact that will trigger OP 4.12 is 
anticipated. The rehabilitation of project roads will not induce immediate or mid-term 
land development of a significant scale. Therefore, negative social and environmental 
impacts due to this AF will be of minor scope and duration, and typical for small scale 
road rehabilitation activities, while the long term social impact will be positive.  
 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was developed for the original 
Lifeline Roads Improvement Project, which provides general guidelines for applying 
environmentally sound practices to local roads rehabilitation. The EMF has been updated 
to include the new road sections to be financed under the AF. Site-specific EMPs have 
been under development for the first year program as per the EMF. One EMP has been 
reviewed and cleared by the Bank. Site-specific EMPs will specify environmental risks 
associated with the rehabilitation works to be carried out in the respective locations, 
recommend concrete mitigation measures, and provide monitoring schemes to ensure that 
the mitigation plans are adhered with. Adherence to the EMPs in the course of civil 
works will be sufficient for keeping environmental impacts of the AF to an acceptable 
level. EMPs also contain sections to confirm the absence of land acquisition and other 
impact that would trigger OP 4.12. EMPs also include measures to be taken against short-
term negative social impacts such as temporary loss of access.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term negative impacts are anticipated due to future activities in the 
project area.  Private land may be temporarily occupied to store construction materials, 
strictly on a voluntary basis so no involuntary land acquisition is involved. Contractors 
are responsible to negotiate with land owners on terms of land use, and will be required 
to reinstate the land used after the civil works, as per measures spelled out in the EMPs.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There is no alternatives to the Project. The project roads were selected based on the 
screening criteria including the absence of land acquisition, minimum environmental 
impact, and the scale of job loss experienced in the catchment areas of respective roads. 
As the project involves only rehabilitation of roads no alternative routes were considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Transport and Communication (MOTC), as the owner of the LRN, has 
the overall responsibility for implementing the AF. The MOTC will delegate day-to-day 
project implementation to the existing Transport Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under the MOTC. The PIU is governed by a Project Management Board chaired by the 
MOTC, which comprise stakeholder ministries and Government agencies.  
 
The existing PIU and the Armenia Road Directorate (ARD) implemented the earlier 
World Bank financed Transport project (2000-2004) and two PHRD grants, and are 
currently managing a PHRD grant associated with the Railways Restructuring project. 
PIU and ARD have already commenced implementation of the Lifeline Roads 
Improvement Project. They are demonstrating good supervision practice using services of 
the qualified firm for the technical oversight. This firm has a good command of the EMF 
and site-specific EMPs, and is using the prescribed monitoring checklists for reporting 
the environmental compliance of works.  PIU and ARD have their own presence at 
project sites as well. The PIU is adequately staffed and has the capacity to address all 
aspects of the project implementation, including safeguard compliance.  
 
Civil works will be supervised by a consulting firm commissioned by the PIU. Along 
with other responsibilities, this firm will be assigned to track compliance of civil works 
contractors with the EMPs and will monitor implementation of the prescribed mitigation 
measures. The PIU will provide the general oversight of safeguard compliance through 
the regular monitoring of the quality of works and by directly addressing outstanding 
safeguard issues identified by the supervisor.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMF prepared for the original project has been updated to fully reflect activities 
proposed under the AF and have been re-disclosed through the national media and posted 
at the Bank's Infoshop. No substantial changes have been introduced to the EMF and 
Page  5
there would be no need for discussing it with the stakeholders. Public consultation on the 
existing EMF was carried out on January 22, 2009.  
 
Site-specific EMPs prepared for the sections of roads covered by the AF will be made 
available for project-affected communities and consultation meetings will be held in 
several locations prior to the commencement of works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/23/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/24/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/24/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  6
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
06/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
06/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
06/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/06/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
