Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3805 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P107614 
Project Name: ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR THE MUNICIPAL WATER AND 
WASTEWATER PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (80%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.70
1.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's original development objectives were to improve: (i) the quality of services 
provided to customers in the Armenia Water and Wastewater Company's (AWSC) service area; 
and (ii) the sustainability of AWSC.  The project objectives would be achieved through: (a) 
strengthening of AWSC management through a performance based management contract with an 
internationally experienced water utility operator, as well as financing of general expenses for 
the Contract Management Unit (CMU), the agency responsible for project implementation; and, 
refinancing of the project preparation facility advance; (b) strategic rehabilitation of the of water 
supply systems by financing AWSC investments at the national level, including water meter 
installation and testing, condominium support and payment of company operations and 
maintenance expenses; and (c) support for priority reconstruction and rehabilitation by financing 
water supply systems in branches managed by AWSC.  These development objectives are 
consistent with the proposed scaled up project for which additional financing is being sought, 
and therefore will not be revised.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The main aim of the proposed additional financing to the Municipal Water Supply and 
Wastewater Project is to enable AWSC to continue with the rehabilitation of the water supply 
system in its service area, and allow it to scale up current activities and thereby improve 
sustainability.  The proposed addition financing will support: activities under Components A, B 
and C of the current project as follows: (a) AWSC Management Strengthening (US$6.0 million); 
(b) AWSC Investments (US$6.2 million); and (c) Investments in Branch systems (US$4.5 
million).  The Government is seeking additional financing for 90% of these project costs, 
equivalent to US$15 million, while the remaining 10%, or US$1.7 million will be funded from 
counterpart resources.  As in the on-going project, Component A also includes financing of 
project management, including continuation of the Management Contract with the International 
Operator, as well as supervision costs, while Component B includes incremental AWSC 
operating expenses.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The scaled up Project will continue to focus on the medium and small sized cites in AWSC's 
existing service area, that initially covers about 45 percent of the national population and 300 
communities. All physical investments under the project will be implemented on public land and 
within existing rights of way.  There are no resettlement issue within the project areas and 
location.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has already established an adequate mechanism for addressing safeguard issues, 
and the Armenia environmental policies and legislation are consistent with Bank requirements.  
The management contract under the project provides support and guidance to the Borrower to 
focus attention on internationally acceptable standards for environmental safeguards and 
management.  Under the on-going project, an environmental management plan was prepared 
which guides the preparation of environmental summaries for sub-projects, which are reviewed 
by the Bank.  The environmental summaries have been satisfactory.  These arrangements will 
continue under the additional financing.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars A. V. Rasmusson (ECSSD) 
Ms Irina Petrovna Novikova (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project activities under the additional financing trigger OP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment. While no major environmental issues are anticipated, since most of 
investments will concentrate on rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, certain investment items 
to be funded under the project (which are expected to fall under Environmental Categories B and 
C) may require special mitigation measures to protect the environment and enhance health 
safety. Any subproject determined to be under Environmental Category A would be ineligible for 
financing under the project. During the preparation of the parent project, an Environmental 
Management Plan Framework (EMPF) was prepared specifying procedures to be followed 
during project implementation to address environmental concerns of sub
-
projects. This 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
framework will be revised to include the additional investments under the additional financing, 
and submitted to the Bank for clearance.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/08/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Management Plan Framework under the on-going project will be revised 
to include the investments under the additional financing and will be resubmitted to the Bank 
by September 12, 2008, following in-country disclosure   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
07/31/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
