Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/18/2008 
Report No.:  AC3909
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P114409 
Project Name:  GEOFUND 2: ARMENIA GEOTHERMAL PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Ani Balabanyan 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 20, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.30 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.30 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to assess the feasibility of exploratory drilling of the 
geothermal site with the estimated highest geothermal potential. The key performance 
indicator is the decision whether to drill or not to drill exploratory wells for the 
geothermal sites, based on the results of site investigation works. The project will achieve 
the project objective through geological field scouting, magneto-telluric study and 3D 
seismic survey.  
 
The global environmental objective is to remove the barriers to development of 
geothermal energy.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be supported by the on-going GEF/World Bank GeoFund program 
through its TA window. The proposed geothermal project will support to conducting 
comprehensive field surveys of the aforementioned prospective geothermal sites and will 
have the following structure:  
 
Page  2
Component A: Technical assistance (US$ 1.8 million, including GeoFund funding of 
US$ 1.5 million and government co-financing of US$ 0.3 million) to conduct 
comprehensive investigations works. This component covers the following areas:  
 
A.1. Technical Investigation (indicative amount of US$ 1.74 million): The field 
investigation works at Karkar and Gridzor geothermal sites will be carried out in two 
phases. The second investigation phase will depend on the results of the first and will 
only be carried out if the results are clearly positive and thus justify additional studies:  
 
Phase I will include: (i) geological field works (scouting), (ii) magneto-telluric (MT) 
sounding, (iii) interpretation of the results of the MT sounding; and (iv) supervision over 
the implementation of the scope of geological field works and MT sounding.  
 
Phase II will include: (i) three dimensional (3D) seismic survey of the most prospective 
of the two geothermal sites, (ii) interpretation of the results of 3D seismic studies; (iii) 
supervision over the implementation of the scope of 3D seismic study; and (iv) 
assessment of the economic and financial viability of the geothermal site with the highest 
estimated technical potential.  
 
A.2. Operating costs (indicative amount of US$ 60,000): Financing of the incremental 
operating costs of the implementing agency for this project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The following locations for further comprehensive field The following locations for 
further comprehensive field investigation works were selected: (1) (1) Gridzor site and 
(2) Karkar site. These areas are located far from any permanent settlements and are not 
expected to lead to resettlement issues. The areas are not used for agricultural or any 
other economic purposes. Also the sites are not within any natural preserve and do not 
closely border with natural habitats. The site areas are represented mostly by alpine 
meadows with limited accessibility for rural residents.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The fieldwork in the two phases envisaged for funding under the project no 
environmental impacts are expected. There might be very minor damage to soil and 
vegetation during the field surveys. These will be managed and minimized through clear 
up-front information of personnel and distribution of clear behavioral rules and conduct 
during fieldworks.  
 
Key aspects will be a no-litter and proper waste management policy, the preservation of 
vegetation, fauna (no hunting / poaching allowed), soil and vegetation (no unnecessary 
tire tracks), no cutting of firewood.  
 
Due to the small scale of the planned field works the impacts are expected to be so small 
and localized, that no specific safeguards documents or procedures would be prepared 
and the project categorized a “C” under WB OP 4.01.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Simple measures of good conduct during field work   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
None   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
N/A 
Page  5
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ani Balabanyan 
10/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
10/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gary Stuggins 
12/18/2008 
Comments:   
