Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4179
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P115686 
Project Name:  Rural Enterprise & Small-Scale Commercial Agriculture Development 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Doina Petrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed additional financing (AF) in the amount of SDR 1.3 million (US$ 2.0 
million) is being processed under the the IDA fast track facility, as part of the Bank’s 
rapid response to help Armenia mitigate the impacts of the current global crisis on the 
Armenian economy and well-being of its population.  The additional financing will  
cover a financing gap of US$ 1.25 million in the Community-focused Economic 
Development (CED) component of the original project, and scale up the component by 
providing US$ 0.6 million for the implementation of several additional sub-projects of 
high priority, and US$ 0.15 million to cover incremental operating costs.  
 
The development objective of the AF would remain the same as defined for the original 
project, which is support the development of Armenia's small- and medium-scale rural 
businesses by improving the ability of farmers and rural entrepreneurs to access markets 
and by stimulating market-oriented private and public investments in rural areas.  
 
The AF would enhance the project’s impact and effectiveness by increasing the total 
number of communities benefiting from the activities under the CED component.  It will 
Page  2
generate additional employment, increase incomes, and improve access to services for a 
wider segment of Armenia’s rural population.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional credit of US$ 2.0 million would enable the Borrower to cover 
the financing gap and scale up public works by adding an additional 5-7 community 
infrastructure grants under the CED component.  The additional financing would help 
with implementation of this component in all its aspects, with a special focus on 
employment and income generating activities, and would be allocated as follows:  
 
(i) 
US$1.25million to cover the existing financing gap to complete the 
implementation of all 156 CED grants in 134 communities designed under the original 
project.  Of this, 97 have already been completed; additional financing is needed to 
complete implementation of the remaining 59 grants.  
 
(ii) 
US$0.60 million to scale up the CED component with an additional 5-7 new 
grants to be implemented. These grants include infrastructure activities, such as repair 
and extension of drinking water pipelines, gas and irrigation.  
 
(iii) 
US$0.15 million to cover incremental operating costs of the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU), including monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in six marzes of Armenia and will cover communities 
selected by the agreed-upon criteria which evaluate communities’ poverty level and their 
potential for economic development.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The AF will not entail any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts on the 
human health and the natural environment given the relatively small size and type of 
most of the grants to be supported. Any negative environmental impacts of the activities 
proposed under the AF are expected to be minor to moderate, while the long-term social 
impacts will be positive. The renovation of village infrastructure (e.g. water and gas 
supplies, storage and marketing infrastructure, etc.) will improve the socioeconomic 
conditions of the rural population and contribute to reducing rural poverty. Some positive 
environmental impacts are also anticipated in the operation phase of the project 
(increased use of natural gas instead of environmentally more detrimental fuels). At the 
same time, the rehabilitation activities may raise certain environmental issues commonly 
associated with small scale construction, such as dust, noise, degradation of vegetation 
and generation of small amounts of potentially hazardous wastes (e.g. asbestos tiles). 
These impacts can be mitigated easily by applying relevant best construction practices as 
laid out in the Environmental Management Guidelines. Support for income generation 
investments will not include activities which would trigger any of the Bank's safeguard 
policies other than OP 4.01 (e.g., no procurement of pesticides; agricultural machinery to 
be used only for cultivation of land already being used for agriculture).  
 
The original project triggered OP/BP 4.01 and was assigned environmental assessment 
Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of the project was carried out 
in February 2005 and an Environmental Management Plan was developed to cover the 
specific types of activities to be supported under the project. These documents were 
disclosed in Infoshop in 2005 and have been resubmitted to Infoshop in January 2009 for 
the AF project as indicated below.  
 
An Operational Manual was produced for the CED component of the original project, 
which provides a blueprint of action for the entire sub-project cycle, including 
environmental due diligence to be applied in the process of sub-project selection and 
implementation. This covers guidance on environmental screening of sub-project 
proposals, conducting specific environmental studies as required, and tracking 
performance of civil works contractors.  
 
A
review of the environmental safeguards performance for the original project was 
conducted in May, 2008 as part of the midterm review. While the environmental review 
identified some problems relating to implementation and monitoring of the EMP, 
particularly in relation to Component 1 (agricultural credit line and Competitive Grants 
Program), it did not identify any major environmental impacts resulting from these 
processing problems.  In relation to the CED component which will be increased under 
the AF, the review found that in practice the environmental work carried out was limited 
to the oversight of compliance with national legislation.  While the OM authorizes the 
Community Economic Development Committees to identify the need for environmental 
studies under any individual investment plan, there has been no case for which this was 
Page  4
done.  Field visits to a sample of CED subprojects identified a few minor environmental 
issues that should be addressed such as occasional overflow spillage of small quantities 
from a reservoir resulting in localized water logging and recommended strengthening of 
the PIU capacity for environmental monitoring and inclusion of information on 
environmental due diligence in the regular reporting on progress of project 
implementation.  In order to address these, the project team has prepared an Action Plan 
which is outlined in the Project Paper.  
 
The project will not finance any activities that would involve land acquisition or 
involuntary resettlement. However, the project will finance new construction, defined as 
extension of pipes network for gas, drinking water and irrigation. These involve small 
diameter pipes in trenches dug around one meter deep and less then one meter in width. 
The extension of the pipes networks will be done on public / community lands, usually 
along side of existing public local roads, and will be restricted to sites which will not 
involve land acquisition or any resettlement, including no displacement of economic 
activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Implementation arrangements for the AF would remain the same as for the original 
project.  The Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Armenia would be the project 
implementing agency.   Day-to-day coordination of project implementation would be 
provided by the Agricultural Reforms Support PIU.  The PIU is responsible for ensuring 
application of due environmental diligence to the project implementation, the essential 
part of which is adherence to the Environmental Management Guidelines. The EIA report 
includes tables listing potential impacts of each particular type of activity, to be supported 
under various components of the project, ranked by associated risk, and provides 
selection of mitigation measures.  
 
A
review of the environmental safeguards performance for the RESCAD project was 
conducted during the Mid-Term supervision mission in May 2008. While the 
environmental review did not identify any major problems, it highlighted a need for 
strengthening enforcement of the Environmental Management Guidelines and monitoring 
of their implementation. Part of the recommendations from the mid-term environmental 
review is applicable to the CED component of the project and will be applied to the AF 
implementation. Towards this, an Action Plan has been developed to address the 
recommendations of the MTR. This includes the following actions: (i) the PIU capacity 
of providing environmental supervision of the project will be strengthened through 
Page  5
additional training, including on-the-
job training by the Bank team’s environment 
specialist, (ii) environmental reviews of sub-projects will be performed diligently in full 
compliance with the Operational Manual and EMP; and (iii) all steps of environmental 
review and supervision applied through the sub-project cycle will be properly 
documented by PIU and be available on file.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EIA was carried out for the original project, and the original EIA report was 
disclosed and discussed with local stakeholders in a series of workshops in February 
2005. Public input to the original EIA was solicited through discussions with farmers, 
small and medium size commercial farms,   commercial banks, and NGOs.  Feedback 
received in the course of public consultations was used in finalizing the project design 
and was incorporated in the final version of the EIA report and the Environmental 
Management Guidelines, which were re-disclosed in April 2005. The EIA was again re-
disclosed in country in January 2009, upon appraisal of the AF.  
 
A
social assessment of the potential project beneficiary communities was carried out 
February 2005. It covered 20 communities of 4 marzes (Armavir, Lori, Shirak and 
Synik).  Outcomes of the social assessment were used for compiling a set of activities 
eligible for the project support, helped to optimize implementation arrangements, and to 
minimize potential risks of the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/10/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/22/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Doina Petrescu 
01/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
01/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
01/22/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
01/22/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/22/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
01/23/2009 
Comments:   
