Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/10/2008 
Report No.:  AC3753
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P100665 
Project Name:  Yerevan Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 6, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
27.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12.18 
 
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
0.82
13.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective would be to improve urban mobility in Yerevan. The 
proposed project development objective will be achieved through:  
 
a. 
Increasing the traffic carrying capacity of the existing urban street network 
through traffic management measures and implementation of a comprehensive program 
of on-street and off-street paid parking.  
 
b.
Preparing for more comprehensive reforms aimed at integrated, efficient, and 
quality public transport services.  
 
c. 
Developing institutional capacity of Yerevan Municipality to better manage 
traffic and public transport in Yerevan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total Project cost is estimated at US$ 44.00 million including taxes, duties and 
contingencies. The Project would include three components: (i) Traffic Management and 
Parking; (ii) Preparation of Public Transport Reforms; and (iii) Support to Project 
Implementation.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Traffic Management and Parking. This component consists of four sub-
components: (a) Traffic signal system and associated intersection improvements, 
including works supervision; (b) traffic management schemes in selected locations and 
corridors; (c) a paid parking program in the city center; and (d) institutional development 
and training.  
 
The traffic signal system and intersection improvements subcomponent comprises the 
supply, installation, operation and maintenance of a new traffic signal system for 
approximately 165 intersections and 35 additional pedestrian crossings. The installations 
under the new system will either replace the existing outdated traffic signal installations 
or cover intersections that do not have a signal system in place.  
 
The traffic management schemes in selected locations and corridors subcomponent will 
develop and implement various traffic management schemes to improve traffic flow and 
safety including: (i) comprehensive improvements of selected street corridors, and 
especially medians and left turn bays; (ii) pedestrian system continuity improvements, 
and particularly provision of safer at-grade or grade-separated crossings; (iii) selected 
traffic circulation improvements in the city center including provision for additional left 
turns; (iv) a high priority program to improve intersection operations through marking 
and enforcing parking bans at intersections and designated locations for mini-bus stops; 
and (v) technical assistance for design and detailed engineering of these schemes.  
 
Component 2: Passenger Transport Study. This component includes consulting services, 
studies, training, and study tours to prepare public transport reforms to be implemented 
under a second Yerevan Urban Transport Project.  It is expected that this second project 
will include: (a) substantial route restructuring and longer concession periods to improve 
service efficiency, to encourage provision of larger buses, and to improve utilization of 
the metro system; (b) consolidation of the number of awarded bus route concessions to 
foster larger and better managed bus companies; (c) integrated routing and ticketing to 
facilitate transfers among bus routes and the metro; (d) provision of high capacity express 
bus services and bus rapid transit services (BRT), and institutional strengthening to 
support these reforms.  It is expected that these reforms will require supporting public 
investments in physical infrastructure including dedicated bus lanes, bus stations, bus 
terminals and bus depots.  Engineering services will be provided under this 
subcomponent for design of these facilities.  
 
Component 3: Support to Project Implementation   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project management components will be located in existing streets in the city of Yerevan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will improve and expand the traffic signaling system in Yerevan, which 
would require, where necessary, modest geometric improvements to high risk 
intersections to improve functioning and pedestrian safety. The Project will improve 
those intersections which do not require acquisition of private land or closure of 
businesses.  OP 4.12 will not be triggered. Civil works to be carried out for the planned 
improvements would be minor and will not cause any significant or irreversible impacts 
on the environment.  Temporary modest impacts are expected at the construction stage. 
OP 4.01 will be triggered and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared to 
mitigate impact of construction works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project will improve the safety of pedestrians in Yerevan.  The Project will also seek 
to improve the urban public transport system and help improve the mobility of urban poor 
without own cars.  No indirect or long term negative impacts are anticipated in the 
Project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project will improve intersections which do not require acquisition of private land or 
closure of businesses.  OP 4.12 will not be triggered.  
 
The Borrower has developing the EMP describing all expected environmental impacts 
of the anticipated civil works, proposing measures for their mitigation, and providing a 
plan for monitoring their implementation.  The Borrower will implement the Project 
through a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will carry primary responsibility for 
Page  4
ensuring compliance with the safeguard policies. The PIU will have the EMP attached to 
the civil works contracts, making it mandatory for adherence by contractors.  An engineer 
to be commissioned by PIU for overseeing works and ensuring their quality will also be 
responsible for monitoring implementation of EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The findings of the Passenger Transport Study and of the Traffic Management Study will 
be shared with local stakeholders for public information. Draft EMP has been posted on 
the web site of the Armenia Ministry of Transport and on the World Bank's Infoshop 
website since July 1, 2008, and hard copies are made available for stakeholders.  EMP 
will be discussed in a public consultation meeting and received comments be 
incorporated in the final version of the EMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
07/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
06/23/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
06/19/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
07/10/2008 
Comments:  cleared 
