Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4132
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P115109 
Project Name:  Access to Finance for Small and Medium Enterprises 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Edwards 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To maintain or improve Armenian small and medium enterpr
ises’ access to medium-term 
finance   
 
3. Project Description 
This is to be a single component operation, focused on providing wholesale funding to 
qualified banks for on-lending to SMEs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Yerevan, Armenia   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
Ms Lela Shatirishvili (ECSPF) 
 
Page  2
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No social safeguards are triggered by the project.  No activities are planned in disputed 
areas. The project will not finance any investments implying involuntary acquisition of 
land.  
 
Private SMEs will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that 
they have not acquired and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be 
supported with the project proceeds through a process which involved and/or would 
involve officially supported expropriation.  Additionally, WB funds will not support 
loans to any sub-borrower who would use it to invest in an enterprise which would 
require the involuntary displacement of existing occupants or economic users of any plot 
of land, regardless of its current ownership, or loss of or damage to assets including 
standing crops, kiosks and fences. Operational Manual will define a screening procedure 
to be filled by PFIs, and the Project PIU will closely monitor the screening procedure, 
with the support of Bank task team. With these restrictions in place, the project does not 
trigger OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  
 
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered by the project.  Environmental due 
diligence will be applied through the procedures for the selection and implementation of 
investments agreed between the Bank and the Borrower. An environmental framework 
document was prepared to outline the guiding principles of environmental screening, 
ranking, review, management, and monitoring of sub-loans as well as to describe roles 
and responsibilities in carrying out the environmental work in the course of the project 
implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the project will support small and medium enterprises, it is not expected that any 
proposed activities will cause multiple, significant, and irreversible adverse 
environmental and/or health impacts. The screening procedures specified in the 
Page  3
framework are designed to eliminate any subprojects where these aspects may pose any 
risk.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Despite a low likelihood of occurrence, sub-projects which would qualify for Category A 
for environmental assessment purposes are excluded from the activities eligible for the 
project support.  Approval of higher risk Category B sub-projects (B+) will require prior 
review and clearance by the PIU.  The PIU will work closely with PFIs to assist them 
with environmental work to ensure that PFIs are adequately applying environmental 
screening, review, approval, and monitoring procedures. The status of environmental 
compliance will be reported by each PFIs to the PIU on regular basis and the PIU will 
provide this information to the Bank as a part of general progress reporting.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental screening of sub-project proposals will be essential to ensure that they are 
properly categorized and respective environmental review is carried out for them.  
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will be developed to provide guidance on the 
application of mitigation measures and a system of monitoring will be introduced to 
ensure compliance of sub-project implementation with EMPs.  
 
This mechanism of environmental screening, review, approval, and supervision of sub-
projects, including roles and responsibilities of all agencies involved in it, is described in 
the environmental framework document and included in the Operations Manual of the 
project.. According to the established environmental framework, sub-loan applicants will 
be required to carry out adequate type of environmental assessment of the proposed sub-
projects and to obtain environmental permits as prescribed by the national legislation.  
 
PFIs will be responsible for environmental screening of sub-loan applications, attaching 
relevant environmental categories to them, reviewing environmental assessment reports 
submitted by sub-loan applicants, approving them, and carrying out environmental 
monitoring in the course of sub-project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Central Bank of Armenia, the Ministry of Economy, 
selected PFIs and SME borrowers.  The implementation agency is the CBA's PIU. The 
PIU’s capacity to carryout environmental work required for the implementation of the 
project is limited and will require enhancement.  Although PIU has extensive experience 
of administering a donor-assisted sub-lending scheme similar to the one proposed by this 
project, the environmental oversight practiced for it is mostly limited to excluding non-
eligible activities and does not focus on mainstreaming environmental good practice into 
the implementation of approved sub-projects.  
 
Page  4
Therefore, PIU’s capacity is to be strengthened either through training or in-house staff 
of recruitment of a knowledgeable specialist in order to adequately handle its tasks.  
Environmental good standards applied by potential PFIs are diverse. Due diligence of 
some commercial banks is limited to checking compliance of their borrowers with the 
national legislation.  Others have their corporate environmental policies in place as well.  
Despite the current practice, all PFIs will require introduction to the main principles of 
the Bank’s environmental safeguards and to the project OM through a start-up workshop 
or a similar short-term training. Bank task team will closely monitor the screening 
process to support the PIU to ensure no loan will be provided that will trigger OP 4.12.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/16/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  5
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Edwards 
01/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
01/16/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
01/16/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
01/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Daniel Pollner 
01/13/2009 
Comments:   
