Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/30/2009 
Report No.:  AC4159
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P115743 
Project Name:  Social Investment Fund III Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Caroline Mascarell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 13, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (22%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(22%);General education sector (22%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%);Other social services (14%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Decentralization (S);Municipal 
finance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.60 
 Local 
Communities 
0.70
2.30 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing is consistent with the development objectives for the 
Armenia Social Investment Fund III Project, to support the Government’spolicy to raise 
the living standards of the poor and vulnerable groups through: (i) improving the quality 
and access and increasing the coverage of community infrastructure and services in poor 
communities, and for the most vulnerable groups in response to critical needs; and (ii) 
promoting complementary institutional capacity building at the community and 
municipal level so as to improve the quality and sustainability of community investments 
and service delivery, increase accountability, and enhance greater stakeholder 
empowerment at the local level. These objectives remain relevant, however, a third 
objective is being added to reflect activities under the proposed Additional Financing.  
The additional objective is the creation of employment associated with the provision of 
community infrastructure and services.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing would scale-up activities under the Community Investments 
Component of the ASIF III Project in support of small-scale infrastructure projects and 
the associated manufacturing of furniture, special equipment and teaching materials for 
school facilities as a short-term solution to the crisis through immediate temporary work 
opportunities. The community infrastructure projects (US$7.5 million) to be financed  
would include the renovation and rehabilitation of key social infrastructure covering 
education (i.e., kindergarten, primary, secondary and special schools), health (i.e., 
primary healthcare facilities); multipurpose community centers, social service centers for 
vulnerable groups, water supply, small-scale water supply systems, small-scale sanitation 
systems, minor irrigation works, and rural electrification.  Microprojects would also 
cover school heating systems, and the rehabilitation of gymnasiums and playgrounds.  No 
new construction projects are envisaged.  Financing under this Component would also 
include goods for microprojects (US$0.3 million) in support of the Government’s 
increasing emphasis on school improvement program covering school furniture for 
regular classrooms in elementary schools and special equipment for children entering 
elementary school at age 5 and a half, and teaching materials.  To ensure proper design 
and supervision of community infrastructure projects, the component would finance local 
consultancies (US$0.2 million) for microproject design and supervision and field work in 
the form of technical assistance and logistical support.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide. The Project will target poor communities in all regions of Armenia. As no 
new construction will be financed under the Additional Financing, no expropriation of 
land nor loss of access of income is expected.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Additional Financing would invest in scaled-up community infrastructure projects 
and complementary goods for school furniture and equipment as a short-term solution to 
the crisis by generating immediate temporary work opportunities. The Environmental 
Category for the Additional Financing will remain FI because it adheres to the design of 
the original project, in that it involves on-lending through a financial intermediary and it 
continues to finance sub-projects not all of which (or not all technical details of which) 
are known up-front.  The Additional Financing does not trigger any additional safeguard 
policies, because the eligibility/selection criteria, as well as the nature and magnitude of 
sub-projects, remains the same as under the original project. No new construction 
activities will be financed under the Additional Financing Credit.  No land acquisition is 
envisaged; therefore, there is no risk that the proposed activities will trigger the 
Safeguard relating to Involuntary Resettlement. The Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) for the ASIF III Project which was disclosed “in-country” on July 10, 2006 is 
valid for the proposed additional financing.  The ISDS for the Additional Financing 
reflects this date.  Environmental mitigation measures and review checklists outlined in 
the ASIF III PAD and in the Operational Manual are monitored regularly by ASIF 
engineers during the construction of microprojects.In addition, these are assessed by 
specialists hired to carry out quality of works review on an annual basis.  As part of the 
Mid-term Review of the ASIF III Project, an assessment of the environmental mitigation 
measures under the project will be included.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N.A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
To avoid possible adverse impacts related to new construction, the Project will not 
finance new construction for any type of microproject.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of the ASIF III Project has been administering 
the ASIF program since 1996. To date, close to 700 community infrastructure projects 
have been carried out with no major environmental issues encountered.  The PIU 
effectively monitors sub-project implementation including ensuring that the sub-projects 
meet the environmental requirements of the country and are consistent with Bank 
guidelines and procedures incorporated in the environmental section of the ASIF III 
Operational Manual (OM).  The OM lays out procedures and implementation 
arrangements for ensuring full consideration of environmental safeguards, in accordance 
with Bank environmental assessment guidelines.  The OM also documents the key laws 
relating to the environment. According to the guidelines, each microproject is 
Page  4
individually screened and reviewed by the ASIF PIU, by specific type, for any negative 
impacts, and mitigation measures.  In addition, the community proposals incorporate an 
environmental review checklist, and the standard microproject appraisal document 
includes an environmental checklist and mitigation measures.  Special environmental 
mitigation measures are included in the OM in the case of certain project types such as 
water supply rehabilitation schemes, sewage, sanitation systems and irrigation 
rehabilitation works sub-projects.  As part of the Quality of Works Technical Reviews 
carried out under the ASIF III Project, training is provided by environmental specialists, 
on a regular basis, in the area of evaluation and monitoring of sub-projects according to 
agreed environmental standards.  The environmental section of the OM has been included 
and updated in the ASIF III Operation Manual and will be used for the proposed 
Additional Financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The process of consultation will take place at three stages: (i) promotion and outreach 
stage at the beginning of the microproject cycle; (ii) appraisal and follow-up stages of 
microprojects; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation stage to assess outcomes and results.  
Such consultation will be carried out continuously and systematically during project 
implementation and will include the disclosure of safeguard policies and the required 
training.  Monitoring and evaluation of the process will be the joint responsibility of the 
key stakeholders - - the ASIF PIU, the Implementing Agencies (IAs), and the Bank 
supervision team.  The Ministry of Finance (MoF), as the responsible ministry for the 
ASIF III Project, with the assistance of the ASIF PIU, will monitor and evaluate all three 
stages of consultation.  Impact monitoring and evaluation would also be carried out 
through beneficiary assessments, technical assessments, workshops and round table 
discussions to discuss the results and impact of project activities. The aim of the 
monitoring and evaluation activities are also to improve communication and information 
flows, develop partnerships between central government and municipal officials and local 
communities, and donors, and thereby enhance local level development.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/12/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The public disclosure was done under the ASIF III on July 10, 2006.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Caroline Mascarell 
01/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
01/27/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathy A. Lindert 
01/30/2009 
Comments:   
