Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC4110
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P107772 
Project Name:  Second Education Quality and Relevance Project (APL#2) 
Task Team Leader:  Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (55%);Tertiary education (25%);Pre-primary education 
(20%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.66
7.66 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project Development Objectives are: (i) enhance and facilitate school 
learning in general education and improve the school readiness of children entering 
primary education; and (ii) support the convergence and integration of Armenian Tertiary 
Education system into the European Higher Education Area.   
 
3. Project Description 
The APL II aims at supporting the Government of Armenia in two main endeavors: 
Enhancing the quality of General Secondary Education and supporting Tertiary 
Education reforms in the context of the Bologna Declaration. A summary of components 
and their costs, activities, and expected outputs/results follows:  
 
Component 1.  Enhancing the Quality of General Education (US$23.08 million of which 
US$18.52 million are Bank financing)  
 
Subcomponent 1. Promoting School Readiness end equal opportunities at the start of 
General Education. The main objective of this subcomponent is to increase the level of 
school readiness among Armenian children, with a focus on the poorest and most 
Page  2
vulnerable communities. More specifically, this subcomponent will assist the 
Government in its effort to increase the number of children enrolled in preschool 
education and to increase the quality of services provided. Approximately 3,750 children, 
ages 5-6, will benefit each year from participation in a kindergarten class, either through 
an enhanced existing preschool or through the establishment of a KG classroom in the 
local primary school. As a result, it is expected that these children will enter Grade 1 with 
a
higher level of school readiness.  
 
Subcomponent 2. Supporting further improvements in the quality of education through 
improved teacher in-service training and professional development. The objective of this 
sub-component is to develop professional development of teachers in Armenia through a 
national system for in-service training of teachers and external support to schools. This 
would require developing and implementing a set of policies, such as transparent and 
merit-based selection and recruitment of new teachers, incentives for young talents to 
choose the teaching career, and new regulations for continuous teacher professional 
development (mandatory amount of professional development/training per annum). The 
component will finance: (i) Grants to School Centers for networking, development of 
new educational materials, teaching and learning guides, dissemination of good practice 
and innovative programs; (ii) Grants to individual schools for professional development 
purposes; (iii) Training of trainers and teachers (emphasizing Science and Mathematics); 
(iv) Establishment of science laboratories in School Centers; (v) Low-cost science kits to 
primary schools; (vi) School leadership program and training for school principals; and 
(vii) Technical assistance for the implementation of the National Strategy for Teacher 
Education and Professional Development  
 
Subcomponent 3. Continuing support to the integration of ICT in teaching and learning 
process. The objective of this subcomponent is ensure that all schools in Armenia are 
equipped with up-to-date technologies, connected interactively through the Internet, and 
ready to use all these technologies effectively to deliver the curriculum and to enhance 
and facilitate student learning. This subcomponent should fit into the overall government 
strategy for IT development in Armenia, which among other things entails that the 
Government contribution in this regard should be considerable. Specific activities to be 
financed by this component include the following: (i) Provision of internet connectivity 
to the 400 most remote schools; (ii) Provision of hardware to schools for school 
management purposes; (iii) Provision of electronic learning materials to schools for all 
key school subjects; (iv) Training of teachers in subject-specific use of ICT; (v) Support 
to the National Education Portal as the host of electronic materials, virtual communities 
of teachers and learners and dissemination tool for good practice; (vi) Technical 
assistance on the use of ICTs for school management purposes; and (vii) Study tour for 
NaCET selected staff to similar Centers in Europe.  
 
Subcomponent 4. Supporting the implementation of high-school reform. The objective 
of this subcomponent is to support teachers and schools in the implementation of the 12-
year general education system and the high-school reform, so that school-leavers will be 
equipped with knowledge and skills comparable to those of 18 year-old in OECD 
countries. Specific activities to be supported include: (i) Establishment of resource 
centers in 150 high schools (libraries plus computer labs); (ii) Establishment of Science 
Laboratories for 150 high schools; (iii) Training of 150 high school librarians; (iv) 
Page  3
Training of 3,000 high school teachers; (v) Training of 150 principals for the new high 
schools; (vi) Curriculum and syllabi design for each of the three streams in the new high 
school, ensuring a better articulation between high school and tertiary education; and (vii) 
Capacity building for the staff of MES and of Marz Education departments who are 
directly in charge of the implementation of the high school reform  
 
Component 2. Supporting tertiary education reforms in the context of Bologna Agenda 
(US$9.76 million  of which US$7.85 million are Bank financing)  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Establishment and Strengthening of the National Quality Assurance 
System  The objective of this subcomponent is to establish and strengthen the capacity of 
the national Quality Assurance system for tertiary education. The government established 
the National Center for Quality Assurance (NCQA) in November 2008.  MoES also 
established a Working Group on Quality Assurance, which will assist the establishment 
and consolidation of NCQA during the initial stage. This sub-component will support the 
National Center for Quality Assurance (NCQA) and the WG on QA to establish the 
external QA system and universities to develop internal QA units.  This sub-component 
will support activities associated with the (i) Establishment of the External Quality 
Assurance (EQA) syste; and (ii) Development of the Internal Quality Assurance (IQA) 
system  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Developing a Tertiary Education Management Information System 
The objective of this subcomponent is to establish an integrated Tertiary Education 
Management Information System (TEMIS) as an effective tool to support policy 
planning, management, monitoring and evaluation of performance of the sector both at 
the national and university levels. This sub-component will provide technical assistance 
to the NACET and universities to establish an integrated TEMIS.  TEMIS will (i) collect 
and store data related to different managerial and academic aspects of the universities; (ii) 
provide institutions’ management and various academic and non-academic departments 
with timely and reliable information; and (iii) provide the MoES with detailed data on 
each university for policy making, planning, monitoring and evaluation.  This sub-
component will also provide technical assistance to the MoES and universities to develop 
information-based planning, monitoring and evaluation capacities. Once TEMIS becomes 
operational, the MoES will update the Higher Education Strategy 2003 in line with the 
Bologna Process and Armenia’s achievements to date.  Each university will also produce 
anannual strategic plan and self-assessment reports using TEMIS data.  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Strengthening the Capacity to Implement a Sustainable Financing 
System. The objective of this subcomponent is to support the government in defining and 
putting in place a sustainable financing system for tertiary education. The first activity 
will be to design a student loan scheme to provide all needy students with financial aid to 
pay their tuition fees and living expenditures.  The scheme will be tested on a pilot basis 
with masters’ students. Second, it will assist the government in setting up priority areas 
and viable procedures for the operation of a future competitive innovation fund (CIF) in 
support of quality improvement and innovations in tertiary education institutions.  It is 
envisaged that once the CIF is designed under APL II, the Bank’s next higher education 
project and/or other donors would provide funding to implement it. Third, it will review 
Page  4
the existing resource allocation mechanisms for tertiary education and design and 
implement a more sustainable, equitable and efficient funding system.  
 
Subcomponent 2.4: Reforming Pre-service Teacher Education. The objective of this 
sub-component is to reform and upgrade initial teacher education in Armenia so that 
better graduates choose the teaching profession and new teachers are better prepared to 
work with the new curriculum, teaching methodologies and learning materials. The core 
activity within this component will be long-term twining arrangement between Yerevan 
State Pedagogical University (and the associated consortium of pedagogical institutions) 
as a large technical assistance package. The change process needs to be started and 
steered from within YSPU itself,
 given its leading role in the creation of “consortium” of 
teachers training institutes and coordination role within the consortium. The envisaged 
technical assistance package could focus on institutional development (including 
structure and financing), curriculum development, training staff on modern teaching and 
learning methods, establishing a research program in the university, and providing 
students with opportunities for the practical training in schools under mentorship of 
advanced teachers.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$4.82 million of 
which US$3.63 million are Bank financing) .  
 
The key objective of this component will be to provide continued support of 
mainstreamed arrangements for the management, administration, and monitoring of 
project activities. Specific activities to be supported by the Component are the following: 
(i) Financing a Project Coordinating Unit with core staff hired as consultants; (ii) 
Implementation and management of the procurement process, disbursements, and 
financial management, project monitoring, and reporting; (iii) Acquisition of minor 
additions/replacement of office furniture and equipment; (iv) Financing of local travel, 
utilities and publications, translations, office supplies, fuel, internet service, bank 
commission charges, vehicle maintenance and repair; (v) Systematic maintenance of the 
Monitoring and Evaluation system with updates on key performance indicators, which 
will be carried out jointly between the NaCET and the CEP; (vi) Financing of 
implementation and management of impact assessments and special studies planned; (vii) 
Facilitate coordination, communication flows and dissemination of information with 
participating institutions; (viii) Facilitate working group arrangements and the 
organization of seminars and workshops; (ix) Support the NaCET in the usage and 
management of the EMIS, which is to be transferred to this center; and (x) Provide 
training to staff in the PIU in the areas covering procurement, disbursements, information 
technology, project management and other areas identified and proposed in the course of 
project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
N.A.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no significant environmental issues in the proposed APL II.  The 
Environmental Category of the APL II is “C”.  No safeguard policies are expected to be 
triggered because of the nature of the activities to be financed under the Project.  Support 
under the project would be limited to the refurbishment associated with: (i) resource 
centers, modern school libraries, and laboratories in high schools; (ii) the enhancement of 
kindergarten classrooms; and (iii) the upgrading of the facilities of the Project 
Implementation Unit.  Specifically, this will consist of cosmetic repairs covering 
replacement of windows and doors, the plastering of walls, the painting of windows, 
walls, and doors, and the painting and repairing of flooring.  There will be no 
construction activity supported by the Project.  Only minor works associated with 
refurbishment activities will be financed under the APL II.  The Project will not finance 
any lead paint, asbestos material or otherwise dangerous/hazardous material in 
conducting these repairs; such prohibitions will be specified in the contract bidding 
documents.  As regards high school laboratories, the project will ensure that appropriate 
facilities for handling, storing, and disposing of chemical reagents associated with the 
high school laboratories will be in place.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N.A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N.A.   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N.A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
No 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
02/02/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mamta Murthi 
02/02/2009 
Comments:   
