Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4166
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P115486 
Project Name:  LIFELINE  ROADS IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.20
5.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to upgrade selected sections of the lifeline road network and 
create temporary employment in road construction.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has two components:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of the Lifeline Road Network (US$ 27.9million including 
contingencies): Rehabilitation of approximately 100 km of the lifeline road network. 
These road sections are located in the seven different Marzes of the country and their 
lengths vary between 1 and 14 km. The component includes: (i) civil works for road 
rehabilitation; (ii) consultancy services for the supervision and technical auditing of 
rehabilitation works; (iii) updating of the original MCA financed 2007 designs and 
environmental documents to meet the requirements of the project; and, (iv) project 
implementation expenses including but not limited to funding project audits, incremental 
operational implementation costs and additional costs for intensified project supervision.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$ 2.2million including contingencies): The 
project will also include technical assistance for strengthening of road sector capacity. 
Page  2
Including but not limited to (i) a study to review low cost pavement options for Armenia 
which will explore different options for different pavement types and ways to increase 
labor based activities; (ii) a vehicle; and (iii) related training.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
About 100km of local roads to be rehabilitated under the project are located in seven 
regions, namely, Aragatsotn, Armavir, Shirak, Gegharkunik, Lori, Tavush, and Vayots-
Dzor. The detailed list of the road sections to be rehabilitated is provided below:  
 
1.  
Vardenut-link to M3 Highway (3.5km)  
 
2
Aygeshat-Janfida (3.5km)  
 
3
Lernakert-link to M1 Highway (3.8km)  
 
4
Voskehask-link to M7 Highway (2km)  
 
5
Karchaghbyur-link to M11 Highway (1.3km)  
 
6
Akunk-Vardenis (2.1km)  
 
7
Chkalov-link to M6 Highway (2.4km)  
 
8
Dzoragyugh-link to M10 Highway (5km)  
 
9
Geghanist-Horom (12.3km)  
 
10
Voghji-link to M1 Highway (14.2km)  
 
11
Aygabats-Gyumri (10.4km)  
 
12
Zorakert-Ardenis-Aghvorik-Tavshut-link to M1 Highway    (10.1km)  
 
13
L.Karmiraghbyur-Berd (7.2km)  
 
14
Chochkan-Pokr Ayrum (7.9km)  
 
15
Kurtan-Gyulakarak (8.1km)  
 
16
Aghavnadzor-link to M2 Highway (6km)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have significant impact on the environment.  All planned 
physical works are limited to rehabilitation of the existing alignments. All project roads 
are local roads connecting villages with secondary or primary roads whose main function 
is to provide basic access, and the rehabilitation will not induce immediate or mid-term 
land development of a significant scale.  Therefore, negative social and environmental 
impacts of the project will be of minor scope and duration and typical for any small scale 
road rehabilitation activity, while the long term social impact will be positive.  
 
An Environmental Management Framework is being developed for the project, which 
will provide general guidelines for applying environmentally sound practices to local 
roads rehabilitation.  Site-specific EMPs were prepared for 14 of the 16 road sections in 
the project some time ago.  They are now being revised to reflect current implementation 
arrangements.  These site-specific EMPs specify environmental risks associated with 
rehabilitation works to be carried out in the respective locations, recommend respective 
mitigation measures, and provide monitoring schemes for tracking adherence to the 
mitigation plans.  Adherence to the EMPs in the course of civil works will be sufficient 
for keeping environmental impacts of the project at the acceptable minimum level. EMPs 
also contain sections to confirm absence of land acquisition and other impact that would 
trigger OP 4.12. EMPs also include measures to be taken against short-term negative 
social impacts such as temporary loss of access.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect and long term negative impacts are anticipated due to future activities in the 
project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Considering project alternatives was not relevant, as the proposed project does not 
include a new development. It will improve the existing network of roads critically 
important for rural livelihood.  
 
Sections of roads, rehabilitation of which would require land acquisition, were excluded 
from financing.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Transport and Communication (MOTC), as owner of the lifeline road 
network and policy making authority, will have the overall responsibility for 
implementation of the project. The MOTC will delegate day-to-day implementation of 
the project to the existing Transport Projects Implementation Unit State Agency (PIU) 
under the Ministry of Transport and Communication of Armenia. The PIU is governed by 
Page  4
a
Project Management Board chaired by the MOTC and comprised of stakeholder 
ministries and Government agencies.  
 
The PIU was established to implement development projects financed by the Bank and 
Government of Armenia and is currently managing a PHRD grant financed Railways 
Restructuring project. The PIU is adequately staffed and has the capacity to address all 
aspects of the project implementation, including safeguard compliance.  
 
The civil works will be supervised by a consulting firm commissioned by PIU.  Along 
with other responsibilities, this firm will be assigned to track compliance if civil works 
contractors with the Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and will monitor 
implementation of the prescribed mitigation measures. The PIU will provide general 
oversight of the environmental compliance by regular checking and ensuring quality of 
the works supervisor and by direct involvement into any outstanding environmental 
issues identified by the supervisor.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental Management Framework is disclosed through the national media and 
the public consultation will be carried out on January 22, 2009. After the consultation 
meeting the document will be re-disclosed in-country and posted at the Bank's Infoshop.  
 
Site-specific EMPs prepared for the sections of roads covered by the project will be 
made available for project-affected communities and discussed with them in stakeholder 
meetings to be held in several locations of the country prior to commencement of works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
01/17/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
01/18/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
01/17/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
01/21/2009 
Comments:   
