Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC3894
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P107614 
Project Name:  ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR THE MUNICIPAL WATER AND 
WASTEWATER PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (80%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's  development objectives are to continue the rehabilitation of infrastructure 
of the Armenia Water Supply Compnay (AWSC) to improve: (i) the quality of services 
provided to customers in AWSC service area; and (ii) the sustainability of AWSC. The 
project objectives would be achieved through: (a) strengthening of AWSC management 
through a performance based management contract with an internationally experienced 
water utility operator, as well as financing of general expenses for the Contract 
Management Unit (CMU), the agency responsible for project implementation; and, 
refinancing of the project preparation facility advance; (b) strategic rehabilitation of the 
water supply systems by financing AWSC investments at the national level, including 
water meter installation and testing, condominium support and payment of company 
operations and maintenance expenses; and (c) support for priority reconstruction and 
rehabilitation by financing water supply systems in branches managed by AWSC.   
 
3. Project Description 
The main components of the project are as follows:  
 
Page  2
(a) 
AWSC Management Strengthening (US$6.9 million):  This component will 
include: (i) the financing of the continuation of the management contract for an additional 
two years (US$5.2 million); (ii) project management and supervision by the Contract 
Management Unit (US$1.1 million); and consultants to prepare a strategy and 
implementation of a lease contract for AWSC’s service area (US$0.6 million);  
 
(b) 
AWSC Investments (US$5.2 million): This component will finance: (i) the 
procurement of equipment, machinery, motor vehicles and computer equipment and 
software to improve the operations of AWSC (US$3.5 million); (ii) institutional and 
financial capacity building, including consultancies for fixed assets inventory and re-
evaluation, and AWSC operating costs (US$0.5 million), (iii) assistance to the AWSC 
Training Center (US$0.5 million); (iv) rehabilitation and improvement of chemical and 
biological laboratories (US$0.4 million); and (vi) assistance to condominiums to continue 
with a program to install block meters and partial repair to internal networks (US$0.3 
million); and  
 
(c) 
Investments in Branch Systems (US$9.9 million):  This component will support: 
(i) procurement and replacement of deteriorated treatment and chlorination equipment 
(US$0.5 million); (ii) procurement and installation of pressure loggers, pipes and fittings, 
water meters including chambers for meter housing, including rehabilitation of pumping 
station (US$4.2 million); (iii) repair and reconstruction of sector offices (US$0.9 
million); and (iv) design and civil works for network rehabilitation in the town of 
Hrazdan (US$4.3 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The scaled up Project will continue to focus on the medium and small sized cites in 
AWSC's existing service area, that initially covers about 45 percent of the national 
population and 300 communities. All physical investments under the project will be 
implemented on public land and within existing rights of way.  There are no resettlement 
issue within the project areas and location   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars A. V. Rasmusson (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project activities under the additional financing trigger OP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment. While no major environmental issues are anticipated, since 
most of investments will concentrate on rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, certain 
investment items to be funded under the project (which will fall under Environmental 
Categories B and C) may require special mitigation measures to protect the environment 
and enhance health safety. Any subproject determined to be under Environmental 
Category A would be ineligible for financing under the project. During the preparation of 
the parent project, an Environmental Management Plan Framework (EMPF) was 
prepared specifying procedures to be followed during project implementation to address 
environmental concerns of sub-projects. This framework will be revised to include the 
additional investments under the additional financing, and submitted to the Bank for 
clearance.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term adverse impacts as a result of the project in the project area   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has already established an adequate mechanism for addressing safeguard 
issues, and the Armenia environmental policies and legislation are consistent with Bank 
requirements.  The management contract under the project provides support and guidance 
to the Borrower to focus attention on internationally acceptable standards for 
environmental safeguards and management.  Under the on-going project, an 
environmental management plan was prepared which guides the preparation of 
Page  4
environmental summaries for sub-projects, which are reviewed by the Bank.  The 
environmental summaries have been satisfactory.  These arrangements will continue 
under the additional financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The implementing agency (AWSC) is conducting at least one public consultation with 
groups affected by the sub-project prior to completion of the individual EMPs. Usually, 
these groups consist of people living near the sub-project site, and any local NGOs. 
Additionally, if needed, broader consultation will be done involving radio or TV stations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/02/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The original EMP was disclosed in country.  The proposed EMP is revised to include 
additional activities to be supported by the additional financing   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
09/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Lars A. V. Rasmusson 
09/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Irina Petrovna Novikova 
09/18/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Kanthan Shankar 
09/18/2008 
Comments:   
