Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC3533
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P105917 
Project Name:  Financial Services Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Edwards 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to assist the Government of Azerbaijan to improve 
consumer financial protection, develop the capital market, and improve access and 
transparency of financial information.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component I. Consumer protection and financial literacy. This component focuses on the 
delivery of  TA to support three key aspects of financial consumer protection: (i) 
improving the disclosure of information provided to financial consumers about their 
rights and responsibilities; (ii) undertake a national financial literacy assessment from 
which a financial education program can be developed; and (iii) the development of a 
dispute resolution mechanisms.  
 
Component II. Accelerating capital market development. The overall objective of this 
component is to create the conditions for the broadening and deepening of the capital 
market, so that it can contribute to the objective of sustainable growth of the non-oil 
economy over the medium to long-term.  
 
Page  2
Component III. Improving access and transparency of financial information/NBA Data 
Warehouse Management. The overall objective of this component is to improve access 
and transparency of financial information to market participants and other stakeholders.  
 
Component IV. Upgrading the existing credit registry into a credit bureau. This 
component will assist NBA in defining and implementing the strategy of transitioning the 
existing credit registry into a full scale credit bureau accessible to bank and non-bank 
market participants  
 
Component V. Delivering agricultural training program to bank and non-bank lenders. 
The main objective of this component is to provide training to banks and non-bank 
lenders in appraising agriculture-related investments and providing suitable adapted 
financial products.  
 
Component VI. Project Management. The objective of this component is to provide 
technical assistance to the PIU for Project implementation, including audit services.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Baku, Azerbaijan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
