Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3394 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P105917 
Project Name: Financial Services Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Michael Edwards 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Financial Sector Modernization Project technical assistance (TA) facility is envisaged to 
mitigate the systemic risks resulting from the rapid development of the Azeri financial sector 
through strengthening portions of the regulatory and supervisory regime, introducing key 
consumer protection disclosure provisions, improving financial literacy and improving access 
and transparency of key financial data.  The operation would support the further development of 
the financial sector by addressing key reforms in five related areas:  
 
•
improve the regulatory and supervisory regime of the capital markets, enabling more 
firms to access domestic debt and equity markets;  
 
•
strengthen consumer protection across the entire financial sector through adoption of 
consistent, transparent institutional disclosure obligations and defining consumers’ rights whilst 
developing a consumer literacy campaign;  
 
•
improve access and transparency of financial data at the NBA through the adoption of a 
web-based data warehouse scheme;  
 
•
upgrade the existing credit registry into a credit bureau, providing real time borrower 
information and ultimately, credit scoring for consumers and enterprises alike;  
 
•
deliver an agricultural producers and processors credit underwriting trainingprogram for 
bank and non-bank creditors, in collaboration with the existing ADCPII project   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Azerbaijan has numerous TA providers available to it in the financial sector, yet has re-affirmed 
its continued interest to borrow through the FS Modernization credit, as it values the framework 
and specific, high-quality inputs provided through the World Bank. The NBA, despite its long-
standing relationship with USAID, specifically sought the Bank’s inputs in several key areas. 
Similarly, as themost cross-cutting dimension of the FS Modernization operation, the consumer 
protection component was strongly endorsed within government, as it was recognized few are 
better placed than the Bank to undertake the diagnostic and develop the far-reaching action plan 
and consumer literacy program.  Amongst other alternatives, a fee for services scheme was 
discussed during the identification mission, but it was felt not yet appropriate.  
 
Lending Instrument.  The FS Modernization operation is proposed to be largely a technical 
assistance facility given the strong demand, limited capacity and success of similar Bank 
activities in the Azeri financial sector. This is an IDA operation.  
 
Sector Program.  The main objectives of the envisaged FS Modernization operation (to mitigate 
systemic risks through strengthening portions of the regulatory and supervisory regime, 
introduce key consumer protection disclosure provisions and improve access and transparency of 
key financial data) are in line with the financial sector strategy now being developed by the 
central bank.  As well, these three main objectives are supportive of the second pillar of the 
Bank's FY07-10 CPS, encouraging the sustainable and balanced growth of the non-oil economy.  
 
Project Components and Costs.  The FS Modernization operation will include the following 
five components: (i) furthering capital markets development; (ii) strengthening consumer 
protection across the entire financial sector; (iii) improving access and transparency of financial 
information through adoption of a data warehouse at the NBA; (iv) upgrading the existing credit 
registry into a credit bureau; and (v) delivering an agricultural credit training program to bank 
and non-bank lenders.  
 
The indicative cost for the proposed TA is about US$ 10 million; and whilst the cost of each 
component is slated to soon be estimated, it is envisaged the first three components will consume 
the bulk of funding.   At this stage no partnership or co-financing by other international agencies 
is envisioned, though SECO has agreed to fund the cost of a comprehensive pan-sectoral 
consumer protection diagnostic study, from which this operation will subsequently benefit.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Baku, Azerbaijan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No civil work or rehabilitation for this project is envisaged.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Johnson Appavoo (ECAVP) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/03/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Edwards 
01/31/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
02/08/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
