Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2009 
Report No.:  AC4352
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P100668 
Project Name:  Second Additional Financing Highway II 
Task Team Leader:  Jacques Bure 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
112.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
63.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
43.75
43.75 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to reduce road transport costs and improve 
access, transit and road safety of the north-south corridor through rehabilitation of the 
Hajigabul-Bahramtapa Highway (M6) serving as an important parallel route to the M3 
Highway, and rehabilitation of 200km of local roads connecting villages with M6.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of 116 km section of M6 road between Hajigabul and 
Bahramtapa and of 200km of local roads connecting rural areas to the M6 road.  
 
Component 2: provision of technical assistance for project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area is located along the 116 km road Hajigabul-Bahramtapa, which runs 
though the flat plains in south-west direction. In terms of climate conditions, the area is 
characterized as typical semi-desert.   
 
Page  2
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed rehabilitation of the 116 km section Hajigabul-Bahramtapa will be 
implemented within the existing 60m ROW, with the major construction work occurring 
within 20-25 meters of the road. The road runs through typical semi-desert area and is 
characterized by availability of agricultural lands, irrigation canals, and two rivers (Kur 
and Araz). The biodiversity along the road is not particularly high except for three 
Important Bird Areas (IBAs) - Mugan Steppe, Sarisu Lake and Hajigabul Lake where 
IUCN listed bird species are regularly observed. The first two areas are located quite 
remotely from the project area and not considered to be affected, the latter one is buffered 
by trees and is outside the 60m ROW. Therefore, no significant environmental impacts 
on the IBAs are envisaged. There are no cultural heritage assets located in the project 
area, which might be affected by the project. Most of the environmental impacts are 
associated with the construction activities, i.e. earthworks, slope stabilization, 
construction of bridges and drainage, quarries and borrow pits, and with short-term 
disturbances to the natural environment such as noise, dust, heavy vehicle traffic. No road 
realignment is envisaged and no impact that may trigger OP 4.12 is anticipated to occur.  
 
The rehabilitation of 200km of connecting roads will be conducted within the existing 
road alignment and no serious environmental impact except during the construction phase 
is anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With the rehabilitation of 116 km section Hajigabul-Bahramtapa, it is expected that 
population along the road and traffic flow will increase and economic activities will 
intensify. These may lead to the increased amount of waste water effluents, which, if not 
managed properly, poses a risk of contamination of existing water bodies and, eventually, 
Page  3
affecting entire ecosystem in the project area. Similarly, increased traffic flow will affect 
air quality through vehicular emissions, and noise level will rise.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As the Project will support rehabilitation of the exisitng road, no realignments or 
alternative alignments are proposed for any segment of the road. Potential environmental 
impacts, mainly assocated with the construction period, and suggested mitigation 
measures are identified and summarized in the Environmental Assessment Report.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Management Framework has been developed for the original AH2P, 
outlining the procedures for the environmental screening, management, consultation and 
disclosure related to the proposed sub-projects. The EMF is compatible with the national 
Law on Environmental Protection and the guidelines contained in Azerbaijan's EIA 
Handbook, which while not legally bindibg contains a framework for EIA that is 
consistent with international environmental assessment practices.  
 
An Environmental Assessment Report was prepared in line with the EMF for the route 
Hajigabul - Horadiz (175km), which covers the 116 km section from Hajigabul to 
Bahramtapa, to be rehabilitated under the Project. The EA report provides overview of 
the policy, legal and administartive framework, specifies environmental characteristics of 
the project area, identifies environmental impacts and proposes mitigation measures 
summarized in the Environmental Management Plan.  
 
Site specific environmental assessments and/or management plans will be developed in 
accordance with the EMF and national requirements for the 200km connecting roads. No 
category A roads are expected under the Project.  
 
Within ARS, the Ecology and Safety Sector (ESS) is responsible for environmental 
management. The capacity of the ESS was found to be week and strengthened under the 
original AH2P through training sessions provided by the EA&EMP Consultants. 
However, the ESS is still not actively invovled in regular environmental management of 
ARS activities, focusing on some selected aspects but missing complex approach. Thus, 
it needs further strengthening. This will be done under the Multi Sector Capacity 
Building Project (MSCBP), which envisages a wide range of training activities on 
environmental management techniques and practices for the infrastructure sector, 
including ARS ESS. In addition, a consultant to be engaged to prepare 200km connecting 
roads sub-projects will also have a follow on capacity building components to their 
contracts.  
 
Construction contractors will be responsible for implementing site specific EMPs. The 
ESS and the PIU will oversee the implementation of the EMF and related environmental 
management plans. They will be assisted by the Constract Supervising Consultants, 
including an environmental specialist.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
public consultation meeting was held by ARS PIU and the Consultant team in Shirvan 
City on April 11, 2008, on Hajigabul-Horadiz EA report. The meeting was attended by 
representatives of local governments, local residents, village representatives, local NGOs. 
At the meeting, the ARS and the Consultant provided description of the proposed project 
activities, i.e. rehabilitation works, elaborated on anticipated environmental and social 
impacts and proposed mitigation measures. Minutes of the public consultation meeting 
were properly recorded and attached to the EA Report.  
 
On February 24, 2009, the Hajigabul-Horadiz EA report in English and Azeri was made 
publicly available on the web-site of the Ministry of Transport, World Bank local web-
site and hard copies are available at the Public Information Center in Baku. An 
advertisement was placed by the ARS in local press, to notify public on availability of 
this report.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/24/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jacques Bure 
04/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
04/17/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
04/20/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
04/20/2009 
Comments:   
