Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4262 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P112773 
Project Name: Hovsan Wastewater Outfall Project 
Task Team Leader: Manuel G. Marino 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (80%);Sanitation (20%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other urban development 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
125.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to improve in a measurable way coastal water 
quality in the Baku’s metropolitan region to reach the standards forbathing quality in those areas 
currently impacted by the discharge of the Hovsan WWTP’s effluent.  The project will support 
the government’s objective on improving sanitation services in Baku area through the financing 
and technical support required for the planning and construction of an outfall to convey Hovsan 
WWTP’s effluent to a disposal point at sea that will meet the relevant standards and will be 
satisfactory with respect to aesthetics, human health and aquatic life, and through the setting up 
of a coastal areas water quality and marine environmental conditions monitoring system.  
 
Progress towards these objectives will be monitored during implementation through two main 
outcome indicators: (i) advances in the construction of the outfall; and (ii) degree of development 
and implementation of the monitoring system. Once the monitoring system is in place the 
following key performance indicators will be used to assess the achievement of the project 
objective, but also to optimize the joint operation of the outfall and the WWTP: (i) concentration 
of fecal and other indicators of pollution along the shore line; (ii) benthos and sediment 
Page  2
indicators (heavy metals, PCBs and other chlorinated hydrocarbons) in the vicinity of the 
discharge point; and (iii) public reaction and satisfaction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be implemented by Azersu Joint Stock Company, the Azerbaijani 
state-owned water company. The estimated overall cost of this investment is about US$ 145 
million, to be financed with the support of a World Bank loan, tentatively set at around US$ 125 
million. The preliminary cost estimates are presented below as part of a brief description of its 
component:  
 
Component I. Hovsan outfall construction.  This component will finance the construction of the 
Hovsan outfall, together with the auxiliary infrastructure it needs to become operational.  The 
estimated cost of this component is 135 million [TBC], of which the Bank’s loan will finance 
US$ 115 million [TBC]  
 
Component II. Project Management and Monitoring.  This component will finance technical 
assistance, in the form of consultant services, training and equipment to Azersu, to strengthen 
Azersu’s capacity to properly supervise the construction of the Hovsan outfall.  This component 
will also support Azersu to implement an environmental monitoring system to assess the outfalls 
efficiency, optimize its joint operation with the WWTP currently under rehabilitation and 
upgrading, carry out public information and assessment campaigns to address any potential 
negative reaction and get specialized advice from an expert panel. The estimated cost of this 
component is estimated at about US$ 10 million (about US$2.0 million for monitoring and 
US$6.7 million for construction supervision) which will be fully financed out of the loan 
proceeds.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project is targeting infrastructure investments in Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan, a 
city with a population of about 2 million situated on the south coast of the Absheron Peninsula, 
on the west side of the Caspian Sea. Specifically, the project location is the shoreline zone where 
the current outlet from the Hovsan wastewater treatment plant, located some 15 km east of the 
center of the city, enters the Caspian Sea. There are no residencies, enterprises, or any industrial 
or other income-generating activities currently located in the land section of the proposed outfall 
area that will need to be displaced to accommodate construction if needed for the investment.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The responsibility for monitoring is proposed to be given to the Azerbaijan State Water Agency 
(AzerSu) which will also be in charge of the outfall construction. Azersu is currently 
implementing satisfactory three Bank-financed operations (the First and Second National Water 
Supply and Sanitation Projects and the Greater Baku Water Supply Rehabilitation Project). 
Additionally, Azersu is currently implementing water and sanitation investments financed by 
ADB, JBIC and EU. Consequently, Azersu has developed sufficient capacity to carry out sound 
environmental monitoring and safeguard compliance for proper implementation of the 
infrastructure investments proposed under this project. The PIU capacity will be strengthening 
through regular Bank supervision missions.  The project team will ensure that AzerSu interacts 
Page  3
constantly with the local environmental authorities who will have the ultimate oversight 
responsibility in this area regarding water and environment quality.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hermine De Soto (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Ms Joanna Peace De Berry (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In accordance with the World Bank OP/BP 4.01, the project is classified as category A for 
environmental assessment purposes given the proposed infrastructure investments planed to be 
financed under the project including construction of the Hovsan deep sea outfall together with 
the auxiliary infrastructure it needs to become operational. For Category A projects, an 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is an integral part of project preparation, including 
disclosure and public consultations, and an EIA Report developed before project appraisal. The 
Client (Azersu) will carry-out an EIA with Environmental Management Plan (EMP) focusing on 
the planned outfall construction activities, a solid analysis of proposed design options and related 
possible environmental impacts, the linkage with the rehabilitation of the WWTP (financed by 
French Government bilateral support) as well as the possible impacts on the marine eco-systems 
during the outfall operation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The policy is triggered by the construction of the deep sea wastewater outfall although the 
net impact on the sea habitat in the project area is expected to be an improved natural habitat.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The team confirmed that while there are two main options under evaluation for constructing 
the outfall, neither of the options will require any land acquisition or displacement.  The 
publically owned land adjacent to the wastewater treatment is currently not developed, occupied, 
or used for any agricultural or urban purposes.   Moreover, there are no residencies, enterprises, 
or any industrial or other income-generating activities currently located in the land section of the 
outfall area that will need to be displaced to accommodate construction or rehabilitation, if 
needed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The proposed infrastructure investments are limited to the immediate shorline of the 
Absheron peninsula by the Caspian Sea. Even though the impact of the project on neighboring 
riparian states will probably be negligible, the Bank’s policyon projects on International 
Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) will apply to this investment due to the international status of the 
Caspian Sea. In accordance with this policy, the Borrower is expected to notify the riparian 
countries about the goals of the proposed project and its potential impacts. The notification 
would be done by the Government of Azerbaijan in accordance with the Framework Convention 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
for the protection of the marine environment of the Caspian Sea, established in 2003. Based on 
consultation with LEGEN, there is no need to notify any non-riparian country about this project.  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/25/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
Preparation and disclosure of Full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) including 
Executive Summary (ES) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP): before Project 
Appraisal;  
 
-
Submission of ES to Board of Directors: before Project Appraisal;  
 
-
Public consultations, one during ToR preparation for EA (already done) and second when 
the draft EIA is available: before Project Appraisal;  
 
-
Safeguard Consultation Meeting:  before QER/Decision Meeting   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel G. Marino 
04/14/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
