Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3459
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P104985 
Project Name:  ARP/ I-Contaminated Sites Rehabilitation 
Task Team Leader:  Aniruddha Dasgupta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (45%);Oil and gas (45%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
47.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
18.00
18.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project has four development objectives (i) decontaminate two former iodine 
production sites from radioactive waste, oily compounds, and other hazardous materials; 
(ii) develop a strategy for remediation or containment of NORM (Naturally Occurring 
Radioactive Material) contaminated sites; (iii) develop institutional capacity and 
experience in oil production sites cleanup operations; and (iv) develop a rehabilitation 
and redevelopment plan and start cleanup of a specific abandoned oil production site. 
These development objectives will be achieved through the following five key 
performance indicators: (i) Decontamination of two former iodine production sites (in 
Surakhani and Ramani) from radioactive waste (NORM), oily compounds, and other 
hazardous materials; (ii) Safe disposal of NORM and other contaminated materials as 
evidenced by the receipt and proper containment of waste from contaminated sites; (iii) 
National inventory and plan completed for containment and remediation of oil production 
sites contaminated with NORM; (iv) Completed plan to clean up and rehabilitate for 
redevelopment an oil production site; at least partial implementation of the plan; and (v) 
Institutions fully adopt standards and develop policies for further cleanup, rehabilitation, 
and redevelopment of contaminated sites.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has the following five components:  
 
Component A - Clean-up and rehabilitation of two former Iodine Sites (US$ 11.5 
million). This component will develop immediate cleanup activities for the 
decontamination of the two former iodine production sites in Surakhani and Ramani. 
Specific activities under this component includes (i) implementation of a Temporary 
Safety Plan to minimize public exposure to hazardous materials by fencing and 
supervising the site when the project starts and decontamination works are underway; (ii) 
preparation of detailed site investigations, design of works, and project supervision 
requirements; (iii) removal, packaging, and transport of radiological waste (NORM); (iv) 
removal of other hazardous materials, preferably to existing hazardous waste sanitary 
landfill; (v) clean-up of oil contamination and contaminated water reservoirs; and (vi) 
demolishing buildings and preparation of sites for redevelopment.  
 
Component B - Construction of a dedicated NORM storage facility (US$ 7.0 million) 
This component will provide the financial resources to develop and construct a dedicated 
facility for the storage of radioactive waste from the two former iodine sites to be 
decontaminated under Component A and NORM from other site clean-ups such as for 
former oil production sites. The new facility for NORM will be constructed adjacent to 
the existing Izotop storage facility for radioactive sources managed by MES. This 
component also includes detailed site investigations, detailed design, construction works, 
and operations to receive the NORM from the former iodine sites. Izotop under 
supervision of MES will manage future (post-project) operations and monitoring.  
 
Component C - National Mapping and Remediation Program for NORM Contaminated 
Sites (US$ 11.0 million) This component will enable MES to execute at the national level 
an extension survey program to map the NORM contaminated sites and subsequently 
investigate these sites to determine contamination levels, priorities and remediation or 
containment actions. Furthermore, this component will include US$ 5.0 million for 
remediation of the highest priority oil production sites identified in the National 
Remediation Mitigation Program for NORM Contaminated Sites. It will also establish an 
integrated program for continuous national radiological monitoring of existing NORM-
contaminated areas, and a radiation emergency and response plan for these areas.  
 
Component D - Remediation Program for the 1,000ha Site (US$ 22.0 million) The 
objective of this component would be to develop and test approaches to cleaning up oil 
polluted land and returning it to use by cleaning-up 1,000 hectares of oil polluted land 
with 350 wells between the Buzovni and Mashtagi settlements. A comprehensive site 
investigation will establish the basis for a detailed cleanup and rehabilitation program that 
includes the following activities:  (i) remove old oil production structures and 
infrastructure; (ii) implement adequate closure of oil production wells; (iii) clean up oil-
contaminated spots; (iv) remove other types of hazardous waste including NORM 
containing materials; and (v) create a redevelopment plan for future land use in 
consultation and cooperation with local stakeholders and relevant institutions. A fund of 
US$20 million will be available for the first cleanup activities on the site.  
Page  3
Component E 
–
Capacity Building, Public Outreach and Project Management (US$ 3.5 
million) This component will provide financial support for the management and 
performance monitoring of the Project as well as for technical assistance towards 
institutional development, strategy development and planning. Technical assistance 
activities will be closely coordinated with IAEA technical cooperation program 
(Monitoring and Rehabilitation Programs for Contaminated Areas of the Absheron 
Peninsula). The training program envisaged under this component will focus on project 
management and technical skills in implementing environmental clean-up projects and 
land redevelopment. The training package will complement the highly specialized 
training activities planned under the IAEA technical support program, which includes 
trainings in the field of NORM waste management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Main project investments are targeting remediation, clean-up works and proper disposal 
of highly radioactive and non-radioactive contaminated land in the Absheron Peninsula 
including about 32.5 ha land polluted by low-level radioactive waste, oily compounds 
and other hazardous materials derived from over 60 years of iodine production operations 
in Baku area (Surakhani and Ramani settlements) as well as 1,000 ha of oil polluted land 
covered with more than 300 non-operated wells and other old oil exploitation equipment 
and infrastructure.  Other high priority NORM contamination cleanup operations are 
envisaged under the project at selected sites identified later during project 
implementation once the national mitigation program for NORM contaminated sites and 
affiliated national mapping strategy (project component C) are developed.  
 
The project component A proposes remediation works at and around the Baku iodine 
plant, which operated during the period of 1930–1990, and consisted of two production 
sites situated next to the Ramani and Surakhani settlements. The total area occupied by 
the former plant is about 32.5 ha of land, of which 4.3 ha represent the Ramani 
production site and 28.2 ha the Surakhani site. Adjacent residential areas are encroaching 
upon both the Ramani and Surakhani sites. No people live at the Ramani site, but 13 
families (59 people, refugees from Nagorno-Karabakh) live in the former office buildings 
at the entrance of the Surakhani site since 1993.  
 
The estimated volume of radioactive waste at the two former iodine sites totals 85,310 
m3 (18,993 m3 at Ramani, and 66,377 m3 at Surakhani site). The gamma-radiation dozes 
on both sites have been found to exceed the region’s normal indicators. Considerable 
contamination by abovementioned isotopes was also observed in the chemical sediments 
deposited in the inner walls of the asbestos pipelines used for the drainage of processed 
oil water. Pipelines transported the used water together with other liquid wastes back into 
the reservoirs or into the neighboring industrial waste collectors. Artificial lakes 
containing high petroleum acids’ concentration were created in natural hollows on both 
former production sitesas a result of the oil water discharge during the plant operation. 
Groundwater on both iodine sites present at depths varying between 0.34 and 2.9 m is 
likely to be contaminated with radio nuclides, heavy metals, and other oil compounds as a 
result of the lack of proper waste management at these sites.  
Page  4
The project component B proposes construction of a new NORM disposal facility at the 
current disposal area for high radioactive wastes (sources) owned by the Special 
Industrial Complex “Izotop”. This storage facility is located at approximately 37 km from 
Baku in a relatively isolated area where there is no groundwater (up to a depth of 600 m) 
and 10 km away from the nearest water and gas pipelines. Also, there are no settlements 
or industry within 3 km from the site.  
 
The project component D proposes remediation of the “1000ha site” located northof 
Baku’s international airport. Preliminary evaluation of the contaminated soils and ground 
waters in the 1000 ha site area demonstrates that up to 30% of the area is contaminated 
with oil and oil products up to the average depth of 1.0 m, and in the other areas (sludge 
tanks, former oil warehouses) up to 1.5-3.0 meters. It is estimated that the total volume of 
contaminated soils has reached 3.0-3.5 million m3 or 5.25-6.1 million tons, and 
contamination level varies from 1-2% up to 20-30%  
 
The territories polluted with oil in the project area may include: (i) open oil warehouses 
–
locations where oil extracted from oil-wells used to be delivered in areas that had 100-
10,000 m2 covered with ground walls from where oil was transported for refining; (ii) oil 
residues-soil mixture transported and collected in temporary territories; (iii) buried 
drilling mud and buried oil contaminated lands (the 1000 ha site); (iv) pollution emerged 
as a result of accident occurred during oil transfer pipes in oil-field areas; (v) existing 
lakes emerged during water flows as a result of leakage from injection wells; and (vi) 
pollution of neighboring areas by oil combinations brought by ground waters and 
atmosphere.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
Mr Bakhtiyar Karimov (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Summary of key Safeguard Issues:  
 
In accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policies and procedures (OP/BP 4.01 
Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement) the proposed 
project has been classified as environmental assessment Category “A” given the 
remediation and cleanup works proposed at the low-level radioactive sites in Surakhani 
and Ramani.  
 
The Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) policy is triggered because the 
implementation of project will require resettlement of households who live in Surakhani 
former iodine site and potential displacement of some owners of structures in 1,000 ha of 
oil polluted land.  The Social Impact Assessment (SIA) carried out during project 
preparation found that 13 households, all of whom are Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs) or refugees without IDP status , will need to be relocated.  SIA for the “1,000ha 
site” also found a number of structures, both residential and commercial, that may need to 
be relocated, which is not known prior to the project.  
 
Given the multiple components included in the project, complemented by the fact that 
MES still needs to finalize several specific investments (e.g., decontamination of the 
highest priority oil production sites and specific cleanup interventions at the 1,000 ha) 
proposed to be financed under this project, the Bank and MES have agreed that the 
following documents will be prepared prior to project appraisal in order to meet the 
Bank’s Category A requirements and the national EAlegislation: (i) a full Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) report including a proper EMP for the decontamination works 
of the 32-ha land at two former iodine production sites and the safe disposal of 85, 000 
m3 of charcoal waste in a special NORM storage facility; (ii) an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) for the cleanup works envisaged at the high priority 
NORM contaminated sites and the 1,000 ha of oil polluted land; and (iii) a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) which sets out policies and procedures for the mitigation of 
social impacts that may arise in any additional sites.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to have important and positive environmental impacts on the 
Absheron Peninsula, that will lead to: (i) reducing public health risks and environmental 
damage caused by inappropriate management of the site’s legacy waste from years of oil 
production activities in the project area; (ii) possible new land utilization following 
cleanup and remediation of two former iodine production sites in Surakhani and Ramani 
and of 1,000 hectares of oil polluted land between the Buzovni and Mashtagi settlements; 
and (iii) overall pollution prevention and waste minimization from oil production 
activities in the Absheron Peninsula through enhancing MES capacity to launch 
remediation and cleanup actions of the highest priority oil production sites in the project 
Page  6
area by developing a national remediation mitigation program for NORM contaminated 
sites and a national radiological monitoring plan.  
 
The activities which raise short-term environmental concerns are those related to the 
execution of specific proposed civil works that involve: (i) full-scale remediation of two 
former iodine production sites, including treatment, packaging, transport and disposal of 
affiliated plants’ buildings and of about 85,000 m3 of mixed low-level waste (charcoal) 
piled and buried at these sites; and (ii) construction of long-term radioactive waste 
storage facility receiving waste from the two former iodine production sites and from 
other oil production site clean-ups.  
 
Predicted environmental impacts of the chosen activities are related mostly to 
construction works performed during the proposed cleanup and disposal of the charcoal 
waste and possibly during the transport of hazardous waste. Temporary effects may 
appear during the construction of the new NORM facility but these are manageable if the 
selected contractor performs the works in accordance with the international and local 
construction standards. Short term effects could appear on air quality and noise (e.g., 
associated with excavating waste sites and transporting waste to the disposal facility, 
vehicle emissions), soil or surface and groundwater (e.g., cumulative radionuclide 
concentrations), accidental spillage of equipment oil. One potential long-term impact of 
the project could be the redevelopment of the land for purposes that are not compatible 
with the level of cleanup achieved during the project implementation, potentially 
triggering a health hazard. This risk will be mitigated through the development and 
implementation under the Project of cleanup standards suitable for commercial land or 
housing development. Other long-term impacts such as effects on groundwater and soil 
could be envisaged in relation with the NORM disposal facility during its operation once 
the facility starts to receive the waste. To avoid such impacts, the operator will be 
instructed to perform regular monitoring of the facility in accordance with a 
comprehensive monitoring system for supervision and control of groundwater and soil 
quality. Occupational health and safety issues for the workers and near site community 
during the remediation works will be followed according to international standards to 
prevent exposure to spills, gas emissions and fires or explosions that could be directly 
associated with these works. The above risks can be addressed by direct mitigation 
activities in the design, planning and supervision of the cleanup works intended to 
prevent and avoid further soil and groundwater contamination.  
 
The EMP including mitigation of possible environmental impacts and a monitoring 
program during the construction phase as well as after completion of proposed civil 
works will ensure that negative impact could be managed appropriately. The long-term 
monitoring program (including radioactive measurements) proposed during as well as 
after project implementation for the different areas of the environment at the iodine plant 
sites will allow constant verification of physicochemical and biological changes 
associated with the cleanup remediation on the site and will provide guarantees to the 
health of the population and contractors performing the works.   
 
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EIA and the feasibility study identified and evaluated several alternatives to the 
proposed investments, including the no action alternative; alternative ways of decreasing 
the environmental pollution at both sites through neutralization of the radioactive and oil 
waste on site; other cleanup alternatives including partial offsite disposal and 
management of hazardous waste. In particular, distinguishable alternatives exist for the 
disposal of NORM waste: (i) burning, (ii) covering, (iii) dumping in wells, and  
 
(iv) transportation and disposal of the waste in a special landfill for radioactive waste. 
MES, in consultation with IAEA, and based on international best practice, short and long 
term safety issues, and cost effectiveness considerations, has concluded that the preferred 
approach is to remove the waste from the contaminated sites and dispose of it in a newly 
constructed dedicated sanitary landfill for radioactive waste, adjacent to the existing 
Izotop facility for disposal of radioactive sources. This solution also serves the need for 
special long-term monitoring requirements that come with the disposal of radioactive 
waste.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
detailed Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) including a proper Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) was prepared for components A and B investments and 
discussed with the local public on two occasions before the project appraisal. The EIA 
and EMP ensure that these investments will comply with the existing environmental laws 
and regulation in Azerbaijan as well as with the Ban
k’s Operation Policy on 
Environmental Assessment. The EMP proposes a rigorous environmental monitoring 
program consisting of sampling and analyzing various media (water, groundwater, air, 
soil and sediments) on and around the project sites to detect potential radioactive or 
hazardous contaminants such as heavy metals and inorganic chemicals. Such monitoring 
data will be evaluated to determine the degree of regulatory compliance and for 
pollution-management practices.  
 
The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prepared for investments at 
additional sites that require further decontamination (unknown at this point, Component 
C) and for the cleanup works proposed at the 1.000 ha site (Component D), provides a 
general option impact analysis with environmental and social criteria and an overall 
assessment on how to mitigate and monitor possible environmental effects affiliated with 
these investments. Once the final investments affiliated with the cleanup of these sites are 
known, proper environmental due diligence documentation will be prepared by MES 
(e.g., full EIA with EMP for specific site).  
 
The Social Impact Assessment (SIA) was carried out to identify potential negative 
impact of the project.  The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed 
that sets out policies and procedures for the relocation of IDP and non-IDP refugees from 
Surakhani and potential displacement of residential households and commercial entities 
in the “1,000ha” site.  During the implementation of thisproject, the MES, together with 
the State Refugee Committee (SRC), will develop a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that 
Page  8
will lay out the relocation plan.  The SRC is planning to build apartment buildings in and 
around Baku to accommodate IDPs in the Absheron areas, and the IDPs from Surakhani 
are expected to be housed in the new apartment buildings.  Another RAP will be 
developed to mitigate the impact in the “1,000ha” site, if it turns out that the project 
activities will result in displacement of private individuals.  
 
Implementation will be accomplished primarily through a project implementation team 
within the MES, and supported staff of relevant environmental agencies. Monitoring of 
project performance and implementation of EMP requirements will, as noted, be the 
responsibility of the MES implementation team, but the team will relay heavily for this 
task on the support of: (i) the day-by-day responsibility to monitor work progress and 
environmental performance by the independent supervising engineer; (ii) the oversight of 
an independent project steering committee for which regulatory institutions will be 
invited; and (iii) the panel of national and international experts for which also IAEA 
specialists will be invited.  
 
The project will also finance activities that will build the MES capacity on project 
management and technical skills in implementing environmental clean-up projects and 
land redevelopment and raise awareness about environmental hazards and health risks for 
the local population.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
public consultation process has been implemented for the project in accordance with 
the Bank OP 4.01. An initial public meeting was held by MES on December 19, 2007. 
The meeting was attended by representatives of the Academy of Sciences, NGOs, local 
governments and community representatives (municipalities) of the districts of, or 
adjacent to, the project areas. The project team (implementing agency and consultants) 
briefed the audience on the proposed project and on the preparatory work carried out, 
answered questions raised by participants. The second round of public consultations on 
the EIA, the RPF, and all related safeguard documents was held on February 7, 2008 
when draft documents were presented and discussed to a various public. Comments 
received during both meetings were incorporated in the final safeguard documents and 
publicly disclosed in Azerbaijan and at the Bank’s Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/12/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  9
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aniruddha Dasgupta 
02/26/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
02/26/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
02/26/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
Mr Bakhtiyar Karimov 
02/26/2008 
02/26/2008 
02/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
