Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3387
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P109885 
Project Name:  RURAL INVESTMENT (AZRIP) ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Mark C. Woodward 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 29, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (31%);Other social services (22%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%);Water supply (18%);Power (9%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Local 
Communities 
1.66 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.66 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of the scaled up project is for households in rural 
communities completing micro-project investments to achieve improved living standards 
through improved access to infrastructure services.  
 
Micro-project investments in economic and social infrastructure are identified and 
selected using demand driven processes.  Funded micro-projects are designed to increase 
access to, and quality of, local economic and social infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
This is additional financing to scale up the ongoing Rural Investment Project. The 
original IDA Specific Investment Loan Credit (SIL) of SDR 10.2 million (US$ 15 million 
equivalent) was signed on September 23, 2004 and became effective on January 18, 
2005. The additional financing credit will support the costs associated with scaling-up the 
ongoing project to 23 new districts and between 875,000 and 1 million additional 
Page  2
beneficiaries, thus contributing to a significant enhancement of its impact and 
development effectiveness.  
 
The project has three components:  
 
Component A 
–
Infrastructure  
 
Component B – Capacity Enhancement  
 
Component C – Project Management  
 
Component A – Infrastructure. The proposed additional financing will support 
anadditional 300 demand-driven community projects (CPs) in rural infrastructure. CP 
expenses eligible for financing from the project include identification, design, 
construction, rehabilitation, and initial operation and maintenance of the investment. 
Potential investments include basic economic (e.g., rehabilitation of secondary roads, 
water systems, electricity transformers) and social (e.g., schools and health clinics) 
infrastructure, based on the priority needs identified by communities. Funded community 
projects are designed to increase access to, and quality of, local economic and social 
infrastructure (e.g., markets, roads, schools, clinics). Improved access to local 
infrastructure reduces household transaction costs, thereby freeing up household 
resources for greater market participation and ultimately increased household incomes.  
The project targets rural communities (greater than 1,000 and less than 10,000 people) in 
regions that meet criteria for high agricultural potential and have a high incidence of 
poverty. The average size of community projects under the original credit was 
US$34,000 but because of inflation, under the additional financing this is US$ 55,000. 
Community projects over US$85,000 will require prior review by IDA and the project 
Working Group.  
 
Component B -- Capacity Enhancement funds training and technical assistance for CP 
implementation. This section helps create the required capacity of involved local 
stakeholders, e.g., communities, recipients, and Regional Grant Approval Committees 
(RGACs) and staff in the Regional Operations Offices (ROOs). In the community 
mobilization phase, communities and recipients are assisted in all aspects of micro-
project development. Recipients receive training in contracting, procurement, financial 
management, and participatory monitoring and evaluation (PM&E). This component also 
comprises a broad dissemination campaign which targets stakeholders at large and 
includes rayon and central government authorities.  
 
Component C -- Project Management. This component finances the administrative and 
operational project implementation and management costs, including hiring of PMU 
professional staff and PMU and ROO support staff, travel cost and per diem, and support 
to the RGACs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Under the Additional Financing, AzRIP will expand the geographical range of all its 
components to 23 new districts in Northern and Northwestern areas of Azerbaijan, as 
Page  3
well as to continue operations in the autonomous region of Nakhchivan. These areas 
include protected areas such as nature reserves and natural parks. AzRIP would continue 
to supervise the monitoring and evaluation of micro-projects currently underway or 
recently completed in the existing districts and involve these communities in community 
networking activities. The Additional Financing would also fund the operating costs of 
AzRIP, AzRIP staff training, and financial management.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECAVP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been revised to address additional 
preventive/mitigation measures associated with the presence of environmentally sensitive 
zones located in the scaled up project areas. The revised EMP was disclosed locally and 
in the Bank’s InfoShop on January 29, 2008. Minutes of disclosure meetings have been 
recorded and kept at the Project Management Unit (PMU). Environmental assessment 
(EA) requirements will be followed by both Community Project Committees and the 
PMU at all stages of micro-project design, appraisal, implementation and evaluation. 
Specific EA documents will be prepared for individual community projects to be 
identified during project implementation.  
 
No changes in the triggering of safeguards are envisaged.  Environmental Assessment is 
triggered and discussed above. The International Waterways safeguard is also triggered, 
although no significant changes to quality or volume of water flows are expected.  
Notification letters were sent to relevant riparians on December 27, 2007, with a request 
that any comments be received by January 27, 2008. No other safeguards are triggered.  
The Project’s Working Group has reconfirmed that the acquisition of private land is not 
allowed under community projects.  Although Physical Cultural Resources is not 
triggered, the Operational Manual includes procedures to be followed in the event of 
chance finds.  
Page  4
There are no foreseen potential large scale and significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
Since micro-projects larger than US$ 85,000 will be subject to no-objection by the World 
Bank, there will be the opportunity to address unforeseen issues as they arise.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
For micro-projects where safeguard policies apply, the Operational Manual defines the 
measures to be carried out in accordance with Bank guidelines. This includes an 
environmental management plan framework. The likelihood that micro-projects will 
trigger safeguard policies was assessed during project preparation and evaluated as very 
low. Micro-projects that include land or building expropriation are not eligible for grants 
through this project. Under the EMP framework, the operations manual contains 
procedures for handling chance cultural property finds.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include members of communities that participate in the project, 
members of Government, and Non-Government Organizations. The EMP is integrated 
into the Operations Manual and has been discussed with key stakeholders and disclosed 
on the PMU and the Azerbaijan Community Development Research websites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mark C. Woodward 
01/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
01/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
01/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
01/24/2008 
Comments:   
