Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/07/2007 
Report No.:  AC3294
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P107613 
Project Name:  IDP Economic Development Support Project -- Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Ellen Hamilton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(25%);General transportation sector (25%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Other social 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Local 
Communities 
0.50
5.50 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Improve living conditions for IDPs, through demand- driven community based 
infrastructure and service micro-projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
Scaled Up Activities:  The Additional Financing would help SFDI to scale-up the 
ongoing operations under Components A (Micro-Projects) and C (Implementation 
Support):  
 
•
Micro-projects:  SFDI would prepare and implement about 250 small-scale projects at 
an average cost of between USD 60,000-80,000.  As in the ongoing project, the micro-
projects would focus on the rehabilitation, repair or reconstruction (including the 
acquisition of related equipment) for (a) basic small infrastructure, such as water supply 
and sewage networks, electricity and natural gas distribution networks, access roads, 
Page  2
drainage and irrigation systems, etc.; (b) social infrastructure such as schools and 
community centers; and; (c) temporary shelter facilities.  
 
•
Implementation Support:  This component would support the operating costs of SFDI, 
SFDI staff training, repair and replacement of SFDI equipment and vehicles, and 
consulting services for project preparation, monitoring and evaluation, and audits during 
the additional three year period.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The micro-project component of IDP/EDS/AF will be national in scope and will target 
IDP communities in urban and rural areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
Ms Joanna Peace De Berry (YPP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12):  IDP/EDS/AF will not trigger OP/BP 
4.12 as the project will deal exclusively with rehabilitation/repair/upgrading of existing 
infrastructure and installations on existing premises or new routes on public rights of way 
which will not entail any land acquisition, relocation of population, or restrictions on 
access to resources.  
 
Environmental Assessment (World Bank OP 4.01):  IDP/EDS-AF is not expected to 
have any significant or irreversible environmental impacts, and is classified as 
Environmental Category "F".  Many of the micro-projects are expected to produce 
environmental benefits.  However, because these projects are not pre-identified, there 
could be unforeseen environmental impacts during implementation.  The IDP/EDS OM 
section includes an Environmental Management Plan Framework (EMPF), which has 
Page  3
recently been reviewed and found satisfactory for assessing and mitigating the minor 
impacts that could occur in specific micro-projects. Adequate institutional capacity for 
environmental management has already been established in SFDI through the IDP/EDS 
project.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50: "Like the on-going IDP/EDS Project , 
the Additional Financ ing  is expected to finance inter alia  community micro-projects (of 
an average cost of about US$ 60,000-80,000) to upgrade, replace, and/or repair existing 
water supply and sewerage installations in buildings or neighborhoods occupied by small 
communities of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in rural and urban areas of 
Azerbaijan.  These activities , some of which may be on international waterways,  are 
minor additions or alterations to existing infrastructure, and do not alter or expand its 
scope and extent , or adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to other 
riparians .  This was the basis for the exception to the Notification to Riparians under 
para 7 (a) of OP 7.50  that was obtained for the original IDP-EDS Project.  Since the 
project activities under the Additional Financing are identical to those of the ongoing 
IDP/EDS project, the rationale for the exception remains applicable, and accordingly no 
notification of other riparians is required under OP 7.50."   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to specific micro-projects will be considered and assessed during micro-
project preparation and appraisal, as per guidelines provided in the Operational Manual.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
SFDI is responsible for screening the micro-projects for environmental impact, defining 
mitigation measures, and preparing terms of reference to manage impacts as part of the 
works contracts awarded by SFDI to contractors.  Adequate institutional capacity for 
environmental management has already been established in SFDI through the IPF/EDS 
project. This capacity has assessed, including a random sampling of 5-6 micro-project 
files and related documents. Overall the project is being implemented in close conformity 
with the Environmental Management Plan Framework (EMPF), particularly with respect 
to the micro-project component. SFDI and its contractors demonstrate good capacity and 
regular practice in the use of the Limited Environmental Assessment format provided in 
the EMPF, and does so in full consultation with the local government authority and local 
representatives of the relevant technical agencies.  
 
It is to be noted that the EMPF is proving beneficial beyond the current project, as many 
Azeri consulting firms and works contractors use its screening tools, forms and checklists 
for non-Bank financed construction and infrastructure rehabilitation projects.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations with stakeholders regarding environmental impacts and other aspects of the 
micro-projects will take place as part of the micro-project identification and preparation 
process, which is described in the OM and has been the successful operational practice 
under the IDP/EDS project.  The overall IDP/EDS approach to environmental 
management has been consulted with the project Board of Directors.  The EMPF has 
been disclosed in country and via the InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/01/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  5
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ellen Hamilton 
11/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
11/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Joanna Peace De Berry 
11/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/28/2007 
Comments:   
