Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/17/2008 
Report No.:  43517
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P109961 
Project Name:  Second National Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Kanthan Shankar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 4, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (60%);Sewerage (40%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
230.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
150.00
150.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to improve the availability, quality, reliability, and 
sustainability of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in selected regional centers 
(rayons) in Azerbaijan.  This objective will be achieved through rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the 21 rayons outside the 
Greater Baku Area, including five in Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.  Sustainable 
management of these investments to improve service delivery is expected to be leveraged 
through a comprehensive Institutional Modernization Component (IMC).  An IMC is 
already part of the ongoing National Water Supply and Sanitation Project (NWSSP), and 
it will be extended under the Second National Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
(SNWSSP).  
 
Progress towards achieving the above development objectives will be monitored 
through the following key performance indicators in rayons under the project:  
 
•
Availability: (i) Number of people served by new piped water supply system,(ii) 
number of people connected to a sewerage network.  
Page  2
•
Quality: Percentage of drinking water samples in project area meeting Azeriwater 
quality standards  
 
•
Reliability: Average daily number of hours of water supply service  
 
•
Sustainability: Financial working ratio (cash operating expenditures divided by 
collected revenues) of the rayon water utilities in which investment is completed.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A:  Rayon Investment Component  
 
This component would finance the rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and 
sewerage systems in at least 21 rayons, as well as water, wastewater and septic sludge 
treatment facilities in these rayons.  Rayons to be covered under the project include; 
Imishli, Kurdamir, Siyazan, Aghsu, Ismayili, Udjar, Zardab, Lenkoran, Masalli, Astara, 
Jalilabad, Yardimli, Lerik, Davachi, Dashkesan, and Gedabey, and Sadarak, Kangarli, 
Shahbuz, Djulfa, Ordubad in Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.  The project would 
cover the rayon centers and the villages located in close proximity of the urban centers or 
along the transmission mains supplying the centers.  The five rayons of Sadarak, 
Kangarli, Shahbuz, Djulfa and Ordubad belong to the Autonomous Republic of 
Nakhchivan, and WSS services in them are managed by the State Amelioration and 
Water Management Agency of Nakhchivan.Given the Government’s approach to cover 
WSS improvements in all of Azerbaijan’s rayons, all rayons for which financing had not 
been previously identified were selected.  
 
Component B: Institutional Modernization Component  
 
This component would further support development and implementation of activities 
needed for capacity building and modernization of Azersu and its subsidiary companies 
and to SAWMA, to improve the efficiency and sustainability of WSS services.  It will 
assure that modernization measures already included in the NWSSP can be extended to 
cover the additional rayons and to also cover the time after the closing of the NWSSP.  It 
would specifically include training in management, financial management, customer 
service, procurement, preventive maintenance and other subjects pertinent to effective 
and efficient management of the utilities, as well as provide continued support to 
activities such as development of performance monitoring, preventive maintenance and 
leak detection and repair.  It will also finance costs of technical support for construction 
management including procurement support and contract supervision for the investments.  
 
Component C: Project Implementation and Management  
 
This component will support project implementation by financing project management 
activities including incremental operating costs and project audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area covers the urban centers in twenty one rayons in Azerbaijan as well as 
the villages located in close proximity of the urban centers or along the transmission 
mains supplying the centers.  Which, if any, of the Safeguard Policies may be triggered, 
will vary depending on the proposed locations for, and nature of, works in each rayons.  
Page  3
The location of several rayons under the project within the catchment areas of some 
international waterways including: (i) the Kura River, which flows to the Caspian Sea 
through Azerbaijan from Turkey and Georgia; (ii) the Araz River which flows from 
Turkey and Armenia, and along Azerbaijan’s border with Iran, joiningthe Kura River 
near the town of Sabirabad in Azerbaijan; and (iii) the Samur River, which flows along 
Azerbaijan’s border with Russia to the Caspian Sea, triggers the Bank’s International 
Waterways Operational Policy.  Azerbaijan is howeverlocated at the downstream end of 
the above rivers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hermine De Soto (ECSSD) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project falls into Category A for Environmental Assessment (EA) since it may 
provide financing for one or more wastewater treatment plants of considerable size and 
potential impact.  Most sub-project investments in water supply, rehabilitation of 
infrastructure, and smaller wastewater treatment plants pose less risk.  Each sub-project 
will be screened regarding its EA category and the appropriate instruments for 
assessment, mitigation and monitoring will be put in place.  Most specific utility and site 
locales have not been formally selected by appraisal and the EA document for the project 
centers on an environmental framework for screening, due diligence, mitigation and 
monitoring.  The team will ensure that these points are reflected in any updated EA 
documents. Such approach has proven itself for the First National Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project, with the first site specific EA already approved by the Regional 
Safeguard Coordinator.  
 
Once operational, most of the impacts of the Project will be positive.  The 
environmental assessment indicates that the implementation of the project will have long-
Page  4
term positive environmental impacts in terms of reducing pollution of natural resources, 
generation of significant economical, social and public health benefits, and will enable 
the government to enforce existing environmental regulations and standards.  Specific 
impacts are outlined below:  
 
Potential Positive Impacts  
 
a) 
Improved WSS Services:  Repair and improvement of WSS systems, especially, 
distribution system, while decreasing fear of pollution, will provide high quality potable 
water to a larger population.  Improved WSS is also expected to result in reduced 
operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to the utilities and higher efficiency through 
decreased water losses and pumping costs.  
 
b) 
Improvement of public health and environmental quality: The provision of 
wastewater collection and treatment facilities will have a strong long term positive effect 
on the overall environment and on public health conditions. There will be an 
improvement in the water quality in the streams and rivers that flow throughout the 
project area.  Another major benefit expected from the project is the protection of 
groundwater resources from contamination by untreated sewage, and the reduction of 
untreated sewage discharge to the Caspian Sea from Kura and Araks.  This will decrease 
negative impacts on water quality consumed by other users from those rivers.  In 
addition, pollution of ground, surface water and underground water caused by flowing of 
polluted water directly onto the relief in project areas will be prevented, and salination 
and erosion problems which are problematic in some rayons will be avoided.  
 
c) 
Improvement of natural habitats:  The project will not cause any direct threat to 
natural habitats in the project area as the project components are far away from them. 
Indeed, through improvements in water quality as a result of the project, the ecological 
conditions of the respective surface water bodies in rayons such as Bilasuvar are expected 
to improve and to assist in the restoration of the degraded water quality of wetlands.  
These improvements are expected to contribute positively to the conservation of natural 
habitats.  
 
d) 
Re-use of treated wastewaters and sludge:  The design of the treatment plants 
under the project will take into consideration the use of their by-products (generated 
sludge, and treated effluent) with the aim of protecting the environment and the scarce 
water resources. This will generate significant economic, social and health benefits and 
will enable the Government to enforce the laws that prohibit discharging raw wastewater 
in the environment.  
 
e) 
Additional economic benefits:  As a result of the project, economic benefits will 
occur in terms of decreased water volume to be pumped (because of leakage reduction 
and demand management), and of increased water volume of good quality available to 
consumers, increased tourism activities, and lower medical costs associated with treating 
water-borne diseases.  
 
Page  5
Potential Negative Impacts  
 
Negative environmental impacts may entail temporary loss of access during physical 
works, however they are only temporary. Typical impacts include:  
 
(i) 
the potential for increased abstraction of water from some individual sources 
(although at the rayon level no net increase in water abstraction is expected);  
 
(ii) 
Dust raised from the roads in the construction sites and from material carrying 
trucks;  
 
(iii) 
Waste water from construction/renovation sites;  
 
(iv) 
Disposal of solid wastes;  
 
(v) 
Use of materials that may damage health (i.e. heavy-metal (lead) containing 
paints, asbestos-cement tiles, pipes, copper pipes, inflammable and toxic materials etc.);  
 
(vi) 
Noise generated by the construction machinery;  
 
(vii) 
Traffic disruption and disturbance to the residents of the area.  Impacts associated 
with increased traffic concern issues such as public safety, congestion of roads and 
disruption of regular traffic;  
 
(ix) 
Contamination/pollution of resource by construction, human wastes, including 
fuel & oil, hazardous wastes, wastewater, etc Soils and Water Resources;  
 
(x) 
Business activity might suffer during construction from loss of pedestrian and 
vehicular access.  Interference with water and electrical power supplies might occur in 
some urban areas, inconveniencing the public;  
 
(xi) 
Loss of visual amenities as construction materials are stockpiled and trees and 
natural vegetation cut down.  
 
International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50)  
 
The Project triggers the World Bank's Operational Policy on International Waters OP 
7.50 (the Operational Policy) and but after consultation with LEGEN was deemed to fall 
within the exception to the notification requirement under Paragraph (7a) of the 
Operational Policy.  Several of the rayons under the Project are dependant on canals 
linked to the Kura River or its tributaries for their drinking water supply, and raw 
wastewaters from some of them are discharged untreated into receiving water bodies, 
including canals ultimately linked to the above mentioned Rivers and the Caspian Sea.  
The works to be carried out under the project are not expected to have adverse impacts on 
the quality and quantity of water to the riparians, and will not be affected by the other 
riparians water use.  It is expected that the water intake from the rivers will actually be 
reduced because of the reduction in leakages and improved demand management under 
the project.  Proposed investments are also expected to improve the quality of wastewater 
discharged into the relevant waterways, resulting in overall improvements in their water 
quality.  The Bank determined in its memo, cleared by the Regional Vice President, dated 
November 27, 2007 that the exception to the external notification requirement set forth in 
paragraph 7a) of OP 7.50 is applicable.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12)  
 
Page  6
Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 is triggered since the project might involve land 
acquisition of either fallow land, used agricultural land, and/or pasture areas used for 
sheep and cattle, for specific infrastructure investments such as wastewater treatment 
plants and water and sewage investments mainly outside the urban centers. As the 
specific locations, land type and size have not yet been fully determined at appraisal, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed for this project.  
 
The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements, schedules and 
funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may occur in the project rayons as the 
result of the project.  The RPF will also provide guidelines to stakeholder participation in 
the mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in order to ensure that the social 
and economic well being of project affected persons (PAP)s will not be worsened as a 
result of the project.  
 
One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines will be to restore the income earning 
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and 
shepherds.  The aim will be to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the 
PAPs prior to project operations.  No resettlement of persons is anticipated, and the 
project does not foresee any demolitions of commercial or private buildings.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37)  
 
The Safeguards Policy OP 4.47 (Safety of Dams) is for now triggered even though the 
project will not finance the construction or rehabilitation of any dams or other large 
control structures, because in some of the rayons rehabilitation of water supply schemes 
which are supplied from small existing dams may take place.  Anchor or Regional Dam 
Safety Specialists will be consulted as to the appropriate means for ensuring that this OP 
is met, and if deemed necessary investigations of the safety of the dams might be carried 
out by an independent dam safety expert in accordance with OP 4.37.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Please see positive impacts outlined in Section 1 above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The 'no project' alternative which would maintain the status quo with respect to WSS 
systems and associated conditions including environmental conditions in the project area 
was considered.  It would however result in a worsening situation in terms of not only the 
quality of service delivery, but also additional operations and maintenance (O&M) costs.  
The continued failure to effectively collect, treat and dispose of sewage would also 
adversely affect the environment.  Implementing the project, through the combination of 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the 
rayons; and implementation of a comprehensive Institutional Modernization Component 
Page  7
to strengthen the WSS sector's capacity to manage services in an efficient, effective, and 
sustainable manner, was found to be the best alternative.  
 
The EMP identifies feasible cost effective measures to mitigate any adverse 
environmental impacts that might occur as a result of the project.  The EMP covers 
mitigation measures, monitoring, and institutional strengthening.  Key measures for 
mitigation of negative impacts in order to protect human health, environment, natural and 
cultural heritage are outlined in the EMP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
a) 
Environmental Assessment:  Because details of site selection and technology to 
be used will be determined during project implementation, an Environmental Impact 
Assessment Framework (EIAF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been 
prepared. The EIAF and EMP detail the procedure, form and contents for specific EAs 
and EMPs to be prepared and approved for investments in each Rayon.  These are 
outlined in the EIAF and EMP, as are the applicable standards and monitoring indicators 
and procedures. Implementation of activities carried out under the project will conform to 
relevant laws in Azerbaijan and sound environmental and construction management 
principles.  The short-term negative environmental impacts, which are mostly expected to 
occur during construction or rehabilitation works will be minimized by proper planning 
and application of preventive measures, and will be mitigated by restorative actions after 
the civil works are completed. The main environmental issues to be addressed include:  
(i) selection of siting and technology for wastewater treatment facilities;  (ii) the potential 
for increased abstraction of water from some individual sources (although at the rayon 
level no net increase in water abstraction is expected); (iii) ecological disturbance 
associated with the construction phase of rehabilitation and extension of the water supply 
and sewer networks and wastewater treatment plants; and (iv) the potential for 
bacteriological contamination if water or sludge from the wastewater treatment plants are 
used for agricultural purposes.  
 
In addition, the EIAF identifies the need for special attention to ecological impacts in 
the EAs for sites located near environmentally protected areas.  It also provides details of 
requirements for assessing the appropriateness of and safety measures for use of post-
treatment wastewater and sludge for irrigation and fertilizer.  
 
Overall, mitigation of any environmental effects will be the responsibility of the main 
Project Implementing Units for the project, (Azersu's PMU in the International Relations 
and Development Department and SAWMA).  In addition, it will be the responsibility of 
the contractors to ensure that mitigation is carried out successfully during 
construction/renovation works as it is required.  The specific mitigation measures will be 
implemented by the contractor under the supervision of the construction supervision 
manager. The provisions described in this EMP will be incorporated in the contract with 
construction companies selected to perform the works.  The cost of mitigation measures 
will be included in the cost of the contracts and will be borne by contractors, who will 
Page  8
make the necessary provisions for implementation of mitigation measures as part of their 
contractual obligations.  
 
The contractors shall take also all necessary precautions for the types of civil works 
involved, especially in residential areas and those with high circulation of persons and 
vehicles. All construction and rehabilitation works should be carried out with keeping the 
safety equipment rules, and health and safety regulations.  Safety measures will be 
adopted to protect the personnel involved in the works. Public access to construction sites 
will be properly restricted. Internationally accepted practices and active regulations 
should be assisted regarding restoration of construction, health and safety.  The 
construction contract document will incorporate all requirements to minimize disturbance 
from construction activities, which will be monitored by the Supervision Engineer and 
the PIU staff (Environment Specialist) to ensure compliance and implementation of the 
required provisions by the contractors.  
 
The contractors will provide suitable and reliable equipment for construction, with a 
formal maintenance program to ensure efficient operations.  The WSS utilities will 
develop and establish appropriate safety procedures for the operation and maintenance of 
the water and wastewater treatment plants. All employees of the contractors and the WSS 
utilities will get suitable training in occupational health, safety, and emergency 
preparedness procedures for earthquakes. Safety equipment will also be provided.  
 
b) 
Resettlement Policy Framework:  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has 
been prepared for this project.  The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional 
arrangements, schedules and funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may 
occur in the project rayons as the result of the project.  The RPF also provides guidelines 
to stakeholder participating in the mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in 
order to ensure that the social and economic well being of project affected persons 
(PAP)s will not be worsened as a result of the project.  
 
One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines is to restore the income earning 
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and 
shepherds.  The aim will be to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the 
PAPs prior to project operations. The Loan Agreement will include a clause requiring the 
Resettlement Process framework to be followed in project implementation should any 
issues arise in this regard. In addition, the RPF is drafted to ensure that siting of facilities 
to be built under the project will not cause displacement of people, demolishing of illegal 
structures, or loss of income to illegal or non-titled inhabitants.  It also requires that initial 
social screening be carried out in line with Bank policies so that all potential issues that 
may trigger OP 4.12 are spotted and addressed.  
 
c) Safety of Dams:  The project will not finance any new large dams, but in some of the 
rayons rehabilitation of water supply schemes which are supplied from small existing 
dams might take place and trigger the Banks OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams. 
Investigations of the safety of these dams will be carried out by an independent dam 
safety expert in accordance with OP 4.37.   
Page  9
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultations with regard to EIAF were held with local stakeholders in Azerbaijan 
in December 2007 in accordance with Bank Guidelines for EA.  The Final EIAF has been 
disclosed publicly.  It was published through the Bank's Infoshop on January 4, 2008, and 
in-country through the Azersu Website on December 17, 2007.  A draft specific EA for 
one rayon (Agstafa) under the NWSPP was prepared and submitted to the Bank on 
February 25, 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/04/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/04/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/10/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/29/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  10
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Rohde 
02/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
02/26/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hermine De Soto 
02/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aniruddha Dasgupta 
04/17/2008 
Comments:   
