Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3376
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P105116 
Project Name:  Social Protection Development 
Task Team Leader:  Aleksandra Posarac 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Improving labor markets (P);Other social protection and 
risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
22.40
22.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve delivery of labor market and social 
safety net interventions through strengthened institutions, enhanced institutional and 
human resources capacity, and improved targeting.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be implemented over 5 years, from 2008 to 2013. The overall cost is 
estimated at US$47.4 million, of which the IDA will finance US$25 million. The project 
has four components:  
 
Component I: Labor market reform (US$21.8 million). This component will help to 
significantly improve labor market institutions, policies and programs and strengthen 
capacity for labor market and employment policy formulation and implementation. It will 
be implemented through the following subcomponents: (a) Subcomponent I.1: 
Modernization of labor market institutions; (b) Subcomponent I.2: Renewal of the 
National Employment Services; and (c) Subcomponent I.3: Facilitating “school to work” 
transition for the young and professional orientation and careercounseling services for 
both youth and adult population.  
Page  2
Component II: MLSPP capacity building and social safety net development (US$19.6 
million). This component will assist modernization of the MLSPP administration, 
introduction of monitoring and evaluation, improvements in performance of the targeted 
social assistance, restructuring of the Disability Certification Service and piloting of the 
social work and care services and integrated provision of the social protection programs. 
Four subcomponents are envisaged: (a) Subcomponent II.1: Establishment of a corporate 
MIS in the MLSPP and evidence based monitoring and evaluation; (b) Subcomponent 
II.2: Strengthening operations and management of targeted social assistance; (c) 
Subcomponent II.3: Restructuring of the Disability Certification Service (DCS); and (d) 
Subcomponent II.4: Piloting of social care centers and integrated provision of social 
protection interventions.  
 
Component III: Pension system development (US$3.1 million). By the end of the 
project, a strategy for the long-term development of the pension system with an action 
plan will have been developed and, if Government so decides, adopted.  
 
Component IV: Project management (US$2.4 million): This component will strengthen 
MLSPP’s capacity to efficiently and effectively implement the SPDP, while observing 
IDA’s fiduciary and safeguard requirements.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental issues are foreseen mainly with respect to the activities which will include 
the renovation of existing offices of the MLSPP. The project is not expected to produce 
any large scale or significant environmental impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Building renovation activities will not contribute to the permanent degradation of the 
physical and human environment. The short-term negative environmental impacts, which 
inevitably occur during construction or rehabilitation works, will be minimized by proper 
planning and application of preventive measures, and will be mitigated by restorative 
actions after the civil works are completed. Activities carried out under the project will 
conform to current laws in Azerbaijan and sound environmental principle.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Decisions on construction design will incorporate environmental considerations as 
described below.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The MLSPP PIU will be implementing the proposed SDP Project and has been 
successfully managing the Pension and Social Assistance Project (PSAP) for 4 years. 
Within latter project the PIU conducted rehabilitation works of 39 local social assistance 
offices with application of environment management guidelines and therefore no major 
environmental issues encountered. The PIU effectively monitored rehabilitation works 
during implementation to ensure that all civil works meet the environmental requirements 
of the country and are consistent with Bank guidelines and procedures. According to the 
guidelines, each renovation activity is individually screened and reviewed by the PIU for 
any negative impacts and mitigation measures. In addition, the Sub-component 
renovation activities Implementation Framework includes environmental review 
checklists, and mitigation measures. Under the PSAP Project training was provided by 
environmental specialists, on a regular basis, in the area of evaluation and monitoring of 
sub-projects according to agreed environmental standards. A separate chapter on 
environment issues and procedures is prepared and will be included in the Operational 
Manual.  
 
The project design documents will include descriptions of proposed construction and 
related activities together with applications for permits from relevant authorities for 
geological studies of soil characteristics, fire safety, public health, utilities (gas, water, 
electricity, and telecommunications) and environmental assessment. The relevant local 
authorities will conduct inspections during construction to monitor compliance with the 
permits, and may issue significant fines if violations are found.   
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR) is the competent authority for 
reviewing the EIA request and documentation being prepared by independent experts 
hired by the project. In Azerbaijan, engineering survey, design and construction standards 
and regulations are governed by the State Construction Committee. Rules of conducting 
supervision and control procedures by the State Construction Committee (in several areas 
regarding to safety of construction by the recently established Ministry of Emergency 
Situations) had been approved by the Cabinet of Ministers in 2003. Subject to the State 
Construction Committee regulations all construction operations are to be carried out with 
due regard to the environmental requirements.  
 
Consultations with MENR, SCC, MES, local authorities and communities will be 
essential in any circumstances where the project activities will affect local communities 
or individuals and at all stage of the project implementation. The physical and social 
environment must not be changed to the disadvantage of local residents, and any changes 
must be with their agreement.  
 
The MLSPP has carried out a disclosure and consultation process to discuss the draft 
EMP with local officials and key stakeholders. The disclosure and consultative process 
included the following steps: (i) the publication of the advertisement of the EMP in local 
papers; and (ii) consultative meetings with representatives of local officials, media, 
school directors, teachers, parents and students.  During the period January 14 to 18, 
2008, the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared by the MLSPP, was 
distributed among the participating constituents. In addition, the EMP is publicly 
available in the MLSPP, as well as in its local offices. The availability of the EMP was 
advertised in a national paper “Xalqqazeti” on February 14, 2008 and on AzerWeb.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aleksandra Posarac 
03/13/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
03/15/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
03/15/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arup Banerji 
03/13/2008 
Comments:   
