Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3252 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P104985 
Project Name: Absheron Rehabilitation Program 
Task Team Leader: Aniruddha Dasgupta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (35%);Oil and gas (35%);Sanitation (30%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The purpose of the proposed program is to support the Government of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan in improving environmental conditions in the Absheron Peninsula by support for a 
selected set of priority investments to address both historic pollution and on-going pollution. The 
proposed development objectives for the first project would be:  
 
•
Reduce the risks for residents living near low-level radioactive charcoal piles resulting 
from Soviet-era iodine production processes by removal of the waste and rehabilitation of the 
sites.  
 
•
Improve sanitary conditions by a phased program to strengthen the performanceof the 
solid waste management system.  
 
•
Strengthen SOCAR’s capacity and procedures for carrying out efficient and effective 
large scale environmental cleaning of oil polluted land; and  
 
•
Strengthen the strategic planning capacity of select agencies in implementingcomplex 
clean-up and environmental projects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
This project is conceptualized as the first phase in a long-term collaboration aimed at improving 
the urban environmental sector in the Absheron Peninsula.  As such, the project will focus on a 
limited number of realistic objectives which are considered achievable within the span of the 
project life while taking into consideration the long-term nature of the key underlying 
environmental improvement and rehabilitation objectives.  
 
The lending instrument is expected to be either an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) covering all 
the above objectives, or separate Specific Investment Loans financing each component. In either 
case, the Absheron Rehabilitation Program itself is expected to be implemented in  two phases. 
Phase I will focus on self-standing emergency activities, which will be carried out 
simultaneously with the preparation of longer-term activities requiring up-front strategic 
planning, capacity building and/or extensive feasibility and environmental preparatory work. 
Phase II will focus on priority investments prepared in Phase I. The first APL loan (or the first 
set of Specific Investment Loans) would only include Phase I components, successful 
completion will be the trigger for subsequent APL loans or SILs in Phase II. Over the life of the 
program, the Bank would provide a total of $300 million in financing, of which $100 million 
would be required for Phase 1 investments.  
 
The APL or SILs financing for Phase 1 would comprise the following:  
 
1) 
Decontamination of Former Iodine Production Sites and Development of Low 
Radioactive Waste Decontamination Strategy for oil production sites:  Implementing Agency - 
Ministry of Emergency Situations (MES).  The objective of this project would be to: i) 
decontaminate two former iodine productions sites in the Surakhani area including the removal 
and safe disposal of waste charcoal and other materials with elevated levels of natural radio-
nuclides; and ii) carry out a study to identify and map radioactive pollution areas which will lead 
to the development of a national radioactive waste decontamination strategy that will outline 
radiation safety regulations and subsequently a national program and financing plan for 
protection and mitigation measures.  
 
2) 
Municipal Solid Waste Management project.  Implementing Agency - Ministry of 
Economic Development (MED).  The project objective would be to restructure and improve the 
municipal solid waste management system to adequately serve the population of Greater Baku in 
solid waste collection and disposal.  A strategic planning exercise will be carried which will 
result in a strategic Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) Plan.  In parallel, this project 
will finance improvements in solid waste collection throughout the Absheron Peninsula and 
improvements in the Balakhani waste disposal site to mitigate short term solid waste problems.  
 
3) 
Development of Capacity and Procedures for Large-scale Cleaning of Oil-polluted Soil:  
Implementing Agency SOCAR.  The objective of this project would be to improve the 
environmental conditions in the Absheron Peninsular by increasing SOCAR's capacity for 
cleaning up oil polluted land by i) developing a business plan for cleaning up 10,000 hectares of 
contaminated land; and ii) purchasing soil-cleaning equipment which will substantially increase 
SOCAR's capacity to clean oil sludge and (iii) building and enhancing SOCAR’s own 
capabilities for technical remediation techniques and process management via a TA component.  
 
Page  3
4) 
Improvements in the enforcement of environmental laws and development and 
implementation of land clean-up standards and a certification program.  Implementing Agency - 
Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources. The main objective of this technical assistance 
project is to provide environmental oversight and results monitoring for the Absheron Program, 
in particular for the solid waste management, radioactive waste management, contaminated soil 
remediation, and waste water treatment. The project will also address hazardous materials 
management country-wide.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Absheron Peninsula is heavily polluted due to nearly 150 years of oil production that has left 
some 10,000 hectares of oil-contaminated land.  The Caspian Sea has also been affected due to 
poor practices which include oil and wastewater spilling and pouring out onto the ground at 
drilling sites.  Oil production on the peninsula also generated radioactive waste (from natural 
radio-nuclides).  Cleaning up already polluted land, as well as reducing on-going pollution from 
oil-production and from people themselves by conforming to good international environmental 
and safety practice are key priorities of the ESP.  
 
The main urban centers on Absheron are the Capital City of Baku on the southern coast and, on 
the northern coast, the City of Sumgayit.  During recent years a large number of people have 
migrated to the area in search of jobs and opportunities for themselves and their families.  The 
rapid urban growth and weak management in the Baku region has resulted in significant 
deterioration of the sanitation and solid waste management system.  In addition, the demand for 
land is also high; informal settlements are growing on heavily polluted land, with citizens and 
developers building homes and apartments on sites that represent a serious health risk.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Presidential Decree and approved ESP signals high level commitment and has stimulated 
action by key ministries and agencies. It focuses primarily on the Absheron Peninsula, although 
some activities are national in scope. It is a comprehensive plan involving both clean-
up/remediation and forward-looking environmental management. It addresses legacy 
contamination and on-going pollution, as well as hazardous and non-hazardous waste.  
 
All implementing organizations agreed to provide funds for the environmental and social 
assessments required for project preparation. Preliminary assessment of potential consultants for 
execution of safeguard studies confirms that most of these companies and consultants have the 
required capacity.  
 
At the same time, there are particular areas in each project which requires expertise 
involvement of either international organizations or consultancy companies which had relevant 
experience with similar projects or working with the World Bank's assignments.  
 
The program envisages further strengthening of the Borrower's capacity for the safeguards, 
relevant to the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Page  4
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
Mr Bakhtiyar Karimov (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Note: These components may be processed as one project or as 3 different projects.  
Consultations for all 3 components/projects can be done at the same time and the same venue or 
separately.  
 
The Decontamination of Former Iodine Production Sites component/project has been 
preliminarily classified as Category ‘A’.  The project will include national mapping of Naturally 
Occurring Radioactive Material (NORM) and cleanup of two sites that were receiving low level 
radioactive waste in the form of contaminated charcoal from an operation to extract iodine from 
produced water from oil fields, and safe disposal of material removed from those sites.  The 
iodine extraction operation has long been shut down, so it is essentially an “environmental 
legacy” cleanup. One site is near a residential area and the other near a lake. Prior to appraisal a 
full EA will be prepared for one already identified site (called the “residential site”), and an EA 
framework will be prepared for additional sites that may be financed, including one that has 
tentatively been identified.   The framework will reflect the fact that cleanup of any additional 
sites is also likely to be A-category and require site-specific full EA, to be reviewed by the WB.  
Two consultation rounds will be undertaken to present and discuss the project, the EA 
Framework and the site-specific EIA.  
 
The Development of Capacity and Procedures for Large-scale Cleaning of Oil-polluted Soil 
component/project has been preliminarily classified as Category ‘B’.  The project involves the 
purchase of soil cleaning equipment for remediation of oil contaminated land.  While provision 
of the equipment is not high risk per se, the Safeguard approach must address the ways in which 
it is expected that SOCAR will use the equipment.  SOCAR is preparing a Business Plan for 
cleaning up of oil-contaminated land.  The Business Plan will include an Operational Manual, 
which will include a detailed  Environmental section which (if satisfactory to the Bank) will 
serve as an EMP and satisfy the EA safeguard requirement. Key issues that should be addressed 
include the approach to prioritization of sites for clean-up, the nature and level of site 
investigations to be undertaken prior to beginning excavations (including identification of both 
surface and sub-surface hazards), disposal of residue from soil cleaning, and categorization of 
levels to which given parcels would be cleaned (i.e. for what types of subsequent usage or 
development), as well as other aspects which directly influence cleanup costs and risks.  At least 
one consultation at the National level before appraisal on Environmental Section of the 
Operations Manual, which will serve as the EMP for this component will be undertaken.  
 
The Integrated Solid Waste Management System for the Asheron Peninsula has been 
preliminarily classified as Category ‘B’.  The project will include emergency activities to reduce 
hazards at the existing waste disposal site (fire extinguishing, access control, immediate 
collection truck requirements) and preparation of a strategic plan.  As a Category ‘B’ project, one 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
consultation on the EMP will be required prior to appraisal.  
 
Currently the government is studying a proposal to install a municipal waste incinerator at 
the disposal site. Although this would not be part of the World Bank project, it was agreed that 
the proposed incinerator will be included in both the Phase I strategic plan and in the Framework 
document, because issues of disposing the incinerator solid residue and the flue gas plume 
influence on local population are all environmental issues that could be linked to the World Bank 
project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Decontamination of Former Iodine Production Sites:   The decontamination of the 
“residential site” will require physical resettlement of twelve IDP families who are living in 
abandoned buildings on the site.  Ongoing studies will determine whether there are other local 
residents who may be affected by the investment, e.g. through loss of access to resources or 
income.  A Resettlement Action Plan will need to be prepared for this site, and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared to cover any additional sites, some of which may also be 
inhabited or used.  
 
Development of Capacity and Procedures for Large-scale Cleaning of Oil-polluted Soil:   
As some people have built houses on oil-polluted land, cleaning up this land would require 
relocation of the residents.  The Government and SOCAR have agreed that no clean up activity 
will be carried out on land where people would need to be resettled.  This is consistent with 
SOCAR’s recent practice where it has focused on vacant land, not areas where people would 
need to be resttled.  
 
Integrated Solid Waste Management System for the Absheron Peninsula:  On the current 
disposal site, there are waste-pickers whose access to the current disposal site will be limited 
under the project activities. A Resource Restriction Action Plan (RRAP) to manage the negative 
impact on livelihoods due to limitations on resource access should be prepared prior to appraisal.  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2008 
 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Decontamination of Former Iodine Production Sites: Two consultation rounds will be 
undertaken to present and discuss the project and the site-specific EIA and the EA 
Framework.  Documents for disclosure before appraisal (planned for mid-March): 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Environmental Management Framework (EMF), 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
 
Oil-polluted Soil Clean Up:  At least one consultation at the National level will be carried 
out before appraisal on the Environmental Section of the Operations Manual, which will 
serve as the EMP for this component.  Documents for disclosure before appraisal: 
Environmental Section of the Operations Manual.  
 
Solid Waste:  One consultation, prior to appraisal, on the EMP.  Documents for disclosure 
before appraisal: Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Resource Restriction Action 
Plan (RRAP).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aniruddha Dasgupta 
01/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
