Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/07/2009 
Report No.:  AC4335
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P115396 
Project Name:  Public Investment Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader:  Elizabeth C. Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (35%);General transportation sector 
(20%);General education sector (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (20%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme:  Managing for development results (67%);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the quality and efficiency of preparation 
and implementation of investment projects in key priority sectors, especially 
infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project activities will support building capacity of the Government in management of 
public investments through provision of technical assistance, training, goods and works 
to: (i) improve the capacity of Government ministries and agencies in project 
management; (ii) improve technical knowledge and skills in the road sector and water 
and sanitation sector, as well as other sectors, based on demand; and (iii) improve the 
effectiveness of training and capacity development activities under the project.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
One component of the Project is the upgrading of several class rooms for use as training 
centers.    There will be no additions or expansions.  While the facility in the University 
of Architecture and Construction (UAC) requires more upgrades than in the Public 
Administration Academy (PAA), the latter is located in a historical building and so 
requires more careful work. In both cases there are (non-retaining) walls that will need to 
be taken down and new walls  built, doors, windows, lighting and flooring to be replaced, 
existing walls cosmetically repaired, and new wiring run through the wall and/or the 
floors, which will need to be raised up slightly to accommodate the wiring.  It is not 
presently known whether asbestos will be an issue.   In both locations the toilets will need 
to be renovated but no new toilets be installed.   In the case of UAC however  the toilets 
will need to be gutted, pipes replaced and ceiling leakages addressed, two staircases will 
need to be renovated and any potential hazards with regard to existing lifts addressed.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will support capacity building related to social safeguards. The Bank#s 
Operational Policy 4.12 does not apply for the Project but this Project will increase the 
understanding of OP 4.12 and other international good practice in land acquisition. The 
Project in particular seeks to focus awareness and deepen understanding of the new 
Expropriation Law, which the Bank considers as one of the best legal frameworks in the 
FSU countries regarding involuntary resettlement. This law is now under discussion in 
the Parliament. The capacity building under this Project will strengthen the capacity of 
the Government to adopt appropriate social safeguards in the context of its broader 
infrastructure development program and to conduct land acquisition and mitigate the 
impact of physical and economic displacement that may result from infrastructure 
development in a fair and transparent manner.  
Page  3
The project aims to enhance the technical and project management of key sectors in the 
preparation and implementation of development projects, and includes a training 
component to strengthen the capacity of key sectors and the Ministry of Ecology and 
Natural Resources in applying environmental and social safeguards to all stages of the 
project cycle. It involves minor rehabilitation of two training centers and their equipping 
with laboratory facilities, computers and other IT needs. Consequently, no adverse 
environmental or social impacts are anticipated and the project is categorized as a C.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
none   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
none   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
none   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
none   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Elizabeth C. Wang 
04/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
04/08/2009 
Comments:  No safeguards are triggered by the Project. 
Page  5
