Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3426 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/12/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P107774 
Project Name: Higher Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims to create, foster and sustain the conditions to improve accessibility, 
quality, and relevance of tertiary education in Azerbaijan, as reflected in  
 
-
Improved governance and increased planning capacity of the Ministry of Education and other 
government agencies to effectively guide the development of the tertiary education sector; and  
 
-
A
more favorable and transparent environment for higher education expansion and incentives 
to encourage efficiency and quality among tertiary education institutions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1. Strengthening the Capacity for Managing and Implementing Reforms in Tertiary 
Education (USD 3.5 million). This component will support institutional strengthening activities 
at system and institutional level. Within the general purpose of strengthening management 
capacity in tertiary education, the component has two specific objectives. The first objective is to 
build up the capacity of Government agencies (Ministry of Education, Ministry of Economic 
Development, National Education Commission, Education Committee of the Parliament) to 
formulate and implement policies and regulations required to apply the new Higher Education 
Page  2
Law and carry out the planned reforms. The second is to strengthen management capacities and 
improve management practices within tertiary education institutions.  
 
Component 2. Supporting improvements in the quality of tertiary education through the 
establishment of a quality assurance system. (USD 4 million). The objective of this component is 
to establish a quality assurance system that will stimulate a culture of evaluation and quality 
enhancement at the system level and at the level of each tertiary education institution.  
 
Component 3. Supporting improvements in quality and relevance of tertiary education through 
the creation and implementation of a competitive funding scheme. (10.5 USD million). 
Introducing a funding formula and competitive funding for investment aiming at quality 
improvement can go a long way towards creating a culture of competition and more effective use 
of resources. This component would set up a competitive scheme to enable tertiary institutions to 
design, develop and implement innovative plans for modernizing their study offer, strengthen 
their managerial and strategic planning capacity, establish partnerships with public and private 
institutions, and participate in international cooperation activities. The establishment and 
operation of the Quality and Relevance Improvement Fund (QRIF) will be guided by the 
principles formulated by the Evaluation/ Accreditation Agency.  
 
Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (USD 2 million). The 
Minister of Education would ensure overall leadership for the reform process, including project 
implementation. However, it is expected that other government agencies will play an 
increasingly important role as the project makes implementation progress. Thus, the Tertiary 
Education Commission (delegated from the National Education Commission), the State Student 
Admission Commission, the Ministry of Economic Development and the new Agency of 
Evaluation and Accreditation will all be implementation agencies for the project. Moreover, 
tertiary education institutions will of course turn into implementation agencies whenever they are 
successful in accessing funds from the proposed Quality and Relevance Improvement Fund 
(QRIF). During the implementation of the Secondary Education Project, the capacity of the 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) has been strengthened. It is therefore envisaged that the PCU 
will also be responsible for coordinating the implementation of the tertiary education project. But 
it will need to be strengthened with a number of appropriate specialists, considering the 
additional work load.  
 
M&E and Impact Evaluation. The challenge for the tertiary education project is to establish a 
good baseline that will provide the necessary data for the key monitoring indicators related to the 
principal areas of intervention of the project. It is critical to have rigorous monitoring tools to 
measure the success of the planned reforms and inform future tertiary education policies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N.A.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/18/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project will not support any type of civil works.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
02/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mamta Murthi 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
