Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3338
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P100667 
Project Name:  Second Highway - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
213.70
213.70 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project development objective is to reduce road transport costs and improve 
access, transit and road safety by upgrading and rehabilitating selected sections of the 
existing East-West and North-South corridors.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Upgrading of the M3 highway between Alat and Masalli, rehabilitation of 
the Kurdamir-Ujar section of the existing M2 highway Baku-Georgia highway, 
rehabilitation of the existing M4 road Baku-Shamakhi road, reconstruction of the R6 
highway Tagiyev 
–
Sahil (Baku bypass) and rehabilitation of some access roads.  
 
Component 2: Provision of technical assistance, training and goods to support 
strengthening MOT and ARS and carrying out project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
See Project Description.   
 
Page  2
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Alat-Astara corridor is identified as the most sensitive area to the proposed 
additional financing. The area is very diverse ranging from less populated dry semi desert 
in the north to more densely populated areas in the southern lowlands(including swampy 
areas)and foothills of the Talysh Mountains. There are many rivers, canals, and wetland 
systems in the corridor as well as some lakes and mineral springs. Numerous protected 
areas and other significant natural sites of both national and international importance are 
found in the study corridor including cultural heritage sites. Biodiversity is high and fish 
resources are abundant. The southern area is largely agricultural.  
 
The area of most sensitivity is the construction of the new road section between 
Shorsulu and Masalli, which will be financed under the additional financing. Three 
alternative alignments (direct and railway alignments, and expansion of the existing road) 
were compared under the AH2P, and the ’railway’ alignment was selected as least 
environmentally sensitive. The 'railway alignment' is 55 km long and includes an 11 km 
section between Mugan Channel and Uzuntapa that runs in  parallel and approximately 2 
to 3 km to the northwest of the railway line and that also routes through the Akhchala 
wetland.  
 
The Madmudchala and Akhchala wetlands provide natural habitats for numerous rare 
and endangered wildlife species and have significance as a buffer zone for the adjoining 
wetlands that form part of the Gizilagach State Reserve, an official Ramsar site located 3 
to 5 km from this area. The water balance in the Akhchala wetland is unstable and under 
constant threat of drying out. Controlled hunting is permitted here and there is pressure 
from poaching and fishing.  
 
Page  3
The additional financing will upgrade the remaining 112 km of the M3 highway 
between Alat and Masalli, which will result in the acquisition of some 600 ha of land.  
The southern part of the road section is heavily populated agricultural lands and physical 
relocation of households will be necessary.  The new alignment will cross over existing 
roads at several points, where some roadside kiosks and commercial structures need to be 
demolished and relocated.  
 
The rehabilitation of R6 will be carried out within the existing ROW and will not 
require acquisition of private land.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Routes through these wetland areas have significant potential for adverse environmental 
impacts including large scale sedimentation due to construction on unstable ground, 
habitat fragmentation and the creation of barriers for wildlife movement, disruption of 
breeding colonies for rare and endangered species and to the hydrology in the area. 
Natural wetlands and areas with saline soils also raise concerns for construction: saline 
soils are prone to collapse under load or vibration and may lead to the corrosion of steel 
reinforcements and also require high volumes of construction materials.  
 
The project may entail temporary loss of access during physical works, and occupation 
of open spaces to store construction material. A few settlements exist along R6 and 
roadside shops may experience loss of income during road construction.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EA carried out under the existing AH2P has compared alternative alignments and 
such alignments, including ’railway alignment’ over the environmentally sensitive area, 
are selected that combines the least environmental impacts with, on balance, the greatest 
potential for stimulating economic development in the region.  
 
Social impact, including the potential size of land acquisition and physical relocation as 
well as the number of roadside structures that need to be demolished, has also been 
compared for alternative alignments, and those alignments that will require least land 
acquisition was selected.  
 
The R6 rehabilitation will be carried out within the existing ROW. Section-specific 
EMP will be prepared by the Borrower.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Regional Environmental Review (RER) was carried out during the preparation of AH2P 
which covers the entire M3 road sections between Alat and Masalli. The RER describes 
the existing environment, discusses and compares project alternatives, and identifies risks 
and issues to be addressed during project implementation. An Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) has also been developed that outlines the procedures for 
Page  4
the environmental screening, management, consultation and disclosure related to the 
proposed Category A and B sub-projects. The EMF is compatible with the national Law 
on Environmental Protection and the guidelines contained in
 Azerbaijan’s EIA 
Handbook, which while not legally binding contains a framework for EIA that is 
consistent with international environmental assessment practices.  
 
In accordance with the EMF, the site specific Environmental Assessment and 
Environment Management Plan have been developed for the entire M3 section, including 
the sections to be financed under the additional financing, in accordance with national 
requirements and the Banks safeguard procedures. The EMP for R6 will be developed.  
 
Within the ARS, the Ecology and Safety Sector (ESS) will continue to oversee the 
implementation of the EMF and related environmental management plans as under the 
AH2P. Construction contractors will be responsible for implementing the EMP. The 
capacity of the ESS has been considerably strengthened and on the job training has been 
provided under the AH2P.  Nonetheless, support will continue to be provided under the 
additional financing for continuous capacity development.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed when the AH2P was 
prepared, and the site specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for the sections of the 
road to be financed under the additional financing are under development as per policies 
and procedures set out under the RPF. The RAPs will detail entitlement packages for 
different categories of project impact, as well as implementation procedure and expected 
cost.  
 
The ARS has gained some experience to manage involuntary resettlement as per Bank 
safeguard policies during the implementation of the Highway project and on-the-job 
training provide under the AH2P. Also, the ARS has significantly increased the number 
of staff in and provided equipment to the Land Acquisition Department (LAD). 
Nonetheless, continuous support will be provided for satisfactory implementation of 
resettlement.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation of the RER, EMF and RPF has been held during the preparation of 
the AH2P. The site specific EA and EMP for the section of M3 to be constructed under 
the additional financing has been consulted in July – August 2007, which were attended 
by representatives of local NGOs, local governments, municipalities and villages.  The 
minutes of the consultation meeting has been attached to the EIA report.  It is expected 
that the final EA report be ready and consultation meeting be carried out in the next few 
months.  The environmental analysis will also be carried out for Tagiyev Sahil road as 
per EMF, and the Environmental Monitoring Plan will be developed.  
 
The site specific RAPs will be consulted nationally at the website of the ARS and 
locally with the participation of local residents, local governments and any interested 
parties.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/18/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/26/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/21/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
01/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
01/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
01/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/28/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
01/28/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
