Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3279 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P109961 
Project Name: Second National Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Andreas Rohde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (60%);Sewerage (40%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
160.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
60.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to improve the availability, quality, reliability, and sustainability 
of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in 21 of Azerbaijan’s regional centers (rayons).  
This objective will be achieved through rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and 
sanitation infrastructure in the 21 rayons outside the Greater Baku Area, including five in 
Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.  Sustainable management of these investments to improve 
service delivery is expected to be leveraged through a comprehensive Institutional 
Modernization Component (IMC).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A:  Rayon Investment Component  
 
This component would finance the rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and 
sewerage systems in at least 21 rayons, as well as water, wastewater and septic sludge treatment 
facilities in these rayons.  Rayons to be covered under the project include; Imishli, Kurdamir, 
Siyazan, Aghsu, Ismayili, Udjar, Zardab, Lenkoran, Masalli, Astara, Jalilabad, Yardimli, Lerik, 
Davachi, Dashkesan, and Gedabey, and Sadarak, Kangarli, Shahbuz, Djulfa, Ordubad in 
Page  2
Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.  The project would cover the rayon centers and the villages 
located in close proximity of the urban centers or along the transmission mains supplying the 
centers.  The five rayons of Sadarak, Kangarli, Shahbuz, Djulfa and Ordubad belong to the 
Autonomous Republic of Nakhchivan, and WSS services in them are managed by the State 
Amelioration and Water Management Agency of Nakhchivan.  Given the Government’s 
approach to cover WSS improvements in all of Azerbaijan’s rayons, all rayons for which 
financing had not been previously identified were selected.  
 
Component B: Institutional Modernization Component  
 
This component would support development and implementation of activities needed for 
capacity building and modernization of Azersu and its subsidiary companies and to SAWMA, to 
improve the efficiency and sustainability of WSS services.  It would specifically include training 
in management, financial management, customer service, procurement, preventive maintenance 
and other subjects pertinent to effective and efficient management of the utilities, as well as 
provide continued support to activities such as development of performance monitoring, 
preventive maintenance and leak detection and repair.  It would also provide support for 
preparatory work towards further investments in Greater Baku WSS, including a study on safe 
disposal of wastewater for Greater Baku, and design of a sea outfall for the main Hovsan 
Wastewater Treatment Plant effluent and modernization of the Plant itself.  
 
Component C: Project Implementation and Management  
 
This component will support project implementation by financing project management 
activities.  It will also finance costs of design and technical support for construction management 
including contract supervision for the investments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The location of some project rayons such as Ismayili, in the vicinity of the Shah Dag National 
Park, lenkoran and Astara in the vicinity of Hirkan national Park and Hirkan State Sanctuary, 
Yardimli and Lerik in the vicinity of Zuvand State Sanctuary, Gedabey, in the vicinity of 
Gizilcha State Sancuary, and Shahbuz close to Shahbuz State Sancuary, have been identified as 
requiring special attention under the Environmental Management Plan for the project.  
 
The location of several rayons under the project within the catchment areas of some 
international waterways including: (i) the Kura River, which flows to the Caspian Sea through 
Azerbaijan from Turkey and Georgia; (ii) the Araks River which flows from Turkey and 
Armenia, and along Azerbaijan’s border with Iran, joining the Kura River near the town of 
Sabirabad in Azerbaijan; and (iii) the Samur River, which flows along Azerbaijan’s border with 
Russia to the Caspian Sea, triggers the Bank’s International Waterways Operational Policy.  
Azerbaijan is however located at the downstream end of the above rivers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
a) 
Environmental Assessment:  Because details of site selection and technology to be used 
will be determined during project implementation, a Environmental Impact Assessment 
Framework (EIAF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) are under preparation. The 
EIAF and EMP will detail the procedure, form and contents for specific EAs to be prepared and 
approved for investments in each Rayon.  These will be outlined in the EIAF and EMP, as are 
Page  3
the applicable standards and monitoring indicators and procedures. Implementation of activities 
carried out under the project will conform to relevant laws in Azerbaijan and sound 
environmental and construction management principles.  The short-term negative environmental 
impacts, which are mostly expected to occur during construction or rehabilitation works will be 
minimized by proper planning and application of preventive measures, and will be mitigated by 
restorative actions after the civil works are completed.  
 
Overall, mitigation of any environmental effects will be the responsibility of the main Project 
Implementing Units for the project, (Azersu’s International Relations and Development 
Department and SAWMA).  In addition, it will be the responsibility of the contractors to ensure 
that mitigation is carried out successfully during construction/renovation works as it is required.  
The specific mitigation measures will be implemented by the contractors under the supervision 
of the construction management company. The provisions described in this EMP will be 
incorporated in the contracts with construction companies selected to perform the works.  The 
cost of mitigation measures will be included in the cost of the contracts and will be borne by 
contractors, who will make the necessary provisions for implementation of mitigation measures 
as part of their contractual obligations.  
 
The contractors shall take also all necessary precautions for the types of civil works involved, 
especially in residential areas and those with high circulation of persons and vehicles. All 
construction and rehabilitation works should be carried out with keeping the safety equipment 
rules, and health and safety regulations.  Safety measures will be adopted to protect the personnel 
involved in the works. Public access to construction sites will be properly restricted. 
Internationally accepted practices and active regulations should be assisted regarding restoration 
of construction, health and safety.  
 
The construction contract documents will incorporate all requirements to minimize disturbance 
from construction activities, which will be monitored by the Supervision Engineer and the PIU 
staff to ensure compliance and implementation of the required provisions by the contractors.  
 
b) 
Resettlement Policy Framework:  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is being 
prepared for this project.  The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements, 
schedules and funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may occur in the project rayons 
as the result of the project.  The RPF will also provide guidelines to stakeholder participating in 
the mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in order to ensure that the social and 
economic well being of project affected persons (PAP)s will not be worsened as a result of the 
project.  
 
One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines will be to restore the income earning capacity 
of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and shepherds.  The 
aim will be to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the PAPs prior to project 
operations.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hermine De Soto (ECSSD) 
Page  4
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project main component will finance the rehabilitation and reconstruction of water 
supply and sewerage systems in at least 21 rayons, as well as water, wastewater and septic sludge 
treatment facilities in these rayons.  As in the first project, environmental category “A” is 
assigned since the project will finance wastewater treatment plants of considerable size with 
potential environmental impact.  Site selection and technology to be used will be determined 
during project implementation.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Framework (EIAF) 
prepared for the first project will be updated to reflect the new rayons and will be disclosed prior 
to appraisal.   The EIAF will have mechanisms to screen sub-project EA category and the 
appropriate instruments for assessment, mitigation and monitoring.  No sub-project will be 
identified for this project prior to implementation.  However, as part of due diligence, an 
EA/EMP prepared for one or more sub-projects identified for financing under NWSSP I will be 
reviewed by the Bank after the public disclosure of the final EIAF in the Infoshop and in 
country, but before appraisal of NWSSP II.  
 
Once operational, most of the impacts of the Project will be positive.  The environmental 
assessment indicates that the implementation of the project will have long-term positive 
environmental impacts in terms of reducing pollution of natural resources, generation of 
significant economical, social and public health benefits, and will enable the government to 
enforce existing environmental regulations and standards.  Specific impacts are outlined below:  
 
Potential Positive Impacts  
 
a) Improved WSS Services:  Repair and improvement of WSS systems, especially, 
distribution system, while decreasing fear of pollution, will provide high quality potable water to 
a
larger population.  Improved WSS is also expected to result in reduced operation and 
maintenance (O&M) costs to the utilities and higher efficiency through decreased water losses 
and pumping costs.  
 
b) Improvement of public health and environmental quality: The provision of wastewater 
collection and treatment facilities will have a strong long term positive effect on the overall 
environment and on public health conditions. There will be an improvement in the water quality 
in the streams and rivers that flow throughout the project area.  Another major benefit expected 
from the project is the protection of groundwater resources from contamination by untreated 
sewage, and the elimination of direct sewage discharge to the Caspian Sea from the Kura and 
Araks Rivers.  This will decrease negative impacts the water quality has on downstream water 
users.  
 
c) Improvement of natural habitats:  The project will not cause any direct threat to natural 
habitats in the project area as the project components are far away from them. Indeed, through 
improvements in water quality as a result of the project, the ecological conditions of the 
respective surface water bodies in some rayons are expected to improve and to assist in the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
restoration of the degraded water quality of wetlands.  These improvements are expected to 
contribute positively to the conservation of natural habitats.  
 
d) Re-use of treated wastewaters and sludge:  The design of the treatment plants under the 
project will take into consideration the use of their by-products (generated sludge, and treated 
effluent) with the aim of protecting the environment and the scarce water resources. This will 
generate significant economic, social and health benefits and will enable the Government to 
enforce the laws that prohibit discharging raw wastewater in the environment.  
 
Potential Negative Impacts  
 
a) Negative environmental impacts during the construction phase may entail temporary loss 
of access during physical works, however they are only temporary.  Typical impacts include:  
 
•
Dust raised from the roads in the construction sites and from material carrying trucks  
 
•
Waste water from construction/renovation sites  
 
•
Disposal of solid wastes  
 
•
Use of materials that may damage health (i.e. heavy-metal (lead) containingpaints, 
asbestos-cement tiles, pipes, copper pipes, inflammable and toxic materials etc.)  
 
•
Noise generated by the construction machinery  
 
•
Traffic disruption and disturbance to the residents of the area.  Impacts associated with 
increased traffic concern issues such as public safety, congestion of roads and disruption of 
regular traffic.  
 
•
Contamination/pollution of resource by construction, human wastes, including fuel & oil, 
hazardous wastes, wastewater, etc Soils and Water Resources  
 
•
Business activity might suffer during construction from loss of pedestrian and vehicular 
access.  Interference with water and electrical power supplies might occur in some urban areas, 
inconveniencing the public.  
 
•
Loss of visual amenities as construction materials are stockpiled and treesand natural 
vegetation cut down.  
 
Documents for disclosure before appraisal:  Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAF), and 
RessetlementPolicy Framework (RPF)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Some of the project investments may fall within Protected Areas or otherwise affect them 
(e.g. through downstream impacts).  This will be covered in the EIAF and EMP and in the 
individual EAs/EMPs for the relevant investments.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Under Operational Policy (OP) 4.12, the project might involve land acquisition of either 
fallow land, used agricultural land, and/or pasture areas used for sheep and cattle for specific 
infrastructure investments, such as wastewater treatment plants and water and sewage 
investments mainly outside the urban centers, if any, such as pumping stations that might involve 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the acquisition of land. As the exact location, land type and size will not be determined until 
implementation, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for the first project will be 
updated to reflect the new rayons and will be disclosed prior to appraisal.  
 
The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements, schedules and funding 
mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may occur in the project rayons as the result of the 
project.  The RPF will also provide guidelines to stakeholder participating in the mitigation of 
adverse social impacts of the project, in order to ensure that the social and economic well being 
of project affected persons (PAP)s will not be worsened as a result of the project.  
 
One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines will be to restore the income earning 
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and 
shepherds.  The aim will be to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the PAPs prior 
to project operations.  No resettlement of persons is anticipated, and the project does not foresee 
any demolitions of commercial or private buildings.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The safeguards policy OP 4.47 (safety of dams) is triggered, even though the project will not 
finance the construction or rehabilitation of any dams or other large control structures. However, 
water supply facilities included in the project might be fed by such structures, rehabilitation 
works might include intake structures situated in or near a dam.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The Project triggers the World Bank’s Operational Policy on International Waters OP 7.50 
(the Operational Policy) and falls within the exception to the notification requirement under 
Paragraph (7a) of the Operational Policy.  The safeguards policy OP 7.50 (International 
Waterways) is triggered:  Several of the rayons under the Project are dependant on canals linked 
to the Kura River or its tributaries for their drinking water supply. The works to be carried out 
under the project are not expected to have adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of water to 
the riparians, and will not be affected by the other riparians water use. The team has received 
clearance from the Regional Vice President, dated November 27, 2007, for application of the 
exception to the external notification requirement.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/28/2008 
 
Page  7
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental category “A” requires at least 2 public consultations before appraisal.  The 
first consultation is already ongoing with the TORs for the EIAF being disclosed on 
December 7, 2007 on the webpage of Azersu.  This disclosure was announced in a local 
newspaper the same day.  People are invited to submit written comments to the TOR by 
December 14, 2007.  Based on these comments Azersu plans to publish the draft EIAF on 
December 17, 2007 and to hold a national level consultation meeting on December 25, 2007.  
For the sub-projects, additional consultation/s will be done depending on the EA category as 
per OP/BP4.01.  
 
Confirmation that Task Team has been referred to ECA Safeguard procedures and website 
for official information on processing and disclosure requirements - Yes - full information 
can be found on the safeguard website.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Rohde 
11/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/11/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/25/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
