Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC3013
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P083108 
Project Name:  RAIL TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION 
Task Team Leader:  Gerald Paul Ollivier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (90%);Other domestic and international trade (10%) 
Theme:  Corporate governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
450.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
223.80
223.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project objective is to improve railway services in Azerbaijan, as well as the 
competitiveness, financial sustainability, operating and cost efficiency, and capacity of 
ADDY in particular along the transport corridor toward Georgia (east-west corridor).   
 
The project will support the most time sensitive part of the  Goverment Program for the 
Modernization of the Railways.  In particular it will focus on: (i) maintaining and 
growing the railway business by focusing on providing the profitable freight market 
segment with proper service, infrastructure and locomotive capacity; (ii) transforming the 
Azeri Railways into a financially self-sustainable operation in freight transportation, 
covering all its costs (including infrastructure maintenance and traction) from revenues, 
while improving its operational efficiency; and (iii) improving the transparency of the 
Railway sector by introducing International Financial Reporting Standards and profit 
centers (passenger/freight) and by separating on an accounting basis passenger service 
that could be self-sustained from others.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project total cost is estimated to be US$674 million, with IBRD lending of US$450 
million.  It will include renewal of critical assets (track, new locomotives, power supply), 
implementation of IFRS accounting system, studies to support ADDY restructuring and 
equipment to improve oil spill prevention and preparedness. The components are shown 
below.  
 
Component 1: (total cost with contingencies US$373 million).  The Rehabilitation of 
East-West Main Line component would include track, signaling and power supply 
rehabilitation along the east-west corridor. It would rehabilitate about 240 km of mainline 
track in poor condition. The investment would remove the most critical speed restrictions 
and allow ADDY to handle existing and potential traffic at up to 100 km/hour for 
passenger trains and 80 km/hour for freight trains without significant track delays on 
those 240 km. It would finance the conversion of the power supply on the East-West 
corridor to the more energy efficient 25 kV alternating current system, including new 
power stations, catenary and the related upgrade in signaling equipment. This component 
includes the technical services required to design and supervise the above investments.  
 
Component 2: (total cost with contingencies US$283 million).  The New Mainline 
Locomotives component would finance about 50 new mainline electric locomotives to 
operate on the east-west corridor.  
 
Component 3: (total cost with contingencies US$14 million).  The Modernization 
component would include support for the full implementation of IFRS accounting, 
provision of Advisory services to ADDY to implement its modernization program and 
provision of equipment and technical support to ADDY to improve its oil spill prevention 
and response capacity.  
 
Component 4: (total cost without contingencies US$2 million).  The Project 
Implementation Component would provide training and consultant services to the PIU for 
procurement, financial management, financial audit, as well as equipment required for 
project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project addresses the Azerbaijan side of an Azerbaijan-Georgian transport corridor, 
which is the most heavily used corridor and part of the larger corridor from Baku to 
Georgian ports that carries in particular transit oil traffic.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECAVP) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The rehabilitation of rail track and conversion to 25 kV power supply system are the 
primary investments of the project that is covered by the EMP; this will allow more 
efficient transport of goods such as crude oil and oil products. Impacts are expected to be 
temporary and related to the direct rehabilitation of these rails and set up of potential new 
power substation, replacement of sleepers, reballasting replacement of tracks, including: 
noise in residential areas; rehabilitation of the track; dust and exhaust emissions from 
equipment; vibration; and waste management, possibly including hazardous wastes, for 
example when replacing old transformers. The metal wastes and oil stained wooden bars 
from rail and sleeper replacement will be collected into special containers and transported 
to a disposal site.  
 
The new power supply and locomotives will be significantly more energy efficient, and 
track upgrades will significantly reduce risks of derailments related to track condition.  
 
No land acquisition through expropriation is anticipated, nor is loss of access to income 
expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
(i) 
Impact on air quality: dust and exhaust emissions from operation of construction 
equipment will be mitigated by using water spraying, ensuring proper ventilation of 
internal areas and regular checkup of engines.  
 
(ii) 
Impact on water: contamination of water by discharge of untreated waste waters 
during the construction phase will be mitigated by mechanical treatment and/or 
disinfection of water prior to discharge into water reservoirs.  
 
(iii) 
Impact on land: impact caused by excavation during construction / rail and 
sleepers  replacement and by improper disposal of wastes, metal garbage and oil stained 
wooden bars will be mitigated by taking/disposing of excavated materials from/at 
approved sites; collection, transportation in covered  containers and proper disposal of 
wastes during and upon completion of construction phase.  
 
(iv) 
Impact of noise and vibration in residential areas, caused by operation of the 
construction equipment will be mitigated by keeping noise level below maximum 
permissible level for each type of equipment.  
 
Azerbaijan State Railways (ADDY) has been a member of the Railway Organization for 
CIS Countries since 1992. This organization provides guidance to its member countries 
on environmental matters, spill management and procedures for the transport of 
hazardous materials.  
 
The Metrology, Standardization, Certification and Ecology Department of the Technical 
and Production Service (TPSD) in ADDY is responsible for environmental management 
including the development and implementation of this EMP, and is based in Baku.  TPSD 
has 3 staff in the central office that has specific responsibility for environmental 
management.  Environmental issues are managed on a day to day basis through local 
departments each having a staff member assigned to environmental matters.  
 
The local departments in ADDY are responsible for the preparation of Ecological 
Passports and action plans for each section of rail line in their district.  These passports 
are issued by the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR) and include limits 
for pollution. They are renewed every 3 years following MENR audit. In order to ensure 
overall compliance with the passport conditions, the TPSD carries out regular inspections 
of ADDY operations.  
 
The capacity of ADDY is assessed to be relatively good in relationship with the type of 
works foreseen. Staff are cognizant of good practices and their responsibilities for 
environmental management, emergency response and spill management as well as 
transportation of dangerous goods and wastes.  
 
The project will provide capacity building (training, procedures, equipment) related to 
the prevention and response capacity for rail related oil spills that may result from 
Page  5
derailment or regular operations. Training and operational budget required for ADDY to 
carry out its monitoring functions for this EMP are included in the project.  
 
The TPSD will have primary responsibility for the implementation of the EMP. The 
TPSD will ensure inclusion of environmental provisions into construction / rehabilitation 
and locomotive purchase contracts, and will supervise operation of contractor to ensure 
compliance with the environmental provision of the contracts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Azerbaijan State Railways (ADDY), potential users / passengers of the east-west 
transport corridor, local communities residing along the corridor (likely to be affected by 
the project), local executive authorities and baladiyyas (municipalities) are the key 
stakeholders. The preparation of the Environmental Management Plan has initiated a 
process of consultations with beneficiaries and stakeholders. When the draft EMP was 
available for disclosure, ADDY carried out public consultations in all rayons along the 
corridor, with participation of representatives of local communities, municipalities, local 
governments, NGOs. During the consultations safeguard issues, measures envisaged by 
the EMP to mitigate potential impacts were discussed, and all issues raised by the 
audience were addressed by ADDY. The EMP has been placed at the Aarhus Convention 
Centre of the Ministry of Ecology and in executive authorities' offices along the route of 
the rail corridor. Public has been informed through the local newspapers on availability of 
the EMP in English and Azeri for review.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/08/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  6
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerald Paul Ollivier 
11/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
11/16/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
11/21/2007 
Comments:   
