Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3447 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P073886 
Project Name: Social Investment Program II - Empowerment and Livelihood Project 
Task Team Leader: Meena M. Munshi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (25%);Other social services (25%);Agro-
industry (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (15%);Micro- and SME 
finance (15%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural non-farm income generation 
(P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Local 
Communities 
10.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to empower and improve the well-being and livelihoods of 
the poorest of the rural poor in Bangladesh, who are currently outside the reach of most 
development interventions, by:  (i) developing sustainable, participatory rural community 
organizations and village level institutions to play an active role in resolving development issues 
important to them and interfacing effectively with local governments and private sector; (ii) 
enhancing skills and capacities of the rural people, especially vulnerable women and youth, to 
help them link to employment opportunities and sustainable income generating activities; (iii) 
financing demand driven subprojects that are prioritized, implemented and managed directly by 
project beneficiaries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed SIPP II would be implemented over a five-year period and would include the 
following components:  
 
Component 1: Community and Livelihood Development.  This component would:  (i) empower 
and build institutional capacity among SIPP beneficiaries through formation and strengthening of 
self-reliant, self-managed and sustainable village-level organizations and their federations; (ii) 
strengthen the demand side of governance by building awareness and capacity of communities to 
engage with local institutions and authorities in planning processes and to hold elected 
authorities and other service providers accountable for discharge of their responsibilities (iii) 
mobilize the rural poor into groups, build their capacity to plan and implement subprojects; 
provide seed funds to the poorest to build confidence and skills; and provide special assistance to 
the disabled and vulnerable; (iv) reduce the non-income dimensions of poverty and improve 
well-being through small-scale social and economic infrastructure and services which are 
prioritized, implemented and managed by beneficiaries; and (iv) enhance livelihoods of the poor 
and vulnerable by financing productive  investments and skills development on a matching grant 
basis.  As under SIPP, partner organizations (POs) would be utilized for social mobilization and 
initial capacity building activities, under time-bound and performance-based agreements.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening the District and National Levels.  This component 
would:(i) improve the capacity of local and national agencies, NGOs and SDF staff at national, 
district and field levels to respond to the demands of the rural poor; and (ii) support the 
development of institutional linkages for enhanced sustainability of the livelihoods of the poor, 
including promotion of savings and development of microfinance linkages.  
 
Component 3: Livelihood Innovations Fund: This component would support a competitive 
‘challenge fund’ to promote innovation and test innovative co-production and marketing models 
between organizations and agencies across the private, public and ‘people’ sectors (i.e., 
community-driven organizations).  It would includeboth livelihood development in the rural 
space and innovative urban-rural linkages (for example, partnership arrangements with urban 
service sector industries for skills development and job creation for rural youth, etc).  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring.  This component would support overall 
project coordination, implementation, monitoring and learning at the national, district and village 
levels. SDF will continue to be the lead implementing agency, as under the current SIPP 
operation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
GOB is interested in preparing a much larger scale up of the program, to reach the hard core 
rural poor and disadvantaged groups throughout the country.  In terms of coverage, SIPP-II 
would roughly cover about 1500-2000 villages, about 500,000 to 600,000 households – directly 
benefiting about 1.5 to 2.0 million people. Indirect benefits would be much more as the 
infrastructure and institutional activities would benefit larger numbers of population 
(approximately about 4 to 5 million population).  These numbers are only indicative at this stage 
and would be further discussed and finalized during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
Implementation arrangements for the proposed Project would remain the same as those of the 
ongoing project, which have been performing well.  Overall, the project management would 
continue to be the responsibility of the existing implementation agency, SDF.  The proposed 
credit has the advantage of being able to benefit from the institutional capacity developed under 
the original project which stressed awareness of safeguard policies and application of an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for subprojects financed under the 
project, as described in the approved Operational Manual (OM). No social or environmental 
safeguards issues have been identified during implementation of the original project.  
 
Environmental: The proposed activities do not trigger any new safeguard policies or raise the 
proj
ect’s environmental category (B).  The project would fund community subprojects similar in 
scale and scope to those implemented under the original project.  No subprojects are approved or 
funds transferred until the environmental viability of the investments is determined, and 
subproject agreements between SDF and the community organizations contain environmental 
compliance clauses as detailed in the OM.  Community subprojects will continue to be subject to 
the screening and impact assessment criteria as detailed therein. Further to that, the 
implementing agency is currently preparing an HR Development Strategy which includes Skills 
Gap Analysis and Capacity Building Plan. It is anticipated that this strategy would include plans 
to augment capacity to handle the environmental aspects of the project, either through 
recruitment of a staff member or retention of consultants.  
 
Social: While the tribal population is insignificant in the districts where the current project is 
operating, a Tribal Development Plan was nonetheless prepared for the first SIPP operation.  It 
will be reviewed and, if necessary, modified to reflect the increased geographic scope of the new 
SIPP-II operation, and the project Operational Manual would also be updated as necessary.  
 
Other social impacts are expected to be positive, with project activities gradually leading to 
improved quality of life of the poor and vulnerable groups through enhancing their access to 
social and economic opportunities. In the villages already participating under the ongoing 
project, achievements to date will be capitalized on by further enhancing functioning and 
sustainability of community groups, and broadening their inclusion to ensure participation of 
young people and the poorest of the poor.  In the new villages, initial social mobilization 
activities will also seek to identify and include the poorest, introducing the principles and 
benefits of collective action for both social and economic empowerment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDN) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment. Given that the project is demand-driven, 
the team has agreed that any requests from communities that fall beyond the Category B criteria 
will be treated separately and given their own environment assessment per World Bank 
guidelines.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The implementation districts have not yet been finalised, but, as in the original project, which 
had a minimal tribal population, it was recognised that they were among the poorest and so a 
Tribal devt plan was prepared.  As for most non-Chittagong tribal populations in Bangladesh, the 
groups are scattered and relatively assimilated with the general population. This progam will 
update and follow the Tribal Development Plan, ensuring compliance with OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The studies are likely to be launched in May 2008 and are expected to be completed by July 
2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meena M. Munshi 
02/13/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
04/09/2008 
Comments:  approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
