Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3833 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P090807 
Project Name: Vocational Training 
Task Team Leader: Venkatesh Sundararaman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 16, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Improving labor markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to develop an efficient technical and 
vocational training delivery system that will help improve employment outcomes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Since the development of a high quality TVET subsector is a long-term agenda, the proposed 
Bank project supports only the first phase of such a development.  The project aims to support 
training in a few key sectors, through a select number of institutions which will be chosen in a 
competitive manner and will comprise of three components as follows:  
 
Component 1: Improved Quality and Relevance of Training (Est. US$ 42 million)  
 
This component focuses on improving the quality and relevance of training imparted across 
various levels of institutions including SSC and HSC (Vocational) and diploma level institutions 
on a select number of trades/sectors to be finalized during preparation. Both public and private 
sector institutions will be supported through competitive grants to enable them to deliver high 
quality and demand relevant training.  Detailed criteria for selection of institutes will be 
developed during preparation, but are likely to include , inter alia: (a) representation of the 
Page  2
private sector/industry on institutional management committees; (b) administrative and financial 
autonomy so that institutes will have the ability and authority to add/abolish courses based on 
demand and generate, retain, and re-invest revenues from the sale of services; and engage 
contract faculty, and have financial authority to award contracts; and (c) the institutions should 
be affiliated with BTEB (or any other internationally recognized accreditation agency).  
 
This component will also help improve the short term training provided by many institutions to 
students and workers aimed at increasing their productivity in specific trades/sectors. This is also 
of considerable importance in terms of preparing potential employees for employment abroad. 
To increase the demand relevance and generate competition among providers, vouchers will be 
provided to trainees to attend training centers of their choice in institutions affiliated to BTEB or 
other internationally recognized accreditation agencies. Grants may be provided for improving 
the teaching learning processes, equipment and minor repairs of existing facilities. Details are 
expected to be worked out during preparation.  
 
Component 2: Project Management and Institutional Capacity Building (Est. 1.5 million)  
 
This component will focus on: (a) establishing a sound structure for project management and 
implementation and providing it with appropriate technical assistance, staffing and logistical 
support; and (b) build capacity for policy development, planning and delivery of improved 
quality vocational training.  It is expected that the Ministry of Education (MoE) will provide 
overall guidance and policy support in respect of the proposed project. The overall responsibility 
for the proposed project implementation would lie with the Department of Technical Education 
(DTE), as the implementing agency. Project Management would be augmented by involving 
DTE and BTEB line units. Implementation arrangements will be discussed and agreed during the 
preparation.  
 
Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation and Dissemination of Information (Est 1.5 million)  
 
The Project will provide for an effective monitoring and evaluation system to: (a) coordinate 
and monitor the use of resources; (b) assess implementation progress of various Project elements 
as measured by intermediate output indicators; and (c) evaluate the impact of project outcome 
indicators through impact assessments and thematic studies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented nationwide in selected public and private institutes at 
Secondary and Higher Secondary (Vocational) and diploma level (with emphasis on 
geographical equity). Participation in the project is optional and depends on the individual 
institutions, which would be willing to improve quality and relevance of training. The 
institutions fulfilling eligibility criteria to be defined in project operation manual on a 
competitive financing will only be considered for the project. The exact location of the 
institutions will be known only during the implementation of the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The responsible ministry has experience in implementing World Bank project and familiar with 
safeguard requirement.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment will be carried out prior to pre-appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/20/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
simple Environmental Management Framework will be prepared in January 2009 to 
describe the process of environmental screening for any small scale physical up-gradation.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Venkatesh Sundararaman 
11/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/26/2008 
Comments:  ISDS is okay at this early stage. 
 
Regards,  
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
12/07/2008 
Comments:  approved 
