Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3576 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/15/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P106216 
Project Name: Higher Education Quality Improvement 
Task Team Leader: Benoit Millot 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The key project development objectives are to: (i) improve the quality of the teaching and 
research environment in higher education institutions, and (ii) strengthen the institutional 
capacity of the higher education sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project development objective to strengthen higher education and research in Bangladesh 
would be achieved through two major components: (i) an innovation fund mechanism open to 
both public and private universities (Component 1); and (ii) capacity building of UGC and 
universities (Component 2).  
 
Component 1 
–
Promoting Academic Innovation  
 
The objective of this component is to restore the quality of teaching, learning and research.  The 
mechanism selected to reach this objective is the provision of additional resources through an 
Academic Innovation Fund (AIF) accessible to all public and private universities on a 
competitive basis. It would provide incentives to launch initiatives aimed at improving their 
performance.  It would instill emulation and accountability, and help to infuse dynamism in the 
Page  2
academic community, without threatening its members. The AIF will introduce the concept that 
resources follow innovation and performance.  It will be accessible to university departments, 
centers and institutes fulfilling specific eligibility criteria, selection criteria, proposal submission 
procedures, which will be carefully spelled out in a detailed Operations Manual. The possible use 
of the fund will be:  
 
-
Small infrastructure renovation/refurbishing  
 
-
Library (books, journals)  
 
-
Teaching materials (lab equipment etc.)  
 
-
On-line facilities (including access to digital libraries)  
 
-
Teachers’ development (training/seminars/conferences)  
 
-
Curriculum development/ modernization of curriculum  
 
-
Research collaboration with foreign universities  
 
-
Collaboration with industries  
 
-
Research projects (including publications)  
 
-
Development of career centers (for facilitation of internship, job placement)  
 
-
Quality enhancement activities (quality enhancement cell, self-study, etc.)  
 
-
Scholarships and fellowships  
 
-
Visiting foreign faculty  
 
The fund can not be used for construction of new buildings. Renovation or rehabilitation of 
limited number of buildings will be eligible under AIF.  
 
Component 2 – Building Institutional Capacity  
 
The objective of this component is to reinforce the management capacity of the sector, both at 
the level of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) and at the central level (UGC). This component 
is closely linked to the AIF, and is expected both to buttress the former and to benefit all  public 
universities as well as private ones, will include the following sub-components: (i) Institutional 
Block Grants to strengthening institutional planning and management in public universities; (ii) 
Sector Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation to endow the UGC with the human and information 
resources to steer the higher education sector; (iii) Digital Library  to allow public and private 
HEIs to access international academic literature; (iv) Mobilization and Training  to increase 
awareness about AIF and IBG, to strengthen institutional capacity for strategic planning and 
ATF proposal preparation, and to strengthen capacity of PIMU; and (v) Project Management to 
support the management of the project by providing funds for incremental staff, technical and 
operational costs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented nationwide in selected public and private universities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Though this is the first higher education project in Bangladesh, the Borrower (MOE) has 
reasonable experience and capacity in managing environmental safeguard issues related to 
education projects - the Second Female Secondary School Assistance Project (2002-2007).  The 
University Grants Commission (UGC), the implementing agency is not adequately staffed to 
Page  3
effectively play its strategic role. The project activities will include capacity development of 
UGC and to ensure safeguard issues, an environmental professional will be included in the 
committee for screening, selection and monitoring of all sub-projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDN) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No potential environmental issues are expected to arise as result of project implementation. 
The project will not support any acquisition of land, construction of any new institution or 
building, or any major physical expansion. Only some minor renovation or rehabilitation of 
existing buildings would be supported. However, identifying and addressing all likely impacts of 
sub-projects especially research works is not possible at this stage. UGC will ensure the selection 
of all research proposals (sub-projects) will be subject to satisfactory safeguard compliance. An 
Environment Management/Screening Checklist will be prepared and to be followed by the 
implementing agency. There is no need for full Environment and Social Assessments and a 
Tribal Development Plan. The government will prepare instructions to the AIF Area Review 
Panels to take into consideration the possible social impact of AIF-funded sub-projects during 
the proposal review. The instructions will be clearly spelled out in the AIF Operations Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/10/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environment Management/Screening Checklist will be prepared by April 2008 and will 
be integrated with the project implementation arrangement.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Benoit Millot 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
