Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4607 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/23/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Original Project ID: P089382 
Original Project Name:  Investment 
Promotion and Financing Facility 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P117542 
Project Name: Investment Promotion and Financing Facility 
Task Team Leader: Tatiana Nenova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (60%);Other industry (20%);General energy sector 
(10%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
257.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of this additional financing for the project are to: (i) supplement the resources of 
the Bangladesh financial markets to provide term finance for infrastructure and other investment 
projects beyond the capacity of local financial institutions; and (ii) scale up the financing of 
public-private partnership (PPP) ventures in infrastructure already started in the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing operation will support Bangladesh Bank (BB), the 
implementing agency, to scale up the financing of public-private partnership (PPP) ventures in 
infrastructure. The proposed operation is expected to increase additional financing of 
infrastructure by over $400 million, leveraging about 100% private resources. It is expected to 
increase infrastructure supply in the power sector # renewable energy and energy savings - as 
well as bridges, ports, container terminals, water treatment plants, waste disposal projects, and 
others. The increased provision of infrastructure will create (or help maintain) jobs during the 
Page  2
economic slowdown, and remove bottlenecks in economic growth caused by existing 
infrastructure shortages. The proposed amount of $257 million equivalent is divided into $7 
million for capacity building and $250 million for the lending pipeline.  The technical assistance 
component is designed to assist Bangladesh Bank in the implementation of the proposed project 
and, more broadly, to enhance the long-term sustainability of private infrastructure finance by 
supporting GOB, through IIFC, in further developing the framework for PPPs in infrastructure; 
fostering policy, regulatory, and institutional reforms; building capacity to manage PPP 
processes; and implementing the Private Sector Infrastructure Guidelines.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed projects are located all over Bangladesh. Available information on the locations 
and salient features of some potential projects which could make up the IPFF pipeline are given 
below.  
 
(i) 
New Mooring Container Terminal:  
 
Government of Bangladesh, as part of its port reform and modernization strategy to increase 
efficiency and reduce costs to the port users, has adopted the policy to operate terminals through 
the private sector. It is therefore decided that the New Mooring Container Terminal at 
Chittagong will be operated by a private Terminal Operator for a certain period of time, as 
mentioned in Commercial Terms and Conditions, for operation and management of the 
Terminal, along with supply of required cargo handling and other equipment on SOT basis. The 
pre-qualification process of the short listed investors is currently underway.  
 
(ii) Mongla Port Jetty:  
 
The project is intended to facilitate berthing of ships and cargo handling at Mongla Port. It is 
envisaged that on completion of the jetties on Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) basis, the volume 
of import and export through this port will increase, generate more revenues and create 
employment opportunities. Overall it will have a positive impact on the economy.  
 
(iii) 5 Land Ports (2nd Round):  
 
There are 5 land ports to be provided to the private sector on BOT basis. These land ports are: 
Tamabil Land Port, Burimari Land Port, Akhaura Land Port, Haluaghat Land Port and Bhomra 
land Port. The pre-qualification of the second round land ports have been completed and the 
short listed investors will be issued tender documents soon.  
 
(iv) Second Round Small Power Plants:  
 
Government of Bangladesh, through Power Cell has been planning for the second round small 
scale power plants from private sector. Initially power cell has planned for an approximate of 
200 MW power generations from these second round small power plants.  
 
(v) Waste Disposal Facilities:  
 
This project is designed to facilitate the organized waste disposal for the 6 city corporations of 
the country. Once implemented, this project will improve the living standard for the residents of 
these metropolises. The concerned city corporations are currently preparing the Project Proforma 
(PP) to be sent to PICOM to be listed as a PPP project on BOT basis.  
 
(vi)Environmental Projects:  
 
Environmental projects worth US $35.00 million is planned to be located in Dhaka and 
Chittagong. The concerned city corporations are working on the preparation of the project 
Page  3
documents. Following PICOM approval once applied for, it is expected to feature in the PICOM 
list of the PPP projects. IPFF is expecting to finance US $19.60 million through the PFIs.  
 
(vii) Energy Saving Equipment Projects:  
 
Energy crisis is an endemic problem facing the country. Mitigating this problem has become a 
priority for the government. Looking at the heavy energy needs of the major cities a project has 
been created which will involve private sector participation for the energy saving equipment 
project.  
 
(vii) Waste Management Plant:  
 
There is a huge potential of recycling the waste materials for producing Bio Fertilizer. The 
project will also involve in Carbon Trading under Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).  
Considering the huge amount of waste being deposited in the Dhaka city#s waste dumping zones 
the Dhaka City Corporation has decided to establish waste management plant in Narshingdi 
through private sector participation on BOO basis.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As required for Financial Intermediary (FI) operations, an Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) has been in place to support the process of environmental review, clearance 
and monitoring of investment projects financed by IPFF. Bangladesh Bank and FIs have 
acquired some experiences in managing the EIA processes for projects already implemented. In 
addition, Bangladesh Bank has managed similar projects prior to IPFF, including FIDP, PSIDP, 
and EDP, with similar environmental and social profile. However, in view of the limited capacity 
in the area for the purposes of the IPFF, all investment projects under the IPFF will be subject to 
prior review and approval of EIAs by the World Bank.  It is to be noted that, IPFF does not 
support investment projects that (i) include activities on the IFC/MIGA exclusion list and (ii) 
activities inside protected areas.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (SASDU) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Given the nature of the projects described in section D above, it is possible that at least some 
of the projects are Category #A# projects or projects involving land acquisition, resettlement, or 
indigenous peoples. Exact project locations and footprints are currently not known, the approach 
to ensure mitigation of impacts and risk management is the compilation of an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework that will ensure compliance with World Bank policies. Once the 
specific sub-project locations and footprints are known in the course of the project 
implementation, appropriate due-diligence with regards to the specific sub-project will be carried 
out. This will include an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment on the basis on which 
specific Environmental and Social Management Plans will be formulated, as required.  
 
As required for Financial Intermediary (FI) operations, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (E
SMF) has been in place to support the process of environmental 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
review, clearance and monitoring of investment projects financed by IPFF. Bangladesh Bank and 
FIs have acquired some experience in managing the ESIA processes for projects already 
implemented. The existing ESMF, however, will require updating and upgrading, given that the 
scope of the additional financing goes beyond the original PDO of the original project. In 
particular, the original project excluded projects that would trigger land acquisition and 
resettlement. During the implementation of the additional financing portion of the project, this 
provision will be superseded and projects that will potentially or actually trigger land acquisition 
and/or resettlement will be considered eligible for financing. Thus, a more substantial ESMF will 
be required, with specific provisions for complying with OP /BP 4.12 and Bangladeshi laws and 
regulations covering issues of land acquisition and resettlement.  
 
However, in view of the limited capacity in the area for the purposes of the IPFF, all 
investment projects under the IPFF will be subject to prior review and approval of ESIAs by the 
World Bank. At the same time, a program of capacity building for Bangladesh Bank and the FIs 
implementing sub-projects will be put in place to ensure that, over time, capacity to conduct due 
diligence on social and environmental aspects of infrastructure projects on PPP basis is built. 
This capacity building program could take place jointly with IFC Environmental and Social 
Department.  
 
It is to be noted that, IPFF does not support investment projects that (i) include activities on 
the IFC/MIGA exclusion list and (ii) activities inside protected areas.  
 
The client will develop and implement an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework which will screen all investments based on the significance of impact using World 
Bank policies. Category #A# projects or projects involving land acquisition, resettlement, or 
indigenous peoples will prepare appropriate plans in compliance with World Bank policy 
criteria. Projects screened with World Bank as category #B# will prepare an Environmental 
Management and Monitoring Plan as needed to address salient environmental and social risks. 
IIFC will make necessary institutional and personnel arrangements to ensure proper 
implementation and supervision. All category #A# type projects will be submitted to the regional 
safeguards adviser for clearance.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
see above under "Environmental Assessment"   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
see above under "Environmental Assessment"   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
see above under "Environmental Assessment"   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/05/2010 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/5/2010  
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure  01/11/2010  
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 01/11/2010   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tatiana Nenova 
06/17/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/07/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John F. Speakman 
06/25/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
