Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4577 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P103999 
Project Name: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Fook Chuan Eng 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (70%);Sanitation (30%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00
13.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proposed project would be to improve the sustainability, reliability 
and affordability of the water, sewerage and/or stormwater drainage services in Chittagong as 
well as support the Government's development of future sector investments and institutional 
development program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following summarizes the proposed key areas of support:  
 
-
A
water supply component for CWASA, to support: (i) Water Treatment Plants in CWASA's 
development plan that is currently not yet financed (e.g., the expansion of the Mohara WTP and 
the Modunaghat WTP), (ii) the rehabilitation and extension of the distribution system, including 
the extension of service provision to urban slums on a phased basis;  
 
-
A
drainage and sewerage/sanitation component for CWASA, to support: (i) updating of 
drainage master plans and for sewerage master plans, identification and design of priority 
investments, and (ii) rehabilitation of priority drainage canals identified in the drainage master 
plans;  
Page  2
-
An institutional development and project support component for CWASA, to support: (i) 
comprehensive institutional development, including capacity building at all operational levels, 
(ii) project management support, including operational cost support and provisioning for 
management of environmental and social aspects (including land acquisition and resettlement), 
for an improved risk management system; and  
 
-
A
technical assistance component for the Government, to support: (i) the assessments and the 
development of sector investments and institutional plans, (ii) the assessment and development 
of longer term programmatic or umbrella approach for the Bank support of the sector (including 
defining the support for Khulna WASA), and (iii) the design and preparation of projects / 
programs towards future phases of Bank support to the sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The wider metropolitan areas of the city of Chittagong.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
CWASA has been in operations since 1963.  CWASA is in a state of reorganizing or setting up 
new governance, management and operating structures.  To date, CWASA is focused on water 
supply operations.  CWASA has not yet assumed sewerage or drainage operations and as such 
has not yet established the associated functions or capabilities.  Existing human resources 
capacities are weak.  
 
CWASA do not have recent experience in implementing Bank safeguards policies.  Except for 
CWASA's implementation of a Bank financed water treatment plant (Mohara Phase I) about 20 
years ago, it has not implemented any Bank financed project involving the construction work in 
water supply, sanitation or drainage facilities.  CWASA only has a small water quality analysis 
unit (at the Mohara water treatment plant), employing a chemist and two assistants.  There is no 
environment or resettlement cell/unit in the CWASA current set-up.  
 
Capacity building for CWASA to manage environmental aspects of its operations will likely 
have to be included in the proposed project.  Sufficient resources have to be earmarked to 
support the implementation of environmental and social management activities, including the 
provision for a program of technical assistance and training to help build the capacity to handle 
environmental and social safeguards issues in CWASA during the project period.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (SASDU) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) Policy will be triggered by the proposed 
project due to its focus on rehabilitation, construction and extension of water supply, sanitation 
and stormwater drainage systems.  An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(ESMF) needs to be prepared to identify and assess the potential impacts under different 
components of the proposed project.  Each project component will be screened for potential 
environmental and social impacts, and subjected to appropriate Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA).As appropriate detailed design of the project components for carrying out 
component specific ESIA is likely to be available during project implementation only, the system 
to support the process of environmental review and clearance has to be defined through an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) Policy will be triggered by the proposed project 
because project activities such as rehabilitation, construction and extension of water supply, 
sanitation and stormwater drainage systems can result in temporary or permanent loss of land, 
crops, and other means of income generation.  As the exact location of project site(s) is not 
known at this stage, CWASA will need to prepare a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) laying out the key principles of the World Bank's OP 4.12 and a strategy to 
fulfill the policy's requirements that is mutually agreed upon.  Specific Social Impact 
Assessments (SIA) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) if needed, will have to be prepared 
during project implementation for each component where the specific project site can be 
identified.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
July 1, 2009 - March 31, 2010   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fook Chuan Eng 
07/16/2009 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/16/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
07/20/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
