Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3521 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/05/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P111272 
Project Name: Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery &Rest Pr 
Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (60%);Crops (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry 
sector (10%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Climate change (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
109.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to support Government of Bangladesh efforts to facilitate 
restoration and recovery from the damage to livelihoods and infrastructure caused by Cyclone 
Sidr and to build long-term preparedness through strengthened disaster risk reduction and 
management.  
 
The proposed project will support a medium to long-term recovery program developed under 
the Joint Damage Loss and Needs Assessment (JDLNA).  This will cover restoration of the 
agriculture sector in Sidr affected areas and reconstruction of infrastructure, including 
reconstruction and improvement of multi-purpose shelters and rehabilitation of coastal 
embankments with “build back better” designs.The project will build new disaster shelters, 
strengthen disaster risk reduction and management, support monitoring and evaluation of project 
impact, technical assistance, strategic studies and training to strengthen future emergency 
response and preparedness to disasters.  Most importantly it will support the preparation and 
initial implementation of the first slice of a fifteen year program for long-term disaster risk 
Page  2
reduction.  This is vital for Bangladesh as it is the most vulnerable country to natural disasters 
and climate change.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have 6 components.  
 
Component No. 
Component Title 
Amount (US$ Million)  
 
A
Recovery of Agriculture Sector and Mid-term Improvement Program 
40  
 
B
Reconstruction and Improvement of Multipurpose Shelters 85  
 
C
Rehabilitation of Coastal Embankments 
43  
 
D
Long-Term Disaster Risk Management Program 
17.7  
 
E
Monitoring and Evaluation of Project Impact 
3.0  
 
F
Project Management, Technical Assistance, Strategic Studies and Training, and 
Emergency Support for Future Disasters 
17.3  
 
The description of the sub-components and major activities under the sub-components are given 
below:  
 
Component A:  Recovery of Agriculture Sector and Mid-term Improvement Program (US$40 
million)  
 
Sub-component A1: Support to crops sector (US$20 million). This sub-component will finance 
a
comprehensive package, beyond the supply of seeds and fertilizers, to include additional 
rehabilitation support for new agriculture equipment and storage infrastructure, improved seeds 
(in terms of yield and salinity resistance), and training to enhance the long-term productivity of 
the land. Additional rehabilitation support will be provided for new agriculture equipment and 
storage infrastructure, improved seeds (in terms of yield and salinity resistance), and training and 
capacity building to enhance the long-term productivity of the land.  
 
Sub-component A2: Support to fisheries sector (US$10 million). This sub-component will 
finance the provision of fisheries equipment (e.g. improved boats, nets) and activities to support 
the long-term sustainability of this resource including improved knowledge base (e.g. surveys) 
on existing status of coastal small-scale fisheries. This will help in implementing the 
Government strategy, which emphasizes the need to introduce certification of hatcheries together 
with training for improved seed quality, proper zoning, improved data and stock assessment 
systems, improved safety, and systems for quality assurance.  
 
Sub-component A3:  Support to livestock sector (US$10 million). This sub-component will 
finance a long-term view towards improving the overall management and production practices in 
the sector including the emergency provision of livestock feed and medication supplies, training 
on avian flu and general healthcare of poultry and feed, and construction of improved dairy and 
poultry sheds. The efforts will lead to improved animal and bird health as well as improved 
processing, storage, and marketing systems.  
 
Component B:  Reconstruction and Improvement of Multipurpose Shelters (US$85 million).  
 
Page  3
Sub-component B1:  Construction of new shelters (US$ 30 million).  This sub-component will 
support construction of 100 new shelters to build greater protection for future disaster events. 
Construction of 100 new shelters with an average cost of about US$300,000 per shelter brings 
the cost of this subcomponent to US$30 million.  The construction of shelters will be carried out 
by LGED as multipurpose buildings for primary schools, community centers of other community 
buildings, in full coordination with local government, local communities and education 
departments.  The contracts for construction of shelters will be awarded in the package of 30-40 
shelters (in the same upazilla or district) thus minimizing supervision costs and the need to 
attract qualified contractors with adequate capacity.  
 
Sub-component B2:  Improvement of existing shelters (US$30 million).  This component will 
finance repairs and improvement of existing shelters that are damaged or cannot be used due to 
inadequacies.  The average cost for about 500 shelters is US$60,000, bringing the total cost of 
this component to US$30 million. Similarly, the shelters will be upgraded by LGED in 
coordination with other concerned agencies and packaged into larger contract consisting of 20-30 
shelters under each contract.  
 
Sub-component B3:  Improvement of communication network to shelters (US$20 million).  
About US$20 million will be allocated for reconstruction of rural road networks and 
communication to the shelters constructed under the project to make them more accessible. The 
reconstruction of road network will be done by LGED.  
 
Sub-component B4: Design and construction supervision of shelters (US$5 million). This sub-
component will finance consulting services for surveys, designs, environmental and social 
impact assessments, environment and resettlement management plans, and construction 
supervision of multipurpose disaster shelters and all works covered under the above sub-
components B1 to B3.  This will also include resources to facilitate consultations with the local 
communities in identifying sites, needs and suitable design for the shelters as well as 
coordination with other government agencies and stakeholders, such as the Ministry of 
Education, local governments, and upazilla and union level governments.  
 
Component C:  Rehabilitation of Coastal Embankments (US$43 million)  
 
Sub-component C1:  Rehabilitation of coastal embankment (US$30 million). This sub-
component will finance the emergency repair to coastal embankments damaged during the 2007 
cyclone. The Bangladesh Water Board (BWDB) will develop an emergency program for 
carrying out immediate repairing of coastal embankment. The component will support 
rehabilitation/improvement to the coastal embankments that were damaged due to the surge 
caused by the Sidr Cyclone.  The repair works will be designed with improved standards so that 
protection can be provided in these sections in future for storms with equivalent strengths. The 
embankments will be designed with milder slopes on the seaside which will be covered with 
forestation. Where possible, roads would be constructed on the embankments in order to provide 
access and improve the maintenance program.  Priority will be given to rehabilitate sections 
which do not involve any social issues such as land acquisition and environment issues.  
 
Page  4
Sub-component C2:  Forestation along embankments (US$10 million). This sub-component 
will finance forestation along embankments to improve the effectiveness of these structures. This 
component will support forestation along embankments.  Priority will be given to the sections 
rehabilitated/improved under the Project.However, other sections requiring forestation will be 
considered and included.The communities will be involved in the implementation of the 
forestation program and after care of these assets.  Carbon finance opportunities will also be 
explored.  
 
Sub-component C3:  Design and construction supervision of coastal embankments (US$3 
million).  This sub-component will finance consulting services for surveys, designs, 
environmental and social impact assessments, environment and resettlement management plans, 
and construction supervision for embankments and all works covered under the above 
components.  This will also include resources to facilitate consultations with the local 
communities in identifying sites, needs and suitable design of the shelter as well as with the other 
government agencies which stakeholders such as education ministry, local government, upazilla 
and union level government.  
 
Component D:  Long-Term Disaster Risk Management Program (US$17.7 million)  
 
Sub-component D1: Disaster risk mitigation and reduction (US$ 10 million). This sub-
component will support the capacity building of the Disaster Management Bureau (DMB), 
support for detailed multi-hazard risk vulnerability modeling and assessment, and the 
strengthening of emergency preparedness at the community levels. The sub-component will be 
divided into 3 major parts. These are:  
 
D1.1: Capacity building of the Disaster Management Bureau (DMB) (US$ 2.5 million). This 
part will support key capacity building activities for the DMB, in accordance with the main 
strategic priority of ‘professionalizing disaster management’ laid out under the NDPM plan 
(2007-15).  
 
D1.2: Supporting detailed, national level multi- hazard risk and vulnerability assessment, 
modeling and mapping (US$3.0 million). In accordance with the Strategic Pillar 1 of the country 
disaster management strategy, for ‘defining and redefining the risk environment’, this part will 
support the carrying out of a national level multi-hazard risk and vulnerability assessment, 
modeling and mapping exercise.  This exercise will build upon existing local assessments (e.g. 
WFP assessment for flood-prone areas), identify existing uncertainties and constraints in these 
assessments (e.g. poor digital elevation models), and consider future risks (e.g. climate change 
drivers).  
 
D1.3: Strengthening and enhancing emergency preparedness in 12 severely cyclone affected 
districts and upazillas (US$ 4.5 million). This part will support local level capacity building 
activities for strengthening local disaster management and emergency preparedness.  
 
Sub-component D2:  Preparation of future projects for River Bank Improvement, Coastal 
Embankment Improvement and Gorai River Restoration Programs (US$6.0 million).  Under this 
component, preparation studies will be carried out for the first phase of the JDLNA identified 
long-term disaster management program.  This includes necessary technical studies for: (D2.1) 
River Bank Improvement Program (RBIP) that would focus on reconstruction of Brahmaputra 
Right Bank Embankment (BRE) starting from Sirajganj town upwards with an total investment 
Page  5
cost of US$300 million and tender design bidding documents for first package for RBIP covering 
at least the towns of Sirajganj and Kazipur; (D2.2) Coastal Embankment Improvement Program 
(CEIP) that would focus rehabilitation, reconstruction and improvement of coastal embankments. 
This would cover feasibility studies, surveys, for the whole investment (about US$300 million) 
and tender designs and bidding documents for first package consisting of works for about 
US$100 million; and (D2.3) updating and revision of project documents, designs, and 
preparation of bidding documents for Gorai River Restoration Project.  
 
Sub-component D3:  Preparation of future projects for disaster shelters and upgrading the rural 
road network (US$1.7 million). To support the activities identified in the long-term disaster risks 
management program, preparation studies will be carried out for: (i) construction of new disaster 
shelters with an investment cost of about US$200 million; and (ii) upgrading of rural road 
network in the disaster prone areas. This would cover feasibility studies, surveys, for the whole 
investment and tender designs and bidding documents for first package consisting of works for 
about US$100 million. The component will finance all engineering studies, surveys, 
investigations, socio-economic studies social assessment, environmental assessment and 
preparation of social management implementation framework (SMIF) as well as Resettlement 
Action Plan, environmental management framework (EMF) and environmental management 
plan (EMP) as necessary for project implementation.  This will also cover the preparation of the 
project implementation plan, financing plan and GoB DPP.  
 
Component E: Monitoring and Evaluation of Project Impact (US$3.0 Million)  
 
This component will finance oversight monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities to provide 
continuous feedback to the Government, Project Steering Committee (PSC), and implementing 
agencies on project performance and impact of its various components, so that corrective actions 
can be undertaken in a timely manner. The M&E consultants will also supervise implementation 
of the overall Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social/Resettlement Policy 
Frameworks (S/RPF), careful review and monitoring of sub-project specific social and 
environmental management plans and impact assessments and supervision of their 
implementation.  
 
Component F:  Project Management, Technical Assistance, Strategic Studies and Training, and 
Emergency Support for Future Disasters (US$17.3 million)  
 
Sub-component F1: Project management, technical assistance, strategic studies and training 
(US$6.3 million).  This sub-component will support the Government in implementing the 
project, and in coordinating all project related activities, strategic studies, technical assistance 
and training.  This will involve financing of incremental staff salaries, operating expenditures, 
consulting services, equipment and software.  
 
Sub-component F2: Emergency support for future disasters during implementation (US$11 
million).  This component will provide support for emergency recovery from a future disaster 
that may occur during the implementation period of the project.  The detailed activities will 
depend upon the nature and location of the disaster and priority needs.   
 
Page  6
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project activities will be limited to the cyclone affected areas i.e. coastal areas and part of 
central Bangladesh. The worst affected districts of cyclone are in the Lower Gangetic delta, 
mostly below 3 meters above sea level and are vulnerable to floods and storm surges. The delta 
is characterized by high fertility and agricultural productivity. However, land holdings are 
usually small due to a high population growth leading to lack of land not already committed to 
agriculture; growing demand for other land uses such as infrastructure, industry and urban 
settlement, making land the limiting factor of production.  
 
Significantly affected by Cyclone Sidr are also the wetland areas in the southern part of 
Satkhira, Khulna and Bagerhat districts. These mangrove forests, called Sundarbans, are a world 
heritage site with rare flora and fauna. However, no physical infrastructure is proposed for 
Sundarbans under the proposed project. Studies will be carried out for developing program for 
restoration of Gorai River under the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project recognizes the emergency nature of the proposed recovery and reconstruction 
operations and proposed areas for Bank financing, while at the same time ensures due diligence 
in managing potential environment and social risks. The sub-components/sub-projects are 
anticipated to have no major potential environmental and social impacts, since the project 
primarily supports rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and facilities, emergency support to 
agricultural productivity, capacity development and preparation of long-term projects. It is 
agreed with the GoB that the existing Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and 
Social/Resettlement Policy Framework (S/RPF) from the Water Management Improvement 
Project (WMIP) will be applicable to this project and will be updated/revised during the project 
implementation period as needed. The updated/revised EMF and S/RPF will be reviewed and 
cleared by the Bank. Furthermore, the proposed project is being processed under emergency 
procedure 8.00, and therefore the environmental and social safeguard assessments for new 
construction activities (e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments) are expected to 
be carried out during implementation under the agreed EMF and S/RPF. Reconstruction work 
under the project is not expected to have adverse social impacts, and land acquisition and 
resettlement are not foreseen during this initial stage.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In view of the emergency nature of the Project (processed under OP 8.0), and the proposed 
areas for Bank financing, a full-fledged Environmental Assessment was not carried out. 
Nevertheless, a rapid environmental assessment was undertaken as part of the damage, losses, 
and needs assessment exercise.  On the basis of this assessment, the Project is considered a 
Category ‘B’.  
 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The potential negative environmental and social impacts of the Project are negligible, since 
it primarily supports rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and facilities.  However, for new 
construction activities (e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments), environmental 
and social assessments will be carried out (and cleared by the Bank) along with the detailed 
designs prior to starting construction according to an agreed Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) and Social/Resettlement Policy Framework (S/RPF).  Reconstruction work 
under the Project is not expected to have adverse social impacts, and land acquisition and 
resettlement are not foreseen during this initial stage.  However, should land acquisition become 
unavoidable, the EMF and S/RPF already agreed upon with the GoB under the Water 
Management Improvement Project (WMIP), will apply.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The potential negative environmental and social impacts of the Project are negligible, since it 
primarily supports rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and facilities.  However, for new 
construction activities (e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments), environmental 
and social assessments will be carried out (and cleared by the Bank) along with the detailed 
designs prior to starting construction according to an agreed Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) and Social/Resettlement Policy Framework (S/RPF).  Reconstruction work 
under the Project is not expected to have adverse social impacts, and land acquisition and 
resettlement are not foreseen during this initial stage.  However, should land acquisition become 
unavoidable, the EMF and S/RPF already agreed upon with the GoB under the Water 
Management Improvement Project (WMIP), will apply.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/27/2008 
 
Page  8
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It will be agreed with the GoB that the existing Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF) and Social/Resettlement Policy Framework (S/RPF) agreed upon under the Water 
Management Improvement Project (WMIP) will be applicable to this project (as many 
activities are similar) and will be updated/revised during the project implementation period as 
needed. The updated/revised EMF and S/RPF will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank. 
Furthermore, the proposed project is being processed under emergency procedure 8.00, and 
therefore the environmental and social safeguard assessments for new construction activities 
(e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments) are expected to be carried out 
during implementation under the agreed EMF and S/RPF. Reconstruction work under the 
project is not expected to have adverse social impacts, and land acquisition and resettlement 
are not foreseen during this initial stage. If these issues arise, implementation of EMF and 
S/RPF will apply.  A separate M&E consultancy will be hired to supervise the 
implementation of all ESAs and the EMF and S/RPF.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
03/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
03/24/2008 
Comments:  approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
