Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/22/2009 
Report No.:  AC4431
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P112963 
Project Name:  Additional Financing For Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Raihan Elahi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (75%);General energy sector (25%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Rural non-farm income generation 
(33%);Climate change (17%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00 
 Asian 
Development 
Bank 
28.50 
 Local 
Communities 
80.00 
 
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid 
15.00 
 
GERMANY: German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ) 
3.00 
 
Islamic Development Bank 
16.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
13.50
163.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the additional financing project remains same as the main 
project. The Project's aim is to support Bangladesh's efforts to raise levels of social 
development and economic growth by increasing access to electricity in rural areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project development objective to would be achieved through three major 
components: (i) scaling up the project#s renewable energy components which are 
improving the supply of off-grid electricity supply in rural areas through the installation 
of Solar Home Systems (SHSs) for affordable lighting, and electricity generation and 
Page  2
supply from other renewable energy sources; (US$98 million); (ii) introducing energy 
efficient Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs) as part of demand side management to help 
address energy shortages in the country (US$15 million); and (iii) rehabilitating 
additional electricity distribution networks in rural areas as part of the System Loss 
Reduction component of the project (US$17 million).  The first two components will be 
managed and implemented by the Infrastructure Development Company Limited 
(IDCOL) using eligible Participating Organizations (POs) while the third component will 
be managed and implemented by the Rural Electrification Board (REB).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The first and third component of the project will be implemented essentially in the rural 
areas of Bangladesh and second component cover 10 large urban centers including 
Dhaka.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the use of renewable energy technologies will yield net positive environmental 
impacts. Solar home systems (SHS) and other renewable energy technologies will result 
in the replacement of kerosene and other biomass fuels that are currently used for 
lighting. The expansion of grid connected mini hydro schemes and the introduction of 
wind power and biomass energy systems would likewise reduce the need for fossil fuel 
based power generation. The replacement of incandescent bulb with CFL bulb would also 
result in reduction of 360MW peak power demand. In general, CFL bulbs use 75% less 
energy than incandescent light bulbs and last up to 10 times longer. All these efforts 
would results in reduction of urban pollution from reducing the need for captive 
generation by households and businesses. The component 3: rehabilitation of the 
Page  3
distribution networks will contribute in reduction of distribution losses of the rural 
electricity system.  
 
The major potential environmental concern in solar home system (SHS) is the improper 
disposal/recycling of lead-acid storage battery used in SHS. If not properly 
disposed/recycled, the lead sulfate can contaminate the surrounding lands and water 
bodies. Lead sulfate is a water soluble substance that could contaminate ground and water 
and be transferred up the food chain. Also the unsafe practices of dismantling of used 
batteries and lack of standard procedures are major occupational health and safety 
concerns for the workers. With proper recycling process and practices, environmental 
impacts can be mitigated. Other renewable energy technologies have localized and 
temporal environmental impact. Since the extent and exact locations of these 
technologies are not known at this stage and may not be known at appraisal, the 
requirement to carry out an environmental analysis as part of project preparation can be 
waived, but environmental assessments will be carried out for commercial/farm based 
technologies during project implementation prior to approval of any sub-project.  
 
Although the amount of mercury in a CFL typically ranges between 3.5 milligrams to 
15 milligrams (average 5 milligrams or 1/100th of the amount of mercury used in a 
mercury fever thermometer), they could be one of numerous sources that collectively 
impact the environment during disposal. However, one of the advantages is recycling of a 
CFL bulb. Virtually all the component can be recycled- the metal end caps, glass tubing, 
mercury and phosphor power can all be separated and reused. The metallic portion can be 
sold as scrap metal, recycled glass can be remanufactured into other glass products and 
mercury can be recycled into new CFL bulb and other mercury containing devices.  
 
Under the component 3, only rehabilitation of the existing distribution networks will be 
carried out and it will not create any significant environmental impact.  
 
Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts from 
relatively limited scale physical interventions and mostly environmental friendly works, 
the proposed operation is to be classified as category #B#.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Earlier analytical studies have identified off-grid renewable energy technology as the 
cost-effective and environment-friendly technology for the millions of people in the 
remote areas of the country. CFL bulb also confirmed as the energy efficient comparing 
the incandescent bulb. However, the other renewable energy technologies (commercial/ 
farm based) will be assessed and awarded based on defined indicators including 
environmental parameters and alternative locations or options.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Please refer to Section 3 above.  
 
IDCOL has developed the #policy guidelines regarding disposal of warranty expired 
batteries# on June 14, 2005 for the RERED project. It spells out the roles and 
responsibilities of the Partner organizations (POs) and battery manufacturers. Based on 
the guidelines, IDCOL facilitated an agreement between battery manufacturers and POs. 
POs are responsible to notify the customers before 3 months of the warranty expiration 
date and advice customers to replace the battery. PO representatives are accountable to 
collect batteries from customers and to safely transport to the regional centers of battery 
manufacturer. The manufacturer is responsible for collecting batteries from regional 
centers and to transport it to the site where the batteries will be recycled or disposed in an 
environment-friendly manner. The agreement also describes the buyback price for 
different categories of batteries, which has been reviewed in each 6 months. At least 80% 
of the buyback price is paid to the customers and remaining 20% is retained by POs as 
transportation and other costs. The battery disposal issue has been discussed with POs in 
monthly operational meeting.  
 
In addition, IDCOL has hired the services of professional consultant to conduct the 
environmental assessment and environment management plan of the commercial/farm 
based other renewable energy technologies in RERED project. IDCOL has also some 
resident staff with experience to review environmental and social aspects but does not 
have trained environmental and social experts. Under the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) supported Pubic-Private Infrastructure Development Facility (PPIDF), it is 
proposed that IDCOL sets up an Environmental and Social Safeguards Management Unit 
(ESSMU). It will be an integrated part of the overall IDCOL structure and will provide 
support to all projects and initiatives of IDCOL.  
 
Using the experience of earlier Environment Management Framework, IDCOL has 
developed an Environment Management Framework, which describes the possible 
environmental impacts and related mitigation measures. IDCOL will promote adoption of 
ISO 14001-2004 (Environmental Management Standard) and OHSAS 18001:1999 
(Occupational Health & Safety Management Systems) by battery manufactures and will 
not accept any battery manufacturer in SHS program without having these certification 
after June 2011. However, IDCOL will immediately enforce the battery manufactures to 
implement mitigation measures in order to protect environment and workers health & 
safety as per Government of Bangladesh rules.  
 
IDCOL will facilitate to develop a national guideline within first 2 years for collection 
of waste CFL bulbs and a recycling method using the other good practices in the 
developed and other regional countries. The project will also ensure safe collection of 
incandescent light bulbs and the recycled glass will be remanufactured into other glass 
products.  
 
Page  5
REB Board approved the #Policy Issues and Procedural Instruction of REB for 
Conducting Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Management# in its 417th 
Board Meeting on June 12, 2007. The policy instruction has been prepared based on 
#Environmental and Social Appraisal Manual#, which was supported by the earlier 
project. The manual describes i) environmental and social impact assessment and 
management policy, ii) project development and implementation life cycle flow chart, iii) 
EIA process and project approval process flow chart and iv) REB decision making and 
reporting flow chart. In addition, it contains templates for environmental and social 
assessment for substation construction, power line construction, building construction, 
environmental mitigation measures and compliance verifications. The policy instruction 
also describes environmental code of practice for power line construction and compliance 
verifications. REB has started practicing different templates for environmental 
assessment power line and sub-station construction. The environmental issues have been 
presently dealt in REB in ad-hoc basis by the Office of Timber Specialist. 
Implementation Monitoring Evaluation Division (IMED) of Planning Ministry and Power 
Division recommended earlier to set-up an Environment Monitoring Cell. World Bank 
also restates the need of regular institutional structure of Environment Monitoring Cell 
(EMC) with full-time staffs. Although there is no major environmental issues for 
rehabilitation of existing distribution network of REB, the capacity of REB will be 
greatly hampered without a regular institutional arrangement and budget for 
environmental safeguard. Since the activities under component 3 have been awarded 
under RERED, the Environmental Management Framework prepared for RERED will be 
applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
IDCOL prepared the EMF in consultation with the relevant project stakeholders 
including POs (NGOs), battery manufacturers, existing and potential users of renewable 
energy technologies, other government agencies. It will be disclosed in both Bangla and 
English by the IDCOL on behalf of the GOB in Bangladesh and it will also be made 
available at the World Bank#s InfoShop. Relevant subproject specific safeguard 
documents/mitigation plans (EMPs) prepared subsequently will also be disclosed to the 
public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/05/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/22/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  7
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raihan Elahi 
05/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
05/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
05/22/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
 
Comments:   
