Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3517
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P106161 
Project Name:  Secondary Educ Qlty & Access Improv. 
Task Team Leader:  Nazmul Chaudhury 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.30 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
16.90 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
16.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The key project development objective is to improve quality of schooling, to monitor 
learning outcomes systematically, and to increase access and equity in project upazilas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would consist of:  (a) improving education quality and monitoring 
of learning levels in project areas; (b) improving equitable access in project areas through 
provision of stipends to poor girls and boys; (c) strengthening the institutional capacity of 
MoE both at central and local levels; and (d) establishing an effective monitoring and 
evaluation system. The project will be implemented in 121 upazilas.  
 
PROJECT COMPONENTS  
 
Component 1 
–
Improving Education Quality and Monitoring Learning Levels 
(aboutUS$24.3 million)  
 
The objectives of this component are to:  (a) increase education quality through the 
provision of incentive awards based on academic performance to students, teachers and 
Page  2
institutions; (b) improve student performance in English Language and Mathematics; (c) 
organize facilities and establishing a program to develop the reading habit in students; 
and (d) measure systematically learning levels by administering internationally 
comparable and national curriculum-based numeracy and literacy testing, that raise 
awareness of policy makers and stakeholders and help them adjust policies and 
interventions.  
 
Component 2 
–
Improving Equitable Access (about US$112.8 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to increase access and retention of poor girls and 
boys, and ensure their completion of secondary schooling through provision of stipends 
and tuition, based on pro-poor targeting and educational criteria, and provision of water 
and sanitation facilities based on needs.  
 
Component 3 – Institutional Capacity Strengthening (about US$ 6.6 million)  
 
The objectives of this component are to:  (a) strengthen the existing structure for 
managing and implementing the proposed project; (b) develop and strengthen the 
capacity to implement programs aimed at increasing educational quality, and to deliver 
financial support to targeted beneficiaries effectively; (c) strengthen accountability at 
school and upazila level; and (d) raise education awareness amongst stakeholders with 
focus on education quality, targeting, and accountability.  
 
Component 4 - Monitoring and Evaluation (about US$ 3.5 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to:  (a) systematically document all project input, 
process, output, and outcomes; and (b) link project interventions with outcomes.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Water and Sanitation.  Activities under the proposed project consist of installation of 
tube-wells (alternative options for arsenic contaminated areas) for providing safe drinking 
water and installation of latrines in most needy schools, along with the regular testing of 
tube-wells.  These activities will be carried out in some of the 121 upazilas of 6 
administrative divisions forming the project area. The technology for water supply will 
be based on aquifer characteristics, arsenic concentration in groundwater, available 
alternative options. The minimum distance to be maintained between tube-well and 
sanitary latrine is 15 m. In case of shallow shrouded tube-wells, the distance should be 
more than 20 m.  
 
Schools willing to participate in the program would first need to enter (through the 
School Management Committee) into a Water and Sanitation Agreement with the Project, 
which will stipulate the terms of conditions, as well as the environmental guidelines, 
under which related minor civil works activities will take place through community 
participation. Since the proposed project aims to improve water and sanitation facilities in 
Page  3
schools, it is expected to have beneficial environmental impacts, and minor negative 
impacts associated with construction.  
 
Indigenous Peoples.  The project area of influence includes indigenous households, thus 
OP 4.10 applies.  Out of an estimated total population of about 36 million in 121 project 
upazilas, the estimated indigenous population is about 300,000 (less than 1%).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDN) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main environmental concerns under the proposed Project relate to the need to ensure 
the provision in project upazila schools of safe drinking water, and the provision and 
maintenance of adequate sanitation.  
 
The FSSAP Projects (I & II) funded the construction of both tube-wells and latrines.  
Tube-well testing was included when the country-wide problem of arsenic contamination 
was brought to light.  Of those tube-wells tested, about 12 percent were found to be 
contaminated with arsenic.  For the proposed Project, the challenge lies in the prevention 
of arsenic contamination of drinking water, and the provision of hygienic sanitation. The 
project will continue six-monthly to monitor the arsenic water quality in tube-wells 
installed under FSSAP Projects and also newly installed water sources under SEQAEP 
through a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Department of Public Health 
Engineering (DPHE). If the tube-wells installed under the FSSAP Projects and SEQAEP 
are found arsenic contaminated, the project and DSHE will ensure alternative water 
options for those schools.  
 
Page  4
The Project will facilitate the capacity building of school committee for operation and 
maintenance of the sanitary latrines to be constructed under the project. Proper drainage 
facilities will be included in design of water supply and sanitation facilities.  
 
Regarding social aspects, this Project has been classified as category B in terms of its 
social impacts.  In order to comply with OP 4.10, the project will consider culturally 
appropriate measures to ensure that benefits flow to indigenous households.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Regarding the provision of safe drinking water, owing to the likelihood of arsenic 
contamination in the installation of shallow tube-wells, hand operated deep tube-wells are 
proposed (>300m deep). If deep tube-wells are not feasible, alternative water options 
(sand filter to treat protected pond water, dug-wells/ring-wells and rainwater harvesting 
system) will be explored. Arsenic treatment options can be considered if no other options 
are available. Site selection of new tube-wells will be based on information on arsenic 
contamination in the surrounding tube-wells.  All new tube-wells will be tested for 
arsenic above the standard level. In addition, regular testing will be done semi-annually, 
related reports will be prepared, and a database will be maintained.  
 
If the school is located in an area where rural piped water supply scheme is available, 
the school management committee can decide to connect the school with the piped water 
supply scheme in consultation with SEQAEP Unit.  
 
With regard to sanitation, latrines will be provided according to the agreed designs, 
which will include the twin double-pit, six-ring latrines already provided under FSSAPII.  
The Guidelines for improvement of school sanitation will be used to help develop the 
menu of design options, and to guide the maintenance and use of latrines supported by 
the proposed Project.  In all cases, latrines for girls will be provided separate to those for 
boys.  
 
The proposed Project will support a school awareness program in the management of 
arsenic risks, hygiene and sanitation.  This will be supported at the local level by upazila 
secondary education offices and School Management Committees/Parent-Teacher 
Associations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Please refer to Section 3 above.  
 
The activities under this sub-component will be guided by an environmental framework 
whose aims include the following key factors: (a) aligning and optimizing the 
Page  5
environmental management process required by GOB regulations; (b) identifying the 
environmental impacts of the water supply and sanitation activities on physical, 
biological and social environment; (c) adopting sound environmental management 
practices within the schools; (d) developing appropriate design and operation guidelines 
for school committees; (e) ensuring that school management is aware of the 
environmental policies, rules and procedures; and (f) introducing hygiene education and 
awareness among students.  
 
Moreover, monitoring and evaluation activities under this sub-component will help 
ensure the quality of facilities installed, the quality of services delivered, their effective 
use, the functionality of tube-wells/water systems and latrines, and the status of their 
operation and maintenance.  Systematic learning and adaptation (new technologies, lower 
cost inputs) as well as documentation of lessons will also be included.  
 
The School Management Committee (SMC) and its Project Implementation Committee 
(PIC) will supervise the construction works and maintenance of water supply and 
sanitation facilities, in conjunction with engineers from either the Education Engineering 
Department or DPHE.  SMC will contribute 20% of the cost of water and sanitation 
facilities.  In the case of deep tube-
wells and other water options, the SMC’s contribution 
would be 10%. SMC will also ensure regular budgetary support for the operation and 
maintenance of the water supply and sanitary facilities. In case of alternative water 
supply options or arsenic treatment, the SMC will engage a full-time caretaker for 
operation and maintenance of the system.  
 
On the basis of reports submitted by SMCs, UPOs will be responsible for recording the 
installation of new tube-wells, the dates and outcomes of arsenic testing, the construction 
of latrines, and their operating and hygienic condition.  DSHE will compile UPO records 
and will also contract half-yearly audits of arsenic testing.  The records compiled by 
DSHE and the independent verification of arsenic testing will be submitted for review by 
IDA during supervision missions.  
 
The project will contract services of environmental specialist in order to (i) to achieve 
capacity building within PMU and PIUs, (ii) to provide subsequent guidance and review 
of application of the Environment Management Framework, and (iii) systematic analysis 
of arsenic test results to take decision on water supply options.  
 
In terms of social issues, the Project uses poverty status as its prime targeting tool.  The 
incidence of poverty among indigenous households is high.  Therefore, the targeting of 
indigenous households in the program is implicit in its poverty-focus.  However, in order 
to comply with OP 4.10, the SEQAEP will consider eligible for the stipend program all 
children from indigenous households of appropriate secondary school going age, 
irrespective of their poverty status, provided they comply with the required educational 
criteria.  
 
SEQAEP will use a participatory approach to implement an awareness campaign that 
includes specific messages about inclusion of indigenous children in the 19 upazilas with 
Page  6
indigenous population.  A series of consultation meetings with target beneficiaries, 
indigenous traditional authorities, and indigenous mothers will be organized.  A provision 
will be kept in the Institution Participatory Agreement for hiring qualified indigenous 
teachers and teaching aides to better address the learning and cultural needs of indigenous 
children.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Students (key beneficiaries), teachers, SMCs and local level education officers were 
consulted during design of sub-component 2.3 Improving School Facilities and also in 
preparation of Environment Management Framework and Environment Management 
Plan (EMP). DPHE was consulted in the development of procedures for provision of 
arsenic-safe water supplies.  The EMF and EMP was disclosed by the Project, and will be 
available at the World Bank’s InfoShop.  
 
With regard to social aspects, through technical assistance expertise on indigenous 
people in Bangladesh, a study, which included consultation with indigenous population 
groups and educational institutions, was carried out to help identify measures by which 
indigenous households can be helped to benefit from the project in a culturally 
appropriate manner.  A plan addressing indigenous people issues was disclosed by the 
Project, will be available at the World Bank’s Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Irajen Appasamy 
04/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
04/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
04/03/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
 
Comments:   
