Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3815
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P111272 
Project Name:  Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery &Rest Pr 
Task Team Leader:  Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (60%);Crops (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry 
sector (10%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Climate change (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
109.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support Government of Bangladesh in its efforts 
to facilitate restoration and recovery from the damage to livelihoods and infrastructure 
caused by Cyclone Sidr and build long-term preparedness through strengthened disaster 
risk reduction and management.  
 
The proposed project will support a medium to long-term recovery program developed 
under the Joint Damage Loss and Needs Assessment (JDLNA).  This will cover 
restoration of the agriculture sector in Sidr affected areas and reconstruction of 
infrastructure, including reconstruction and improvement of multi-purpose shelters and 
rehabilitation of coastal embankments with “build back better” designs.The project will 
build new disaster shelters, strengthen disaster risk reduction and management, support 
monitoring and evaluation of project impact, technical assistance, strategic studies and 
training to strengthen future emergency response and preparedness to disasters.  Most 
importantly it will support the preparation and initial implementation of the first slice of a 
Page  2
fifteen year program for long-term disaster risk reduction.  This is vital for Bangladesh as 
it is the most vulnerable country to natural disasters and climate change.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project components are:  
 
The description of the sub-components and major activities under the sub-components 
are given below:  
 
Component A:  Recovery of Agriculture Sector and Improvement Program (US$16 
million)  
 
A1:  Support to the crops sub-sector (US$4.7 million).  This sub-component will 
promote improved production and marketing technologies in the sub-sector and finance a 
comprehensive technology package, model demonstrations of improved technologies and 
agronomic practices (especially in terms of yield enhancement and salinity resistance), 
and enhance farmers knowledge through technical assistance and training. This 
component does not anticipate provision of pesticides and agro-chemicals. FAO and 
World bank guidelines on use of pesticides/agro-chemicals will be adhered to if agro-
chemicals are used.  
 
A2:  Support to the fisheries sub-sector (US$3.7 million).  This sub-component will 
promote improved production and marketing technologies in the sub-sector and finance 
the provision of fisheries equipment (e.g. improved boats, nets and safety equipment) and 
activities to support sustainability of fisheries resources, including an improved 
knowledge base (through surveys and studies) on the status of coastal small-scale 
fisheries as well as rehabilitation, technical assistance and training related to improved 
aquaculture (fish and shrimp) practices.  
 
A3:  Support to the livestock sub-sector (US$4.2 million).  This sub-component will 
promote improvements in the overall management and production practices in the sub-
sector (e.g. restoration of cold chain systems for vaccination delivery, stocking of 
improved goats, sheep and poultry, introduction of improved grasses for animal fodder, 
construction of improved model dairy and poultry sheds). The focus will be on improved 
technologies and enhance farmer knowledge about the livestock sector that is suitable for 
the coastal areas.  
 
A4: Support to community mobilization and facilitation and component management 
(US$3.4 million). This sub-component will facilitate the identification and support of 
formal and informal farmer/fishers’ groups and production and marketing community-
based organizations (CBOs) (some of which will have been formed under the existing 
SIPP as described earlier) to best deliver knowledge, goods and services under this 
component.  It will also include, inter alia, an awareness/communication campaign and 
needs assessments directly with the targeted communities and farmer groups at the start 
of the project.   This sub-component will also finance the management of component A 
including technical assistance, provision of office equipment and vehicles, and the 
Page  3
establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system for the component.  A 
detailed implementation plan for this component will be provided in the Operational 
Manual.  
 
Component B:  Reconstruction and Improvement of Multipurpose Shelters (US$40 
million)  
 
B1:  Construction of new shelters (US$ 15 million).  This sub-component will support 
construction of 50 new multi-purpose shelters to build greater protection for future 
disaster events.  
 
B2:  Improvement of existing shelters (US$15 million).  This sub-component will 
finance the repairs and improvement of about 250 existing shelters that are damaged or 
cannot be used due to inadequacies.  
 
B3:  Improvement of communication network to shelters (US$7 million).  This sub-
component will finance the reconstruction of the road and communication network to the 
shelters constructed under the project to make them more accessible and effective.  
 
B4:  Design and construction supervision of shelters (US$3 million).  This sub-
component will finance consulting services for surveys, designs, environmental and 
social impact assessments, environment and resettlement management plans, and 
construction supervision of multipurpose disaster shelters and all works covered under 
the above components.  This will also include resources to facilitate consultations with 
the local communities in identifying sites, needs and suitable design for the shelters.  
 
Component C:  Rehabilitation of Coastal Embankments (US$20 million)  
 
C1:  Rehabilitation of coastal embankments (US$18 million).  This sub-component will 
finance the emergency repair to over 100 km of coastal embankments damaged during 
the 2007 cyclone.  The repair works will be designed with improved standards so that 
protection can be provided in these coastal areas in future from similar storms. This will 
include vegetation/plantation along embankments to improve the effectiveness of these 
structures.  
 
C2:  Design and construction supervision of coastal embankments (US$2 million).  This 
sub-component will finance consulting services for surveys, designs, environmental and 
social impact assessments, environment and resettlement management plans, and 
construction supervision for embankments and all works covered under the above sub-
components.  This will also include resources to facilitate consultations with the local 
communities in identifying sites, needs and suitable design for the embankments.  
 
Component D: Long-Term Disaster Risk Management Program (US$16 million)  
 
D1:  Disaster risk mitigation and reduction (US$8 million).  This sub-component will 
support the capacity building of the Disaster Management Bureau (DMB), support for 
Page  4
detailed multi-hazard risk vulnerability modeling and assessment, and the strengthening 
of emergency preparedness at the community levels.  
 
D2:  Preparation of future projects for River Bank Improvement, Coastal Embankment 
Improvement and Gorai River Restoration Programs (US$6.2 million).  This sub-
component will finance the preparation studies for selected activities under the first phase 
(Table 3) of the identified long-term program.  This includes studies related to the River 
Bank Improvement Program (RBIP) for revamping the Brahmaputra River Bank 
Embankment (BRE) starting from the town of Sirgajanj town to Kazaipur and moving 
northwards, Coastal Embankment Improvement Program (CEIP), and updating and 
revision of documents for the Gorai River Restoration Project (GRRP).  
 
D3:  Preparation of future projects for disaster shelters and up-gradation of rural road 
network (US$1.8 million).  This sub-component will finance preparation studies for: (a) 
construction of new disaster shelters with an investment cost of about US$200 million; 
and (ii) up-gradation of rural road network in the disaster prone areas. This would cover 
feasibility studies, surveys, for the whole investment and tender designs and bidding 
documents for first package consisting of works for about US$100 million.  
 
Component E: Monitoring and Evaluation of Project Impact (US$3.0 Million).  
 
This sub-component will finance oversight monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities 
to provide continuous feedback to the Government, Project Steering Committee (PSC), 
and implementing agencies on project performance and impact of its various components, 
so that corrective actions can be undertaken in a timely manner. The M&E consultants 
will also supervise implementation of the overall Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) and Social/Resettlement Policy Frameworks (S/RPF), careful review 
and monitoring of sub-project specific Social and Environmental Management Plans and 
impact assessments and supervision of their implementation.  This consultancy will also 
help to reinforce overall transparency and governance during Project implementation.  
 
Component F: Project Management, Technical Assistance, Strategic Studies and 
Training, and Emergency Support for Future Disasters (US$14 million).  
 
This sub-component will support the Government in implementing the project, 
coordinating all project related activities, and provide resources for needed strategic 
studies, technical assistance and training.  This includes:  
 
(F1)   support for the operation of the Project Coordination and Monitoring Unit 
(PCMU) within the Ministry of Planning (US$3 million);  
 
(F2)   consulting services, studies and other related costs for establishing financing 
facility to fund recovery from disasters in Bangladesh i.e. disaster management response 
fund/facility (DMRF)  (US$0.3 million);  
 
(F3)   strategic studies (e.g. opportunities for buying risk coverage from the international 
capital market, including re-insurers in case of catastrophic and rare events), and other 
Page  5
studies/pilot projects which may be identified during the project implementation, and  for 
technical and financial audits (US$1.2 million);  
 
(F4)   technical assistance and training in such areas as disaster management and 
preparedness, construction, contract management, financial management, training on 
environmental and social assessment and (US$1.5 million); and  
 
(F5) support for emergency recovery from a future disaster that may occur during the 
implementation period of the project (US$8 million).  Possibility of using these funds for 
initial capitalization of DMRF would be examined, when the fund is established.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will be limited to the cyclone affected areas i.e., coastal areas and 
part of the central Bangladesh. The worst affected districts of cyclone are in the Lower 
Gangetic delta, mostly below 3 meters above sea level and vulnerable to floods and storm 
surges. The delta is characterized by high fertility and agricultural productivity. However, 
land holdings are usually small due to a high population growth leading to lack of land 
not already committed to agriculture; growing demand for other land uses such as 
infrastructure, industry and urban settlement, making land the scarcest factor of 
production.  
 
Significantly affected by Cyclone Sidr are also the wetland areas in the southern part of 
Satkhira, Khulna and Bagerhat districts. These mangrove forests, called Sundarbans, are 
a
world heritage site with rare flora and fauna. However, no physical infrastructure is 
proposed for Sundarbans under the proposed project. Studies will be carried out for 
developing program for restoration of Gorai River under the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project recognizes the emergency nature of the proposed recovery and reconstruction 
operations and proposed areas for Bank financing, while at the same time ensures due 
diligence in managing potential environment and social risks. The sub-components/sub-
projects are not expected to result in limited irreversible or cumulative environmental and 
social impacts, since the project primarily supports rehabilitation of damaged 
infrastructure and facilities, emergency support to agricultural productivity, capacity 
development and preparation of long-term projects. The two components involving 
construction of shelters (Component B) and rehabilitation/improvement of coastal 
embankments (Component C) which are likely to involve environmental and social issues 
will be implemented by LGED and BWDB respectively.  Under the ongoing projects (the 
Water Management Improvement, Municipal Services and Rural Transport Improvement 
Projects) an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social/Resettlement 
Policy Framework (S/RPF) have been agreed with two implementing agencies.  
 
It has been agreed with GoB that building upon the existing EMF and 
Social/Resettlement Policy S/RPF,  Project specific EMP and S/RPF will be developed 
and agreed with the Bank prior to issuing any works contracts. The EMF and RPF will 
set out procedures and guidelines for environment and social assessment of sub-projects 
such as new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments before finalization of design 
and implementation arrangements. It will also specify screening, monitoring, and post-
evaluation mechanisms. Based on the EMF and S/RPF the sub-project or scheme-specific 
Environment Management Plans (EMP) and Social Management Plans (SMP) will be 
prepared as part of the sub-project/scheme design process. The EMPs/SMPs will be 
reviewed, screened by the independent M&E consultants, and cleared by the Bank prior 
to initiation of the bidding process for construction. Land acquisition, if any, will be 
carried out with prior approval of the Bank that would also determine the eligibility of 
financing of land acquisition cost from the IDA credit. During implementation the M&E 
consultants will ensure effective implementation of agreed EMP and SMP provisions for 
the given sub-project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The nature of the project, which is intended to rehabilitate the impact of cyclone Sidr, is 
unlikely to lead any significant incremental long-term impacts since most infrastructures 
already existed prior to the cyclone. Indirect impacts may arise due to the sudden increase 
in demand for raw materials for construction activities. Similar to existing EMF and 
S/RPF of Water Management Improvement Project, the EMF and S/RPF will have 
provisions for analysis of any potential indirect or long-term adverse impacts and taking 
necessary mitigation measures to ensure minimal impacts.   
 
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All sub-projects will be subject to an environmental screening at an appropriate level of 
assessment based on the EMF to determine appropriate extent and type of EA. The 
screening process will distinguish sub-projects requiring an environmental review or 
more detailed environmental assessments. The later is expected for the new construction 
(e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments) and full environment 
assessment will be carried out with sound environmental professional (and cleared by the 
Bank). These sub-projects will undergo an analysis of alternatives with respect to the 
location and design as per the EMF.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has agreed to prepare separate Environment Management Framework 
(EMF) and Social/Resettlement Policy Framework (S/RPF) utilizing the previous project 
experience specifically Water management Improvement Project (WMIP). The EMF and 
S/RPF will set out policies, acts, rules, procedures to be followed and organizational 
arrangements to manage and mitigate the environmental and social impacts, prior to 
finalization of design and mobilization of civil works contract. The EMF and S/RPF will 
provide screening, monitoring, and post-evaluation mechanisms.  The sub-project or 
scheme specific EMPs and SMPs will be guided by the EMF and S/RPF and will provide 
site-specific mitigation and monitoring measures.  
 
The project will be implemented by three agencies, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture 
and Disaster Management (through DMB and FAO), the Ministry of Water Resources 
(through BWDB), and the Ministry of Local Governments (through LGED). These 
agencies have experienced in managing Bank financed projects and reasonable capacities 
to implement the planned activities. The following process will be followed during 
implementation:  
 
a) 
For rehabilitation of embankments and any potential realignment needs 
–
BWDBwill carry out screening to assess the need and scope of environmental and social 
assessment for both new infrastructure and identified rehabilitation of structures. 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans will be 
prepared and reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  
 
b) 
 LGED will be responsible to carry out screening and initiate appropriate level of 
environment and social assessment including preparation of EMPs and RAPs (if 
applicable) fpr construction of shelters. The EAs will be reviewed and cleared by the 
Bank before finalization of design and initiation of civil works.  
 
c) 
In order to ensure effective implementation of EMPs (and RAPs if applicable), a 
separate independent M&E consultancy (financed under sub-component E) will report to 
the PSC and is responsible for overall monitoring and supervision of the implementation 
and impact (including environmental and social) of various sub-components. They will 
also supervise implementation of the overall EMF and S/RPF, review and monitor for 
Page  8
each sub-project the specific Social and Environmental Management Plans and 
supervision of their implementation.  
 
d)In implementation of component A, although use of pesticides is not expected, in the 
unlikely event of their usage, FAO and World Bank Guidelines for use of pesticides/agro-
chemicals will be applied.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project are those affected by the Cyclone Sidr. The project is 
designed based on the Joint Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment (JDLNA) of the Sidr 
affected areas. The process of JDLNA included field visits in the affected areas, 
consultations with communities, local level NGOs and government officials. Detail 
discussion was also held at central level with key government officials, NGO leaders, 
civil societies and development partners.  
 
The EMF and S/RPF will require consultation with the local communities, NGOs and 
government officials/agencies. Similarly, sub-project specific EA will be prepared in 
consultation with affected communities and the draft will again be consulted with 
communities and NGOs. EAs will also be published in the website for public comments. 
The proposed operations will support a number of studies for future infrastructure 
investments, for which World Bank safeguard policies relating to consultation and 
disclosure will be applied. The M&E consultants will supervise implementation of the 
overall EMF and S/RPF, review and monitor for each sub-projects the specific social and 
environmental management plans and supervision of their implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/27/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/27/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/27/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  9
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  10
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
08/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
07/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
08/29/2008 
Comments:  Cleared on the understanding that this emergency operation will provide final safeguard 
documents before issuance of any physical works contracts. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
08/29/2008 
Comments:  Approved 
