Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3813
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P106216 
Project Name:  Higher Education Quality Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Benoit Millot 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
81.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.50
10.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The key project development objective is to improve the quality and relevance of the 
teaching and research environment in higher education institutions through encouraging 
both innovation and accountability within universities and by enhancing the technical and 
institutional capacity of the higher education sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project development objective would be achieved through three major components: 
(i) an innovation fund mechanism open to both public and private universities 
(Component 1); (ii) capacity building of UGC and universities (Component 2); and (iii) 
providing better access to global knowledge network (Component 3). In addition, the a 
fourth Component 4 will be devoted to the Project Management and Monitoring.  
 
PROJECT COMPONENTS  
 
Component 1 
–
Promoting Academic Innovation (USD 50.2 million)  
 
The objectives of this component are to establish enabling conditions to enhance the 
quality and relevance of teaching, learning and research and to introduce an efficient 
instrument for the allocation of public funds with an emphasis on innovation and 
Page  2
accountability.  The mechanism selected to reach this objective is the provision of 
additional resources through an Academic Innovation Fund (AIF) accessible to all public 
and private universities on a competitive basis. It would provide incentives to launch 
initiatives aimed at improving their performance.  It would instill emulation and 
accountability, and help to infuse dynamism in the academic community, without 
threatening its members. The AIF will introduce the concept that resources follow 
innovation and performance.  It will be accessible to university departments, centers and 
institutes fulfilling specific eligibility criteria, selection criteria, proposal submission 
procedures, which will be carefully spelled out in a detailed Operations Manual. The 
possible use of the fund will be:  
 
a.  Small infrastructure renovation/refurbishing  
 
b.
Library (books, journals)  
 
c.  Teaching materials (lab equipment etc.)  
 
d.
On-line facilities (including access to digital libraries)  
 
e.  Teachers
’
development (training/seminars/conferences)  
 
f.  Curriculum development/ modernization of curriculum  
 
g.  Research collaboration with foreign universities  
 
h.
Collaboration with industries  
 
i.  Research projects (including publications)  
 
j.  Development of career centers (for facilitation of internship, job placement)  
 
k.
Quality enhancement activities (quality enhancement cell, self-study, etc.)  
 
l.  Scholarships and fellowships  
 
m.  Visiting foreign faculty  
 
Component 2 – Building Institutional Capacity (USD 4.4 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to reinforce the management capacity of the sector, 
both at the central level and at the level of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). This 
component is closely linked to the AIF, and is expected both to buttress the former and to 
benefit all public universities as well as private ones, will include the following sub-
components: (i) Improving the strategic capacity of UGC; and (ii) Strengthening the 
institutional capacity of the universities.  
 
The sub-component 2.1 ‘Improving the strategic capacity of UGC’ aims to endow the 
UGC with the human and information resources needed to steer the higher education 
sector.  To achieve the target, the project will support the following activities: (i) capacity 
building for strategic planning of higher education sector; (ii) development of a higher 
education management information system (HEMIS); and (iii) upgrading of UGC 
management capacity.  
 
The sub-component 2.2 ‘Strengthening capacity of the universities’ is designed to: (i) 
strengthen institutional capacity for preparation and evaluation of AIF proposals and 
implementation and management of AIF sub-projects for all AIF eligible public and 
private universities; (ii) increase awareness about the AIF among the key stakeholders 
through appropriate media and communication campaigns with specific emphasis on 
Page  3
academic innovation and institutional capacity enhancement; and (iii) strengthen 
institutional capacity for self-assessment in public universities on a voluntary basis. To 
that end, the project will support awareness campaigns for the AIF, training and 
workshops related to the academic innovation, and a self-assessment pilot.  
 
Component 3- Raising the Connectivity Capacity of the Higher Education Sector (USD 
34.0 million)  
 
This Component is designed to support the creation of the Bangladesh Research and 
Education Network (BREN), a high performance ICT network (Intranet) providing 
connectivity among education and research institutions in both public and private sectors 
to enable academics, scientists and researchers engaged in higher education and research 
to communicate with their peers within the country. The network, with its state-of-the-art 
high performance broadband internet connection at a reasonable cost, will support 
geographically dispersed academics, scientists and researchers with reliable access to 
high-end computing, simulation tools and massive datasets.  It will also be connected 
with other regional and trans-continental RENS via global ICT highway and thus link 
faculty and students of Bangladesh to global academic community and learning 
resources. It will facilitate international collaborative research and will catalyze 
innovation in the country.  
 
Component 4- Project Management (USD 2.9 million)  
 
The forth component of the HEQEP is dedicated to all the activities to be undertaken 
under the other two components.  Its objective is to ensure the proper implementation, 
management, and monitoring and evaluation of the project, and it is constituted of two 
sub-components, aiming to reach this objective.  
 
The sub-
component 4.1 ‘Project Management Unit’ will be established in order toensure 
smooth project implementation.  The overall responsibility for the proposed project 
would lie with the UGC, as the implementing agency, with its line units. The proposed 
HEQEP Unit will be led by a full time Project Director and staffed with key technical, 
procurement, and financial management staff.  Its main functions will be to plan, manage, 
implement and coordinate activities under the proposed project. In addition, project 
management and implementation capacity will be augmented through the use of 
government and private specialized agencies.  
 
The sub-component 4.2 ‘Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)’ aims to have built-in 
mechanisms to ensure that both monitoring and evaluation instruments are in place at the 
outset of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nationwide in selected public and private universities, 
their faculties, departments, centers and institutions fulfilling eligibility criteria defined in 
project operation manual on a competitive basis.   
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The activities identified under the project are mainly technical assistance in nature and no 
major infrastructural activities are proposed. It will not require any acquisition of land, 
construction of any new institution or building or any major physical expansion. The 
proposed project may finance, among other things, small infrastructure 
renovation/refurbishing construction. These small scale construction activities are not 
anticipated to cause any major environmental impacts considering that all will be done 
with the existing structures in order to provide better facilities. The proposed project will 
support six categories research activities under the Academic Innovation Fund (AIF). 
These are: i) Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, ii) Business and Management, iii) 
Physical, Biological, and Earth Sciences, iv) Engineering and Technology, v) Medical, 
Health, and Nutritional Sciences, and vi) Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. These 
research activities can be laboratory based or field based. The research activities to be 
carried out under  i) Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences and ii) Business and 
Management are not expected to create any major environmental impact. However, the 
research under other 4 categories may have negative impact on environment.  
 
Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts from 
relatively limited scale of the renovation/refurbishing construction works and academic 
research works, the proposed operation is to b
e
classified as category ‘B’.  Since the 
extent and exact locations of reconstruction works and research works are not known at 
this stage and may not be known at appraisal, the requirement to carry out an 
environmental analysis as part of project preparation can be waived but, for subprojects 
with potential adverse impacts, a limited environmental analysis/screening will be done 
during project implementation prior to approval for any sub-project. However, if any land 
Page  5
filling is required for sub-project site preparation such as filling of low lying lands, full 
Environmental Impact Assessment (not only an Environmental Management Plan) will 
be a condition for IDA financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative study for small scale infrastructure renovation/refurbishing construction 
and research proposals is possible at this stage of the project as the extent and nature of 
the sub-projects will be identified during implementation of the projects. However, the 
sub-projects will be assessed and awarded based on defined indicators including 
environmental parameters.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an Environment Management Framework, which describes 
the necessity of environmental screening for any small scale infrastructure 
renovation/refurbishing construction and research proposals. The process has also been 
described in the operational manual of the project. The sub-project proponent i.e., public 
and private universities, their faculties, departments, centers and institutions fulfilling 
eligibility criteria will use a sample checklist to identify any environmental issues in the 
infrastructure renovation/refurbishing construction works. If there is any environmental 
issue identified, the project proponent will add an Environmental Management Plan with 
their proposal. For the research activities, the applicant (research student/faculty) of 
research proposal will submit another environmental checklist duly reviewed and signed 
by proposed supervisor and departmental head. If there is substantive environmental 
impact, the applicant will submit the mitigation measures for the activities.  
 
Though this is the first higher education project in Bangladesh, the Borrower (MOE) has 
reasonable experience and capacity in managing environmental safeguard issues related 
to education projects - the Second Female Secondary School Assistance Project (2002-
2007).  The University Grants Commission (UGC), the implementing agency is not 
adequately staffed to effectively play its strategic role. The project activities will include 
capacity development of UGC and to ensure safeguard issues, an environmental 
professional will be included in the committee for screening, selection and monitoring of 
all sub-projects. Further to that, UGC will hire short-term consultant as needed to monitor 
the environmental safeguard issues in the selected sub-projects and publish quarterly 
report on environmental compliance of sub-projects based on agreed monitoring 
indicators. UGC will develop its own monitoring plan to oversee environmentally critical 
sub-project. The Project Director will be responsible for overall environmental safeguard 
and reporting. In addition, UGC will also assign 2 professional staffs as additional 
responsibility to review the environmental safeguard issues in sub-projects.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMF will be shared by the Ministry of Education with concerned academic 
institutions, Department of Environment and civil society. As no potential affectees are 
identified as this stage, such field level consultation will be waved here.  It will be 
disclosed in both Bangla and English by the Ministry of Education on behalf of the GOB 
in Bangladesh and it will also be made available at the World Bank’s InfoShop. Relevant 
subproject specific safeguard documents/mitigation plans (EMPs) prepared subsequently 
will also be disclosed to the public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/05/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Benoit Millot 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
08/27/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. Project is transferred to SASHD for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
09/03/2008 
Comments:  approved 
