Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3527 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P110376 
Project Name: Livelihood Restoration in Cyclone Affected Area-Additional Financing-III 
SIPP 
Task Team Leader: Meena M. Munshi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (40%);Micro- and SME finance (20%) 
Theme: Rural non-farm income generation (P);Other rural development (P);Participation 
and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the additional financing will remain consistent with that of the original project 
and will continue to support GOB/SDF in developing effective and efficient financing and 
institutional arrangements for responding to emergency needs and improving access of cyclone-
affected families to local infrastructure, assets, and livelihoods.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Responding to the Government of Bangladesh’s (GOB) request for rehabilitation and 
reconstruction assistance in the aftermath of Cyclone Sidr (November 2007), the Bank is 
implementing a cyclone assistance program to help the country cope with the current situation 
and build resilience to future disasters.  This is built on a three-phase approach:  (i) A quick-
disbursing US$100 million financial support to the GoB budget, under the Development Support 
Credit IV.  This will assist in reducing the fiscal pressure on the FY08 budget arising from non-
programmed cyclone-related spending and financing the immediate recovery needs; (ii) an 
Page  2
emergency-response Livelihoods Restoration Program that will help restore livelihoods in 
cyclone-affected areas, through emergency assistance funds, community infrastructure, micro-
credit, and income generating activities; and (iii) a $175 million Emergency Recovery Credit for 
infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction that will largely be focused on the medium to 
long-term restoration and rehabilitation needs.  
 
Given satisfactory performance of the ongoing Social Investment Program Project (SIPP) to 
date, GOB and IDA have identified it as one of the best instruments for channeling funds quickly 
and efficiently to support livelihoods restoration.It is therefore proposed that $50 million 
assistance for the second phase described above will be channeled as Additional Financing to the 
SIPP.  
 
The Livelihood Restoration in Cyclone Affected Areas project, under the ongoing SIPP, will 
support GOB’s efforts to help people restore their livelihood activities in the wake of Sidr and 
build long-term preparedness by mainstreaming disaster risk reduction measures into people’s 
lifestyles and livelihoods under the framework of the original SIPP.  
 
The project activities aim to:  
 
(i) 
empower the rural poor in the cyclone affected villages by building community 
institutions, building capacity, and providing direct funding for investments;  
 
(ii) 
restore the livelihoods and assets of the poorest and most vulnerable families affected by 
the cyclone so as to help them recover from the losses caused; and  
 
(iii) 
prepare the communities for future disasters through risk reduction strategies to cope with 
losses and access timely support during disasters like flood, cyclone etc.  
 
The implementation arrangements under this project will be similar those for the SIPP-Flood 
Restoration and Recovery Assistance Additional Financing (II). SDF will be in charge of overall 
project coordination, management and monitoring through a dedicated disaster risk management 
unit (DRMU) that they are establishing within their organization to focus on the needs of cyclone 
affected communities. At the regional level, SDF will establish independent Appraisal and 
Monitoring Teams, reporting directly to the MD, to appraise the livelihood and disaster 
management plans of the community and check compliance with agreed rules and procedures.  
 
At the field level, given the urgent need to reach out to affected communities in a very short 
time, SDF will use three different models for community mobilization, facilitation, and 
institutional building: (a) mobilizing PKSF’s network ofPartner Organizations (POs); (b) hiring 
other NGOs/agencies that have expertise and local level presence in the cyclone affected areas; 
and (c) SDF will establish its own cluster facilitation teams in some of the target areas. The 
teams will facilitate the communities to implement the program.  At the community level, the 
community organizations representing the most vulnerable families will be responsible for 
planning, implementing and monitoring of the community livelihood and risk reduction plans.  
 
The fiduciary tasks of procurement and financial management are currently detailed in the 
Project Implementation Plan and Community Operational Manual for the SIPP, all of which have 
been approved by IDA. Audit reports and reviews during supervision missions attest to their 
Page  3
effectiveness, and these arrangements would be continued under the proposed Additional 
Financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The focus will be on the  worst affected districts (including Patuakhali, Barguna, Bagerhat and 
Pirojpur).  Piloting will begin in April 2008 in one or two of the worst affected Unions in each 
District.  The project will begin in late June 2008 and will ultimately cover about 12 to 14 of the 
most affected Upazillas and about 150 Unions. Assuming that the program will cover all the 
affected families in the target area, about 150,000 families will get direct benefit from the 
livelihood support activities. However, the infrastructure rehabilitation work and institutional 
development at the local level will indirectly benefit the whole community (about 1.0 million 
population).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
SDF has been implementing SIPP-I and SIPP supplemental since 2003, so they are experienced 
in managing safeguards issues in community driven projects such as this. SDF has both a Tribal 
Development Plan and an Environmental Manual (Operational Manual Volume III: Environment 
Assessment Manual) approved by IDA, which will be updated to reflect specific conditions of 
the cyclone affected area, and on which training will be provided to facilitators and communities.  
 
Environmental safeguards:  As the implementation will involve new partnership with PKSF’s 
network of Partner Organizations (POs) and other NGOs/agencies, thereis a need for awareness 
of applicability of Bank safeguards policies in general and environmental assessment capacity 
amongst field level staffs in particular.This is in order to ensure that environmental assessments 
for subprojects are carried out in accordance with the Operational Manual (OM), as well as 
making sure that mitigation measures are adequately implemented by the proponents.  
 
As under the original project, no subprojects will be approved or funds transferred until 
environmental viability of the investments is determined, and subproject agreements between 
SDF/implementing organizations and the community organizations contain environmental 
compliance clauses as detailed in the OM.  Community subprojects will continue to be subject to 
the screening and impact assessment criteria as detailed therein.  Given the expanded scope of 
work under this project, SDF is hiring a full-time environmental specialist, who will work 
closely with the DRMU to monitor environmental issues in subprojects.  
 
Social safeguards:  No involuntary resettlement or impacts on cultural property are envisaged 
under the project and the EA Manual clearly states that those sub-projects which may require 
involuntary land acquisition or resettlement would not be eligible for funding.  Should any cases 
involving involuntary resettlement arise, OP 4.12 would be fully complied with.  
 
In the original project districts, according to the 1991 Census, 0.2% of the population in each 
district is from minority tribal groups (Garo and Saontal).  While small in number, the social 
assessment identified members as among the poorest and most vulnerable and therefore OP4.10 
was triggered and a Tribal Development Plan prepared.  In the new districts to be covered under 
the Cyclone operation, the 2001 census data indicates the tribal population to be very small.  In 
Barguna, where there is the largest population (Rakhain people) they make up 1% of the total 
Page  4
population.  In Patuakhali, Bagerhat and Piorjpur, the proportions of tribal groups are 0.04%, 
0.5% and 0.005% respectively.  As for most non-Chittagong tribal populations in Bangladesh, 
the groups are scattered and relatively assimilated with the general population.  
 
One inherent feature of the SIPP model is participatory targeting of the most vulnerable 
households/families, and reaching out to them by involving them in the decision making and 
sharing of benefits.  The additional financing will use the same participatory targeting 
framework.  As part of community/social mobilization process, the program will use 
participatory tools (participatory identification of the poor/vulnerable methodology) to help 
communities assess their capacities, risks, and vulnerabilities to determine what different levels 
of assistance are needed, and to come up with participatory targeting criteria for various 
interventions.  In areas, where groups and communities belong to the tribal communities, the 
program will follow the Tribal Development Plan as well, ensuring compliance with OP 4.10.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDN) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Category:   B - Partial Assessment. Given that the project is demand-driven, 
the team has agreed that any requests from communities that fall beyond the Category B criteria 
will be treated separately and given their own environment assessment per World Bank 
guidelines.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
In the new districts to be covered under the Cyclone operation, the 2001 census data indicates 
the tribal population to be very small.  In Barguna, where there is the largest population (Rakhain 
people) they make up 1% of the total population.  In Patuakhali, Bagerhat and Piorjpur, the 
proportions of tribal groups are 0.04%, 0.5% and 0.005% respectively.  As for most non-
Chittagong tribal populations in Bangladesh, the groups are scattered and relatively assimilated 
with the general population. A Tribal development plan is in use for the original project. In areas 
in the cyclone area where groups and communities belong to the tribal communities, the program 
will follow the Tribal Development Plan as well, ensuring compliance with OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meena M. Munshi 
04/09/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/09/2008 
Comments:  ISDS cleared for public disclosure. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
04/07/2008 
Comments:  ISDS is approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
