Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3619
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P102542 
Project Name:  Bangladesh National Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  Andrea Vermehren 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 28, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (80%);Pre-primary education (20%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Social risk mitigation (S);Nutrition and food security 
(S);Participation and civic engagement (S);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to ensure that targeted beneficiaries in selected 
rural and urban areas will utilize social safety net programs delivered through an efficient 
and accountable decentralized mechanism.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is comprised of three components that would help the Government of 
Bangladesh consolidate and strengthen its social protection system. The first component 
involves the establishment and implementation of a conditional cash transfer (CCT) 
program in selected urban and rural areas of the country to smooth income of extreme 
poor families and encourage investment in their children’s education, health and 
nutrition. This demand side intervention would be complemented in urban areas by a 
supply side intervention - the second component - that would provide essential early 
childhood development services for poor, urban children. Children from CCT families 
would have priority access to the ECD services. The third component would strengthen 
the Ministry of Local Government's capacity to facilitate the social protection policy 
dialogue and monitor, coordinate, and evaluation social assistance programs.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Strengthening Social Safety Nets through Local Governments (total 
$86.7, IDA $78.1 million, GoB $8.6 million). This component would set up a safety net 
system in selected urban and rural areas of Bangladesh that would provide cash transfers 
to selected, extreme poor households. This component would provide cash transfers to 
approximately 200,000 poor households, or about 1.000.000 individuals. The project 
would establish administrative systems in municipalities to (i) select and target the 
poorest households based on geographical criteria, community identification and a proxy 
means test (PMT), (ii) make cash payments through the local banking sector, (iii) forge 
links with the education sector to monitor school attendance of beneficiary children 
(compliance monitoring), and (iv) monitor and eval
uate the program’s performance and 
impact.  
 
Component 2: Expanding early childhood development (ECD) for poor children in 
urban communities (Total US$10 million, of which IDA $ 9.7 million, GoB $ 1 million). 
This component would seek to improve early childhood development outcomes for about 
60,000 children aged 6 months to 6 years in poor urban areas of the same municipalities 
selected for Component 1. It would provide an ECD block grant to participating 
municipalities to finance community-based ECD services that would promote the health, 
physical, nutritional and psychological wellbeing of young children. In addition, these 
services will help improve their levels of school readiness. A situation analysis 
commissioned as part of the preparation for the project in two towns viz. Narayonganj 
and Munshiganj, where the components 1 and 2 are going to be piloted, indicates the 
significant need for making ECD services accessible to children.  
 
Component 3: Strengthening the institutional capacity to develop, coordinate and 
monitor safety net programs and promote social protection policies (Total US$ 2.6, of 
which IDA is $ 2.5 million, GoB $ 0.1 million). This component would seek to provide 
elements for developing an overarching Social Protection policy framework for 
Bangladesh by strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Local 
Government and other relevant ministries to coordinate and implement policies and 
programs in the social protection area.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide, in selected urban municipalities and rural UPs.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No safeguard policies are triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Andrea Vermehren 
04/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mansoora Rashid 
05/05/2008 
Comments:   
