Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3528
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P098151 
Project Name:  Clean Air and Sustainable Environment (CASE) 
Task Team Leader:  Sameer Akbar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 6, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (60%);Other industry (30%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.24 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.30 
 
NORWAY: Norwegian Agency for Dev. Coop. (NORAD) 
0.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
7.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to facilitate the adoption of sustainable 
environmental initiatives in the key polluting sectors (urban transport and brick making) 
with a focus on reducing air pollution and improving safe mobility, through the 
implementation of demonstration sub-projects in the cities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is structured into two components: (i) environment, which includes 
addressing brick kiln emissions; and (ii) transport, which includes addressing traffic 
management and safety issues. In addition, given the various agencies involved in the 
project implementation, a third component, project management, is included. The details 
of the components are provided here.  
 
Component 1: Environment (US$ 16.31 million)  
Page  2
This project component is aimed at strengthening the environmental ag
ency’s capacity 
and capability to effectively address air pollution issues. It will be executed by the 
Department of Environment (DOE), which is a part of the MOEF, in consultation with 
stakeholders from the key polluting sub-sectors. A summary is provided below.  
 
Sub-component 1A: Capacity building for air quality management (US$ 7.86 million)  
 
This sub-component will support: (i) the Air Quality Cell (AQC) at DOE; (ii) air quality 
monitoring, data analysis, and reporting; and (iii) standards, enforcement, and controls 
for emissions reduction.  
 
1A.(i): Air Quality Cell (AQC).  This sub-component will provide support to the AQC 
at DOE which has been envisaged as the vehicle for implementing all activities related to 
the abatement of air pollution in Bangladesh.  DOE recognized the need for creating 
AQC because the air quality program activities in the department were dispersed among 
many units within DOE and they needed to be consolidated.  A detailed report and 
proposal on AQC’s administrative structure and staffing was prepared by an international 
consultant during project preparation. GOB, through the Establishment Division and the 
Ministry of Finance is in the process of establishing the AQC with 20 staff members 
initially, which is envisaged to increase in the context of the ongoing reform on DOE 
staffing.  AQC is proposed to be responsible for programs in air quality monitoring, data 
analysis and reporting, program planning - including standards, enforcement and controls 
for emissions reduction from vehicles and industrial facilities; as well as public 
information and administration. To empower AQC’s staff, the project will support a 
strong capacity building program. In view of the improvements to DOE’s staff working 
on air quality management, the project will support the creation of infrastructure facilities 
for developing and implement air quality management programs and initiatives.  
 
1A.(ii): Air quality monitoring, data analysis and reporting.  The previous Bank-
supported Air Quality Management Project (AQMP) helped create an air quality network 
of five Continuous Air Monitoring Stations (CAMS) and equipped DOE with nine 
Satellite Air Monitoring Stations (SAMS), and laboratory equipment. The CASE project 
will build on the progress made under AQMP and will support the provision of 
appropriate hardware and software facilities, selected studies to strengthen DOE’s 
various functions, enhancements for reporting, use of air quality information for 
planning, public awareness (via website and other media) and development of public alert 
systems. Six new CAMS will be installed and industrial facility monitoring undertaken, 
in order to complement ambient air quality data with source-oriented emissions data, 
which will help in identifying the sources of emissions and developing action plans for 
reducing air pollution.  
 
1A.(iii): Standards, enforcement and controls for emissions reduction. This 
subcomponent will focus on creating / strengthening the regulatory framework for 
emissions reduction from vehicles and small scale industrial sources.  By law, DOE 
within MOEF has the legal authority and responsibility for air quality management.  
However, the Environmental Conservation Act (ECA) of 1995 and Environmental 
Conservation Rules (ECR) of 1997 do not have adequate enforcement mechanisms.  
Page  3
Revisions of the ECR 1997 are needed in order to introduce stricter standards and an 
amendment of the ECA 1995 is required to enforce “the polluter pays” principle. These 
will be supported by the project. The enforcement of current standards – a crucial part of 
environmental regulation – remains weak. Under the proposed project, the vehicular 
emission control program will be further strengthened with a focus on addressing 
emissions from diesel commercial vehicles , and stronger enforcement.  The emissions 
control program will be expanded to include control of industrial air emission through the 
introduction of stricter standards, compliance testing, and enforcement.  
 
Sub-component 1B: Brick kilns emissions management (US$ 5.67 million)  
 
This sub-component aims to usher in a new era for brick manufacturing in Bangladesh.  
On the one hand, DOE will work towards changing the institutional, legal and regulatory 
framework. The project will establish a Brick Project Advisory Committee with 
representatives from the Government, industry and stakeholder institutions.  The project 
aims to develop a long-term strategic policy framework for the brick industry that will 
include strengthening of laws and regulations.  The latter will include the revision of the 
Brick Burning Act and other related legislation.  In addition, it is expected that the 
capacity of GOB's personnel will be substantively built through awareness raising, 
competence building programs and exposure visits.  
 
On the other hand, the adoption of cleaner technologies and practices will be promoted 
with the brick enterprises through demonstration projects.  The brick sector industry 
association proposed approximately 35 demonstration projects as the minimum number 
required for catalyzing widespread adoption. Technical support to these cleaner 
technologies and practices are vital.  Such technical capacity development, an integral 
part of this sub-component, will be provided to the stakeholder institutions. Broadly 
referred to as the "stick-and-carrot" approach, this project will support a whole range of 
activities aimed at reducing local air emissions from the brick sector.  This will also lead 
to reduced energy consumption and therefore lower greenhouse gas emissions.   
Following the completion of the demonstration projects, it is estimated that some 400-
500  brick manufacturers (i.e., 10% of the total number of kilns or 42% of the north 
Dhaka cluster) will switch to the newer and cleaner brick manufacturing practices.  The 
latter would lead to a potential decrease of local emissions by 20-30%, and energy 
savings and greenhouse gas emissions reduction of 15-20%. Given the GHG emissions 
reduction potential, the project is facilitating the development of two carbon finance 
projects that are likely to be implemented in parallel with the CASE project.  It is 
envisaged that the revenue streams from carbon finance would provide additional 
incentive for the uptake of cleaner technologies and practices. Further assessment of the 
requirements for continued financial incentives would be undertaken during the early 
stages of the project implementation.  
 
Page  4
Sub-component 1C: Communication campaigns and Clean Air Initiatives Facility (US$ 
2.78 million)  
 
The communications campaign will be rolled out using all available media channels in 
English and Bangla to highlight the impact of local and global emissions from key 
transport and industrial sources, and the “co-benefits’ of addressing the same.  It will 
contain targeted messages for different stakeholders, and will also be linked with the 
national program for HIV/AIDS awareness to enhance the impact of the messages among 
workers in the transport and brick industry. Social marketing tools will be used to address 
socio-cultural issues.  The media campaign will also serve as the tool for GOB to reach 
out to different stakeholders and include them in the efforts to achieve the project’s 
development objectives. In doing so, it will work as a risk management tool for the 
project, since there are likely to be some winner and losers during project 
implementation.  
 
In addition, it will support outreach and establish a Clean Air Initiatives Facility (CAIF), 
a
program that will use appropriate instruments (e.g., contracts and  grants) to support 
clean air initiatives and activities by different stakeholder groups. Given the limited 
capacity of DOE especially in highly technical issues such as source apportionment and 
dispersion modeling, partnerships with academic and research institutions both at home 
and abroad will be useful.  Partnerships with civil society and other non-governmental 
institutions will also strengthen air quality outreach. The CAIF will aim to overcome the 
capacity limits and supplement the efforts of DOE to address air quality concerns in the 
immediate- and long-terms.  The detailed modalities of administering the CAIF will be 
worked out during the first year of the project and the facility is envisaged to become 
operational in the second year of project implementation.  
 
Component 2: Transport (US$ 51.57 million)  
 
Diesel buses are considered a major source of PM pollution in cities. Following the 
removal of approximately 35,000 two-stroke three-wheelers, approximately 10,000 
CNG-fuelled three-wheelers came onto the streets. While this led to a dramatic 
improvement in air quality in the short term, it also led to a large number of diesel buses 
coming onto the streets of Dhaka in order to satisfy the need for public transport and 
quickly negate the gains made by removal of two-stroke three-wheelers. Recently, the 
GOB has initiated a number of actions against buses in order to address the worsening 
congestion and air pollution problem: The registration of more than 15 year old buses has 
been disallowed; A vehicles inspection and maintenance program supported by the ADB 
is planned to be launched soon; All mini buses have been directed to convert to CNG by 
October 2008. If implemented, these actions can have a significant impact on the 
vehicular contribution to pollution in Dhaka. However, in order to sustain the gains 
envisaged, structural problems related to public transport planning, coordination, and 
operations need to be addressed.  
 
This component will support capacity building through technical assistance and 
demonstration SEIs in urban transport in Dhaka that will focus on reducing conflict 
between motorized and non-motorized transport (NMT) and congestion, as well as 
providing safe and better mobility for those who walk and use public transport, 
Page  5
particularly working women. It will also help strengthen the institutional, policy, and 
regulatory framework for public transport, and help mainstream environmental 
considerations into urban transport related decision making. As mentioned earlier, it has 
been established that interventions which promote non-motorized transport and a shift to 
less polluting modes of transport also deliver lower GHG emissions.   The SEIs will be 
consistent with the recommendations in the 2005 Strategic Transport Plan (STP) for 
Dhaka and will be designed to deliver and demonstrate tangible but modest results during 
the project duration, while helping plan and prepare for a larger urban transport 
intervention.   The outcomes of this component will consist of improved traffic flow, 
reduced congestion, enhanced mobility and safety of pedestrians and those who use 
public transport, in those areas of Dhaka where the sub-projects will be undertaken.   The 
development and execution of this component will involve a number of key stakeholders 
including, the Ministry of Communications (MOC), Bangladesh Road Transport 
Authority (BRTA), Dhaka Transport Coordination Board (DTCB), Dhaka City 
Corporation (DCC), Dhaka Metropolitan Police (DMP), as well as public transport 
owners and operators. A summary of the sub-components is provided below.  
 
Sub-component 2A: Physical improvement of traffic flow and pedestrian mobility (US$ 
43.57 million)  
 
This sub-component will include small investments in traffic engineering and 
management measures aimed at showing quick results in the location of intervention, 
consisting of improved traffic flow and movement of pedestrians, particularly where 
there is significant conflict between the traffic flow and pedestrian movement.   The 
investments will focus on foot over bridges (FOBs), traffic signals, one-way streets, 
separation of motorized and non-motorized traffic, and people-with-disability (PWD) 
friendly sidewalks.  The investment in sidewalks will also assist in the reduction of re-
suspension of particulate matter, a known problem in Dhaka, and one of the major 
contributors to local PM air pollution, as mentioned earlier.  The component will also 
support the development of a parking strategy, capacity building efforts and institutional 
strengthening related to the investments. It is to be noted that most of the interventions 
proposed in this sub-component have already been established as being instrumental in 
reducing GHG emissions from urban transport, and have been supported though GEF 
financing in a number of urban transport projects supported by the World Bank.  
 
Sub-component 2B: Preparation of the bus route network rationalization and franchising 
(US$ 6.62 million)  
 
The overall objective of this component is to encourage a modal shift from existing 
transport modes to cleaner and safer transport modes in Dhaka in the long term. The three 
necessary pillars to support the objective include: (i) technical studies; (ii) consensus 
building with all relevant stakeholders; and (iii) institutional strengthening.  This 
component would support the first two pillars. Specifically, the technical studies consist 
of: (i) public transport network study for Dhaka; (ii) and (ii) feasibility and detailed 
design of a bus rapid transit (BRT) or bus priority measures (BPM)  in Dhaka.  
Consensus building activities such as technical stakeholder workshops, training, and 
public relations campaigns are also envisaged under this sub-component.  
 
Page  6
It is envisaged that once the basic elements for bus route network rationalization and 
franchising 
–
institutional strengthening, legal and regulatory reform, and stakeholder 
consensus building are in place and detailed designs available, the physical investments 
for implementation of franchised operations on a priority corridor could commence as a 
follow-on project to be prepared on a fast track.  
 
Sub-component 2C: Institutional strengthening and regulatory review (US$ 1.38 
million)  
 
As part of the transport component, a review of the institutional and regulatory 
framework for public transport will be undertaken with a view to: (i) providing a pivotal 
role to the DTCB in planning, implementation, and coordination of urban transport; (ii) 
enabling bus sector reform with a focus on route rationalization and franchising; and (iii) 
facilitating the implementing the action plan developed in the context of the STP (and 
AQMP) to reduce air pollution from diesel vehicles.  This is expected in the long term to 
lead to the establishment of a unitary authority for urban transport that can plan, 
implement, and coordinate a multi-modal urban transit system.  
 
Technical assistance and capacity building will be provided also in the following areas 
and to the respective implementing agencies: (i) design of traffic engineering (DCC); ii) 
mainstreaming environmental management in urban transport planning (DTCB and 
DCC) (ii) traffic signal systems operation and maintenance (DCC); (iii) traffic 
management (DMP); and (iv) management of motor vehicle emissions (BRTA, DTCB).  
 
The project would also support the creation of a Traffic Management Committee (TMC) 
anchored at the DTCB. The TMC would have representation from all relevant 
stakeholders, and would ensure information sharing and coordination on urban transport 
related initiatives and interventions between them.  
 
Component 3: 
Project management (US$ 9.58 million)  
 
The MOEF is envisaged as the ministry where overall project coordination will be 
anchored.  Project implementation will be carried out by three agencies through their 
respective Project Implementation Units (PIUs): (i) DOE (specifically, the AQC) for the 
environment component; (ii)  DCC for implementing the traffic management and 
engineering component; and (iii) the DTCB for implementing the public transport related 
sub-component of the project.   The project management component will cover the costs 
of retroactive financing , consultants, travel, office equipment, audits and other operating 
costs necessary for project implementation and reporting.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the urban and peri-urban areas of Dhaka and other 
cities in Bangladesh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Teen Kari Barua (SASDI) 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Page  7
Ms Nilufar Ahmad (SASDI) 
Mr Sankaran Vaideeswaran (CESI2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Environment Safeguard Issues:  The project will have positive environmental benefits, 
as its objective is to abate air pollution, reduce greenhouse gas emissions and bring about 
energy savings through interventions in the key polluting sectors - urban transport and 
brick making. However, some of the physical investments will have construction-related 
environmental issues that will impact the workers as well as the passer-bys and 
neighborhood. These impacts are minor, temporary in nature and can be mitigated 
through appropriate management measures.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  Most of the activities proposed under the two components 
concern institutional/ regulatory reforms and capacity building in the organizations that 
are variously responsible for environmental protection and urban transportation planning 
and management.  As to social safeguards, the land-based physical works proposed under 
the two transport subcomponents, Improvement of Traffic Flow and Pedestrian Mobility, 
are expected to trigger th
e
Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Construction of 
new foot over bridges (FOBs); and development/improvement of bus bays, road 
junctions, sidewalks, and other facilities to improve vehicular and pedestrian mobility, 
may involve land acquisition and displacement of public land users. However, the 
magnitude of acquisition and the nature and scale of adverse impacts will not be known 
until specific subproject activities are selected and designed.  
 
Based on the experience of civil works implemented under Dhaka Urban Transport 
Project (DUTP) and on-going investigation of the general situation on the ground, it is 
Page  8
assumed that the physical activities envisaged under the project are unlikely to have 
significant social safeguard impacts.  Land acquisition from private ownerships, if 
required, is likely to be quite modest.  The other likely adverse impacts are expected to be 
on encroachers of public lands, and on vendors/traders who use the sidewalks and 
undeveloped spaces.  Impacts on encroachers may involve dismantling of small portions 
of storefronts that encroached into the sidewalks.  And the impacts on the sidewalk 
vendors/traders are expected to be temporary: they may have to make rooms for the civil 
works without having to stop their operations.  As seen with the existing ones, 
construction of FOBs may somewhat constrict movement of pedestrians in the landing 
areas who do not intend to cross the roads.  Shops and other establishments at the 
landings may become somewhat obstructed, but not to the extent to face business losses.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental Impacts:  The project will not have any indirect and/or long-term negative 
impacts. To ensure the same, the preparatory studies at the sub-project level will ensure 
that all impacts 
–
direct and indirect – are suitably mitigated.  
 
Social Impacts:  The need for private land acquisition is expected to be very modest and 
most likely to be in narrow strips at spots needed for traffic efficiency and safety. As seen 
under DUTP, the most likely adverse impacts are expected in temporary displacement 
during the construction period, of vendors from sidewalks and other undeveloped spaces 
that belong to the city and other public agencies.  Under DUTP, such vendors were 
allowed to use any vacant spots they could find in the vicinities without having to stop 
their various livelihood activities.  Many returned to their original spots as soon as 
construction works were over.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environmental Impacts:  From an environmental safeguards point of view, consideration 
of project alternatives is not specifically required as the environmental impacts are 
minimal and fully reversible.  Management measures will suffice to remediate these 
impacts.  However, as a part of the preparatory studies, environmental aspects will be 
studied. If changes are required due to environmental reasons, these will be incorporated.  
 
Social Impacts:  An environmental and social survey for 30 probable FOBs has been 
conducted to establish criteria to prioritize construction and locations, in terms of 
pedestrian needs and traffic situation, with particular attention to avoiding / minimizing 
potential social and environmental safeguard impacts.  Stakeholder consultations in this 
study included pedestrians, business owners in the FOB vicinities, sidewalk vendors, 
traffic control police personnel and the like.  Screening of selected junctions has also 
been done to assess signaling needs, which also include environmental and social 
safeguard issues that may arise due to a need for physical improvement of these 
junctions.  While land acquisition needs have been minimized by undertaking 
improvement of the existing facilities, all feasible alternative engineering designs will 
also be considered to avoid or minimize adverse impacts of the improvement works.   
Page  9
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To deal with the potential environmental and social safeguard impacts, the borrower has 
prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  This contains 
principles, policies, procedures and requirements that need to be adhered to during 
project preparation and implementation, addressing the requirements of the Bank’s 
Operational Policies OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement -- the two safeguard policies applicable to the project.  
 
On the environmental aspects, the ESMF includes (a) an overview of applicable 
environmental legislation, (b) an environmental screening procedure, (c) environmental 
requirements / guidelines that need to be integrated with the contract document in order 
to mitigate construction-related environmental impacts.  
 
On the social aspects, the ESMF consists of (a) a legal framework outlining the 
principles and guidelines which will be used to acquire lands and resume public lands 
from private users, and mitigate the adverse impacts; (b) a mitigation policy matrix in 
terms of impacts/loss categories; (c) arrangements for preparation and implement 
Resettlement Plans/Abbreviated Resettlement Plans (RPs/ARPs); (d) a grievance redress 
procedure for project affected persons; and (e) a monitoring scheme, with key indicators, 
for land acquisition and RP/ARP implementation.The ESMF, which will apply to the 
entire project, will provide the basis to prepare and implement RPs/ARPs as and when 
specific subprojects are found to cause adverse social safeguard impacts.  The RP/ARP 
for each subproject, or a batch of subprojects, will contain details of the impacts and 
affected persons, and an implementation budget and time-schedule.  
 
The implementing agencies associated with the safeguard issues in the project are the 
Department of Environment (DOE), Dhaka City Corporation (DCC) and the Dhaka 
Transport Coordination Board (DTCB).  In relation to their capacity, the following is to 
be noted:  
 
•
By virtue of its subject knowledge and experience, the DOE has the capacity to 
address environmental safeguard issues that are applicable to its component.  On the 
other hand, DCC has the understanding and capacity on environmental safeguards as it 
has already implemented another bank-funded project, DUTP, in the past.  In addition, 
most of the environmental safeguard issues pertain to construction.  As DCC has strong 
capacity on engineering-related issues, DCC will be able to effectively plan and 
implement the environmental measures required during the construction. In addition, the 
Design and Supervision Consultant will assist DCC on any environmental issues that 
arise.  
 
•
The transport component subprojects to be implemented by DCC may involve 
landacquisition and resettlement issues.  As to its experience, DCC implemented the 
Resettlement Action Plan for the DUTP and, as of now, most of the land-based activities 
envisaged under this project are quite similar to those implemented under the previous 
project.  A social safeguard specialist will be a part of DCC’s Project Implementation 
Page  10
Unit. In addition, the Design and Supervision Consultant will assist DCC with the overall 
management of all land acquisition and resettlement activities.  
 
•
The transport component initiatives to be implemented by DTCB are in the nature 
of studies and related preparatory work. In conducting the studies, DTCB has the 
capacity to ensure that environmental and social safeguard considerations are adequately 
met, as these are intrinsic to the physical investments, such as bus rapid transport lanes, to 
be prepared.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
There are different key stakeholders for the transport and environmental components. For 
instance, the bus operator association in the transport component and the brick 
manufacturer association in the brick sub-component of the environment component 
(brick sub-component) are the key stakeholders. The project design has been developed 
in consultation with these and such stakeholders. The implementation will also be done 
with regular interaction / engagement with these stakeholders.  
 
As to the social issues, the key stakeholders are those who would be adversely affected 
and/or benefited by the project works.  The environmental and social survey of the  FOBs 
included consultations with the key stakeholders consisting of pedestrians (disaggregated 
in terms of gender, occupation, age, etc.), business owners in the vicinities of the FOBs, 
sidewalk vendors/traders, traffic control police, and the like.  As the ESMF requires, 
selection and design of particular subprojects will include stakeholder participation and 
consultation with particular emphasis on possible adverse impacts.  Stakeholder 
consultations will continue throughout project implementation process with increasing 
focus on project affected persons/households.  
 
Both the English and Bangla versions of the ESMF have been disclosed to the public. 
All subproject preparatory work will consider the ESMF requirements, including 
consultation and disclosure, so that the design and implementation pay appropriate 
consideration to these safeguard issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/18/2008 
 
Page  11
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/15/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  12
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameer Akbar 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Nilufar Ahmad 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Teen Kari Barua 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
 
Comments:   
