Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/23/2008 
Report No.:  AC3148
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P093988 
Project Name:  Dhaka  Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Fook Chuan Eng 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 2, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (75%);Water supply (25%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
149.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
16.70
16.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the sustainable delivery of 
stormwater drainage, wastewater and water services by the Dhaka Water and Sewerage 
Authority (DWASA) to the population of Dhaka through:  
 
a) 
the installation of selected stormwater pumping stations and the rehabilitation of 
selected canals to help improve drainage and minimize urban flooding;  
 
b)
the rehabilitation, repair and expansion of priority investments in the city’s 
sewerage network and treatment plant to help improve the urban environment;and  
 
c) 
supporting DWASA’s pilot expansion of water and sanitation services into 
selected Dhaka slums to help increase services to the urban poor.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have the following five components  
 
Component 1.  Rehabilitation and Strengthening of Existing Sewerage System – 
US$63.6m including contingencies (IDA US$52.2m). This component will support the 
rehabilitation and strengthening of the existing sewerage system, including the 
rehabilitation of lifting / pumping stations, the rehabilitation and augmentation of the 
Pagla sewerage treatment plant, the replacement of trunk sewer mains and sewer lines, 
Page  2
and the laying of branch sewers to expand the coverage areas within the existing Pagla 
sewer basin. In addition, sewer cleaning equipment and other technical assistance for 
improvement of operation and maintenance (O&M) would be provided, as well as 
support to initiate actions to establish the proper O&M of the sewerage system.  This 
component will also support a study to prepare a master plan for a cost effective and 
socially and environmentally sound wastewater management system for Dhaka.  
 
Component 2.  Rehabilitation and Strengthening of Stormwater Drainage System 
–
US$80.5m including contingencies (IDA US$76.1m). This component will support the 
rehabilitation and strengthening of the stormwater drainage system by installing two 
pumping stations at critical locations (Rampura and Kamalapur) on the eastern periphery 
of Dhaka city to alleviate periodic flooding in the city.  The project will also support the 
improvement of the hydraulic performance of selected khals (canals) through re-
excavation, re-profiling and canal protection.  Recognizing the complexities surrounding 
khal rehabilitation , this activity would be carried out as a pilot effort supporting a small 
number of selected khals, with future phases predicated on the lessons from and success 
of the pilot.  Thirteen khals have been identified to be included in the initial scope of the 
project i.e., Khilgaon Bashabo, Shahjadpur, Shutivola, Abdullapur Khal, Kalyanpur main 
khal, Digun, Manda, Mirpur Housing and Kalyanpur Branches KA, KHA, GHA, UMO, 
and CHA   where new mechanisms and procedures for khal recovery and rehabilitation 
would be piloted.  In addition, drains cleaning equipment and other technical assistance 
for improvement of operation and maintenance (O&M) would be provided.  This 
includes support for solid waste management along khals rehabilitated under the project 
and technical assistance to formulate and implement institutional arrangements to 
maintain the open drains and box culverts.  This component will also support the 
updating the storm water drainage master plan for Dhaka.  
 
Component 3.  Support to the implementation of environment and social safeguards – 
US$5.2m including contingencies (IDA US$5.0m). This component will supportthe 
implementation of environmental management and social safeguards activities.This will 
include supporting the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) (including compensation 
payments) associated with the rehabilitation of selected canals and the implementation of 
the Environmental Management Framework (EMF).  
 
Component 4.  Support to service provision to Low Income Communities – US$9.0m 
including contingencies (IDA US$8.6m).  This component will support the piloting of 
several core approaches for DWASA to extend and mainstream services provisions to 
low income communities and the strengthening of the capacity of DWASA to deliver 
water and environmental sanitation services to these communities.  The pilot will 
commence in selected target areas and will include several approaches, including (i) 
direct connections by DWASA in selected city fringes areas (Dhaka Metropolitan Areas 
Unions), and (ii) working with Support Organizations (SO) and Community-based 
Organizations (CBO) in ‘traditional slums’ areas (Dhaka City Council Wards).  These 
pilots will be evaluated for a significant expansion into more slum areas both through 
project funding and/or funding from donors who have expressed keen interest in 
supporting service provision to Low Income Communities.  
Page  3
Component 5.  Project Management, M&E, Consultations and Communications - 
US$7.5m including contingencies (IDA US$7.1m).  This component will support 
technical assistance for pr
oject implementation, project monitoring and DWASA’s 
communications program. Project implementation support will include technical 
assistance for engineering, financial, legal, environmental and social monitoring and 
evaluation.  Project monitoring and evaluation would cover activities aimed at (i) 
ensuring compliance with fiduciary arrangements for the project, including annual 
independent financial audits; (ii) systematic quarterly technical, financial and operation 
performance review of DWASA; and (iii) carrying out mandatory mid-term review and 
final review of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be located in the Dhaka Metropolitan Area (DMA) served by the 
Dhaka Water and Sewerage Authority (DWASA).  The population of DMA is about 12 
million.  DWASA supplies piped water to about 70% of the population.  There are no 
piped networks in slum areas (accounting for about 4.2 million people) and slum dwellers 
depend on municipal taps or tubewells for water.  DWASA currently obtains most of its 
water from an over exploited aquifer; for the future, it envisages developing mostly 
surface water sources, whose quality is rapidly deteriorating due to industrial pollution.  
Physical leaks in the distribution network are estimated to be about 40% of the water 
produced.  The sewerage network serves less than 20% of the population.  Trunk sewers 
suffered major damage during recent floods and, as a result, only about 40% of the waste 
water generated currently reaches the treatment plant.  About 50% of the population has 
no access to adequate sanitation facilities.  Industries are supposed to treat effluents 
before discharging them in DWASA’s sewers, but this regulation is seldom enforced.  
 
DWASA is also responsible for Dhaka’s storm water drainage consisting of a system of 
drainage channels / canals (khals) draining into peripheral rivers, and various flood 
proofing structures including two temporary pumping arrangements.Natural channels and 
wetlands that help Dhaka cope with storm water flows are rapidly disappearing due to 
urban development.  Encroachment by illegal settlers of various magnitudes in sections 
of some khals has reduced sectional areas and thus the carrying capacity of the khals. 
Public health is affected by the limited coverage of the water supply and waste water 
service and recurrent flooding.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (SASDI) 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDI) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project was reviewed and screened during preparation and designated as Category B 
which is appropriate and consistent with the provisions of OP/BP 4.01 as the project 
involves the rehabilitation and extension of stormwater drainage facilities, waste water 
facilities and water supply facilities.  The rehabilitation of selected stormwater drainage 
canals and the construction of two pumping stations to replace existing temporary 
pumping arrangements would help minimize urban flooding.  The rehabilitation and 
extension of the city’s sewerage network andtreatment plant, and the extension of water 
and sanitation services to selected slums, would help improve urban environment.  An 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared, focusing on issues 
related to the proper organization of construction activities, route selection and right of 
ways of new pipes, drains and sewers and compliance with land use regulations.  
Disposal of the sludge generated by the existing waste water treatment plant would be 
reviewed, as would seepage tipping conditions city-wide; improvement measures would 
be proposed.  The proposed rehabilitation of three khals within the project scope is 
assessed to lead to involuntary resettlement activities and Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAP) have been prepared. A total of 45 families will be affected by the project, of which 
12 are squatters residing in own informal housing structures, and 33 are tenants living in 
rented premises. Compensation for lost assets and income will be provided to affected 
people in accordance with the provisions of OP 4.12. In a further eight khals proposed to 
be rehabilitated, a Tracer Study was carried out to trace where possible squatters who 
were removed prior to project preparation for adequate compensation to be made prior to 
rehabilitation works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental and social screening process will allow for the application of appropriate 
mitigating measures.  The adverse impacts of the project are likely to be considerable 
during the implementation stage (i.e. excavation of soil and disposal, backfilling) and 
moderate during the operation stage.  Depending on the presence of heavy metal and 
Page  5
other hazardous chemicals, sludge disposal from the waste water treatment plants may be 
a
major environmental issue.  In parallel, preparation is underway for a separate IDA-
supported project - the Dhaka Integrated Environment and water resource management 
project (DIEWRMP) 
–
to address the affluentfrom the industrial clusters especially the 
dyeing industries in the Dhaka watershed.  This project will be jointly implemented by 
DWASA and the Department of Environment (DOE) and it is likely to have considerable 
synergy with the current project.  On completion, the project will have substantial 
positive impact in improving the quality of the surface water in the Dhaka watershed, by 
reducing discharge of raw sewage and other affluent in to the water bodies in the 
watershed.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared to identify and 
assess potential impacts under Components 1, 2 and 4. Each project component will be 
screened for potential environmental and social impacts, and subjected to appropriate 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).  Appropriate detailed design of the project 
components for carrying out component specific EIA will be available during project 
implementation.  The system to support the process of environmental review and 
clearance has been defined through the Environmental Management Framework (EMF).  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to address the inadequacy 
of existing legal provisions and ensure that project affected persons (PAPs) are 
compensated. Involuntary resettlement form an important consideration in project 
preparation and implementation.  
 
A
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) has been prepared to ensure that suitable mitigation 
measures are applied to the selected khals where people will be affected under 
Component 2.  The RAP process included a detailed consultation with the affected people 
living on public lands along the selected canals, a detailed census and socioeconomic 
baseline  of affected people, and the preparation of an appropriate  mitigation plan.  
 
The Government of Bangladesh’s procedures with regards to the preparation of 
Environmental Impact Assessment and Mitigation Plan (EA/EMP), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) and Resettlement Plans (RP) and disclosure are broadly in line with 
Bank guidelines. However, the effectiveness of these processes is quite constrained due 
to a lack of transparency and consultation, as well as the limited resources.  
Consequently, all sub-projects under the project will be subject to prior review and 
approval by the Bank for environment and involuntary resettlement screening purposes.  
 
DWASA has some experience in implementing Bank safeguards policies, having 
previously implemented four Bank financed projects involving the construction of large 
Page  6
drinking water and waste water treatment plants.  However, the last Bank-financed 
project closed in 2002 and since then specific skills maintenance and renewals have not 
taken place.  Capacity building for DWASA to manage environmental and social aspects 
of its operations will be included in the project.  About US$5.2 million has been 
earmarked to support the implementation of environmental management and social 
safeguards activities, including the provision for a program of technical assistance and 
training to help build the capacity to handle environmental and social safeguards issues in 
DWASA during the project period.  Project funding also include resettlement 
compensation to Project Affected Persons (PAPs).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Government of Bangladesh (the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Environment), 
DWASA, Dhaka City Corporation as well as the affected communities.  The EMF, RPF 
and RAP prepared in consultation with the relevant stakeholders has been reviewed and 
approved by the World Bank.  These have been disclosed in-
country and at the Bank’s 
InfoShop.  In addition, the documents have been made available at the Bank’s 
information center in Dhaka. An executive summary of the EMF, RPF and RAPhas been 
disclosed to affected people in Bangla.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/17/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/17/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fook Chuan Eng 
07/21/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman 
07/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
07/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Soma Ghosh Moulik 
07/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/22/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Songsu Choi 
07/22/2008 
Comments:  Songsu Choi, Acting Sector Manager 
