Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4068 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/10/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Belarus 
Project ID: P114515 
Project Name: Belarus Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Maha J. Armaly 
GEF Focal Area: P-Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID: P111110 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other urban development 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is twofold: (i) to support the GoB 
efforts to manage solid wastes according to international good practice; and (ii) to reduce 
environmental and health risks to Belarus’ population associated with the presence of POPs in 
the environment. The PDO outcome indicators are expected to be: (a) level of materials 
recovered/recycled; (b) where feasible, energy recovery from waste generation; and (c) ratio of 
current incomes/current expenditures.  Outcomes to measure the reduction of environmental 
risks are (d) reduction in pesticide contamination; and (e) reduction of contamination at specific 
sites.  
 
2. 
The objective would be achieved through support for the development of an integrated 
Solid Waste Processing Facility in Grodno Oblast, addressing management of current POPs 
stockpiles, specifically PCBs and POPs pesticides that have accumulated to date, initiating action 
on POPs contaminated sites, and to supporting the development of institutional, technical and 
Page  2
infrastructure capacity to manage POPs and Solid Waste Management (SWM) aspects into the 
future.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3. 
The proposed project will consist of three components that will cover investments 
targeting the construction of a municipal solid waste processing plant in Grodno, a GEF funded 
POPs management, and a component covering project management activities. The project will be 
implemented by the Project Coordination Team (PCT) recently established in the Ministry of 
Housing and Utilities (MHU) for the implementation of the Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
(WSSP). Details of project components are given below:  
 
4. 
Component I Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Management Investments in Grodno.  The 
estimated cost of the component is about US$ 56 million (February 2009 exchange rates) for the 
construction of a modern mechanical separation plant for mixed household waste to recover 
recyclable materials  The objectives of this component are to:  (a) reduce the amount of waste 
deposited in landfills; (b) recycle valuable materials by extracting up to 45% of materials 
(polymers, scrap paper, metals, and other materials); (c) increase the compactness of waste; (d) 
increase landfill service life; and (e) reduction of CO2 and potential generation of energy.  This 
component will finance (a) activities related to the construction of a 120,000 ton facility for solid 
waste processing to separate and produce recyclable materials from mixed waste, including 
design and supervision, construction and procurement and installation of equipment, support to 
start-up the operation of the plant; (b) training, public information and educational campaigns; 
(c) technical assistance to improve the current operations of SWM in Grodno and to further 
integrate the proposed new facility into the regional waste management operations; and (d) 
support to improve quality of the extracted materials and the further marketing thereof. Land 
acquisition has already been completed, and a site near a polymer processing facility has been 
fenced. The residual material after mechanical separation of recyclables will be mainly a mixture 
of putrescent and inert materials. This residual material will be disposed off in the landfill. The 
feasibility study will investigate possibilities for pre-treatment of this waste (e.g. simple 
composting) or landfill gas extraction in a separate section of the landfill. This component will 
have environmental benefits as reflected in reduced waste in landfills 
–
in line with the 
government’s regulations, utilizing materials of value, reducing the need for controversial new 
landfills in the future.  
 
5. 
Component II POPs Stockpile Management.  The estimated cost of this component is 
US$ 5.5 million which will finance the following activities:  
 
(1) 
Risk reduction of POPs Stockpiles and Wastes - This sub-component, aims to secure and 
provide environmentally sound management destruction of high-priority stockpiles of POPs and 
associated contaminated equipment and to address contaminated sites as identified in the 
National Implementation Plan (NIP). The NIP includes repackaging of 3,500 ton of hazardous 
chemicals and transferring them to secure storage facilities and will address the assessment; 
monitoring and clean-up requirements to mitigate the immediate risks posed by two contained 
DDT burial sites at Slonim and Dribin as well as informal PCB storage sites identified among 9 
priority POPs-contaminated sites.  
Page  3
(2) 
Technical Support for Capacity Development - This sub-component supports 
strengthening of the technical capacity required for implementation of the NIP and long-term 
sustainability of compliance with the Stockholm Convention.  
 
(3) Institutional and Regulatory Strengthening - - This sub-component supports activities 
required to ensure that the management of POPs is fully covered within the overall national 
regulatory and legislative framework.  
 
6. 
Component III:  Project Management and other Support Activities:  The estimated cost of 
this component is US$ 4 million.  About $0.5 million will be available for PCT operation 
including audits, monitoring and evaluation, training and other project management activities to 
ensure adherence to Bank fiduciary, safeguards and reporting issues.  The remaining funds are 
contingencies for additional needed studies in the solid waste management sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
7. 
Component I investment is located in Grodno, the Grodno Oblast capital, situated at the 
Polish border and including about 320,000 people. The six-hectare site proposed for the 
construction of the new SW facility plant is located nearby a polyethylene processing factory 
newly developed by the Oblast. The site is easily accessible by road system. The FS developed 
by Client includes a brief environmental assessment of the surrounding areas.  
 
8. Bank visits and discussions with the authorities at the site revealed that waste pickers do not 
exist on the landfill in Grodno. A program of formal separation of valuable material (plastic, 
metals) takes place at the building level.  The landfill site is fenced and well protected; and is 
close to the border with Poland.  There is no market for individual sale of recyclables in Grodno. 
Nevertheless, social surveys will be undertaken and will include monitoring the situation at the 
landfill.  
 
9. 
Activities financed by Component II which have the higher environmental risks will be 
those possibly occurring at the Cherchersk facility in Gomel Oblast, and the two sites, located at 
Slonim in Gordno Oblast and Dribin in Mogilev Oblast, were POPs pesticides are to be removed 
from contained/restricted burial sites.  All three sites are located in accessible but relatively 
remote areas well removed from settlements or any conflicting development.  The nearest 
settlements to the Cherchersk site are Chechersk (14 km to the north east), Buda-Koshelevo (20 
km to the south-west) and Vetka (30 km to the south-east). The villages of Dubrovka, Zarya, 
Slobodka, Lukomskie Poplavy, Bratstvo, Proletarsky and Bolotovo are located within a 2 km 
radius but are officially uninhabited and the site has a designated 3 km sanitary protection zone.  
The site occupies an area of 18 ha that offers a basic natural hydro-geological barrier and is 
provided with an extensive surface water management system.  The Slonim and Dribin sites are 
located in forested territories which are not consdiered protected areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
10. 
Belarus has an established EIA process involving performance of an OVOS or EIA and 
its expert review through a State Environmental Expertise (SER) which is part of the overall 
approvals cycle for all development activities. Unlike other countries in the region, the 
OVOS/SER process has been maintained and consistently resourced in Belarus. As a 
consequence, the country and specifically the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Page  4
Protection (MNREP) and MHU who both act as the project’s executing agencies have 
maintained a high level of expertise related to environmental assessment and continue to develop 
this using experience from the EU.  Also supporting this capacity is the maintenance and 
expansion of the National Environmental Management Systems (NEMS) and associated 
environmental health monitoring systems, both of which have now been expanded to include 
POPs and which will see further laboratory and physical monitoring capacity upgrading through 
this project. The above operates in a comprehensive framework of legal and regulatory 
instruments covering air, water, land and waste management, as summarized in the NIP. Belarus 
is an active party to the principle relevant international conventions related to EIA, namely the 
UNECE ESPOO Convention on EIA in a trans-boundary context, the Aarhus Convention on 
accesses to information, public participation and environmental justice, and the UNECE 
Convention on industrial accidents.  
 
11. 
To date the OVOS/EA process has been applied to activities associated with government 
financed NIP activities such as POPs recovery, repackaging and transfer to secure storage, and to 
the infrastructure development at the Cherchersk facility. It would be applied to future activities 
undertaken under the project including continuation of the significant level of public and NGO 
participation that has characterized the work undertaken to date.  At a practical level, operational 
capacity in the management of hazardous waste has developed through the implementation of the 
OP management program, which has included early bi-lateral support from Denmark for training 
on EU practices and techniques. There is currently an established capability for this work with 
the Ministries of Agriculture and Emergency Situations that will be utilized during the project.  
 
12. 
In general, the government and specifically the main executing ministries have developed 
capacity for implementation of the anticipated EA, EMP and public disclosure requirements 
associated with Bank safeguard policies. This includes prior experience with Bank safeguard 
procedures in the framework of the existing Bank projects, the experience to date of effectively 
managing POPs based on EU practice, the existence of strong professional and the basic 
infrastructure for monitoring and laboratory analysis, a PCT within the MHU which is managing 
a
Bank-financed Water Supply and Sanitation Project respectively.  The MNERP is managing 
the NIP process.  
 
13.    The MNREP is the recipient of the PPG for the preparation of the EIA.  The MNREP will 
hire a consultant to undertake the study, through the Waste Management Inspection Department.  
The EIA will be reviewed and approved by the SEE department of the MNREP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The overall project is proposed as environmental assessment category "A" in accordance 
with the Bank's operational policies. The Client was advised on the scope and schedule for the 
overall project EA process. The MHU and MNREP will have joint re
sponsibility for the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
preparation of the EIA report as main counterparts in the proposed project, with MNREP taking 
the lead as the country’s legally authorized entity in this process. Draft ToR for a full EIA report 
have been discussed and agreed with the Client. The EIA will include a detailed POPs site 
assessment that will reflect the nature and quantity of hazardous materials and contaminated soils 
needing to be removed and cleaned under the POPs component.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The POPs sites in Slonim and Dribin do not present any natural habitats in accordance with 
current assessments performed at these locations.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Some of the POPs-contaminated sites are located within forest areas to prevent easy access 
by people. POPs Clean-up activities related to these sites will require special permitting from the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations related to possible elimination of trees during the GEF funded 
operation. The project EIA will fully evaluate the applicability of this policy to the proposed 
project.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered since no ressetlement or land aqusition is involved. The Solid 
Waste processing facility(mechanical separation for mixed household waste to recover 
recyclable materials), to be financed in Component I, is proposed at a six-hectare site which is 
public land and was owned by nearby collective farm as confirmed by local and oblast offcials in 
Grodno. The workers who used to work on this land parcel would continue as employees of the 
collective farm. There are no waste pickers at the landfill site in Grodno.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/26/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/26/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
13. The full EIA documents including specific EMPs developed for each project component 
will be prepared, disclosed and discussed in country in local language and in English in 
Infoshop before project appraisal.  The Executive Summary of the EIAs will be sent to the 
Board before project appraisal. Two public consultations will take place before project 
appraisal as follows: (i) One public consultation as soon as the draft EA ToRs for the selected 
option (Component I) and POPs component are developed; and (ii) a 2nd public meeting to 
disclose and discuss the draft EIAs for the selected option and the POPs evaluation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maha J. Armaly 
04/01/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
04/10/2009 
Comments:   
