Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3259
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Belarus 
Project ID:  P101190 
Project Name:  Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Kanthan Shankar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Water supply 
(30%);Information technology (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the quality, efficiency and sustainability 
of water supply and wastewater treatment services in six participating Oblasts covering 
about 1.7 million consumers.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Water Supply and Sanitation Systems, USD 
53.75 million.  
 
Subcomponent (i) Rehabilitation of Water Supply Systems (US$25.75 million). This 
sub-component will include rehabilitation and construction of deep wells, pumping 
stations, transmission mains, distribution network, ground and elevated reservoirs and 
iron removal plants (IRP).  
 
Subcomponent;(ii) Rehabilitation of Sanitation Systems (US$28.0).  The component 
will include rehabilitation and construction of wastewater collection systems and 
wastewater treatment plants including upgrade of monitoring stations and laboratories.  
Page  2
Component 2: Support to the Preparation and Sustainability of Investments (USD 
6.05M). This component will finance the preparation activities needed to undertake the 
investments under component 1.  As such, this component will support four main tasks:  
 
(i) 
Engineering preparation (USD 5.4 million): preparation of feasibility studies, 
preliminary and detailed designs, bidding documents, assistance with bidding and 
evaluation review;(ii) Construction management (USD 0.65million): advisory services 
for project management, construction supervision, monitoring physical implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation and reporting on technical and financial audits.  
 
Component 3: Project Implementation, Management and Training: (USD 0.20 million). 
The Project Coordinating team (PCT) will be located within the Enterprise 
“Zhilkommuntechnika.” The staffing costs will be covered by the Government so the 
only additional expenses covered under this component include:  
 
(i) 
Technical and Financial Audits  
 
(ii) 
Training for the PCT including building capacity in appraising water supply and 
sanitation projects, planning sector development and management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Investments will be implemented in 21 municipalities in six oblasts of the country – 
Brest, Grodno, Gomel, Minsk, Mogilev and Vitebsk. Big cities, with about 100,000 
people, and small towns with population from 3,000 to 25,000 people will be involved in 
the proposed project. Overall, the proposed investments will ensure the targeted demand 
for water supply and wastewater treatment in the selected cities by 2015.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bank’s safeguard policies and procedures, including 
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the project has been classified as a Category B 
for environmental assessment purposes. The environmental impact of the project is 
mostly expected from the rehabilitation water supply and sanitation infrastructure works 
proposed under the project’s Component 1. These investments will be limited to the 
rehabilitation and upgrading of existing infrastructure. Furthermore, there is envisaged 
some small scale construction of new water supply and sanitation infrastructure in those 
rural areas where health population is jeopardized by high iron content in the drinking 
water. Overall, the range of physical investments that are financed under the Project 
include: (i) reconstruction of water supply systems, including small scale construction of 
iron removal stations; (ii) rehabilitation of existing wastewater collection systems; and 
(iii) rehabilitation of existing wastewater treatment facilities.  
 
It is unlikely that the project activities will result in any adverse social impacts, 
including the physical relocation of people or the acquisition of privately owned land. 
The specific project sites and investments identified by the government for financing do 
not include any involuntary resettlement issues. Therefore, the OP/BP 4.12 is not 
applicable.  
 
The project would not involve any physical activities at or near known sites of 
cultural/historical/religious etc. significance. Nonetheless, during routine activities, 
artifacts that are significant from a cultural heritage viewpoint will be subjected to chance 
find procedures as highlighted in the project Environmental Assessment.  
 
The project environmental review performed during the development of the EIA report 
concluded that investments proposed under this project do not alter forests or any natural 
habitats.  
 
The OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways applies to any water project that 
involves "the use or potential pollution of international waterways”. It specifically 
exempts from the notification requirement "minor additions or alterations" to existing 
schemes that "will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other 
riparians."  Since by the proposed project seeks to improve water quality, reduce 
wastewater flows and improve the quality of wastewater discharges, it meets this 
definition.  Reduced downstream flow of pollutants into the both Black and Baltic Seas 
would have positive regional/global impacts. Hence, an “exemption to the notification of 
riparian states” has been prepared and approved by Bank Legal Department and the ECA 
region on December 5, 2007.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social implications of the physical investments to be 
supported under the project are described in the EIA including an Environmental 
Management Plan as well as in the project Operational Manual developed by the 
Government during the project preparation. The investments supported are intended to 
improve: (i) the efficiency of water supply in the proposed locations; (ii) the quality of 
drinking water supplied to the affected population; and (iii) the wastewater collection and 
treatment. No significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
draft environmental assessment has been prepared focusing on the proposed 
investments identified by the government. The document meets current Belarusian 
legislation and the World Bank’s operation policies on EA and has been reviewed 
andcleared by the World Bank. While learning by doing will be a major input into 
building capacity within the project management unit and the participating vodocanals 
would also benefit through guidance from the National Ministry of Nature Protection.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry of Housing and Communal Services, the National Ministry of Nature 
Protection, the participating municipalities and the water companies are the key 
stakeholders. Consultations have taken place with these main stakeholders during project 
preparation. In addition a social assessment is underway to solicit the views of the final 
beneficiaries and this too will be disclosed along with the Environmental Assessment. 
The design also includes customer feedback through BIAs during the implementation of 
the proposed project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kanthan Shankar 
01/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
01/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria L. Amelina 
01/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
01/14/2008 
Comments:   
