Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3470 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/17/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Belarus 
Project ID: P108023 
Project Name: Energy Efficiency 
Task Team Leader: Pekka Kalevi Salminen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 27, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (60%);District heating and energy efficiency services (30%);Renewable 
energy (10%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to improve energy security and reduce 
environmental emissions through energy efficiency in the energy sector in Belarus.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is planned to have two investment components and two implementing agencies, 
Belenergo and the Energy Efficiency Department. The components are as follows:  
 
Belenergo's component (cost estimate US$ 120 million):  
 
Belenergo is the state owned power utility currently responsible for power generation, 
transmission and distribution through its subsidiaries. The project aims to finance two 
subcomponents under Belenergo, which preliminarily are:  
 
a) 
The conversion of large heat-only-boilers (HOBs) operated by Belenergo to combined 
heat and power (CHP) plants, in the towns of Borisov, Mogilev and Grodno for which the 
feasibility studies have been completed. These CHPs will be located at the existing boiler plant 
Page  2
sites and will partly utilize existing buildings and other infrastructure. The existing feasibility 
studies have considered several alternatives for the proposed investments, including (i) 
continuation of heat generation without power generation, and (ii) different configurations for 
power generation.  
 
In Borisov the plan is to convert the existing HOB to a combined cycle CHP plant based on 
natural gas. The preliminary power capacity is about 65 MW. In Mogilev a smaller HOB would 
be converted to a CHP plant based on gas engine technology. In Grodno the preliminary plan is 
to convert an exiting steam boiler to use wood waste and add a small steam turbine.  
 
The preliminary cost estimate of about US$ 90 million will be verified during project 
preparation. The economic justification of the above mentioned investments will also be 
reviewed.  
 
b) 
Reconstruction of a high voltage power line in Brest Oblast will include upgrading of an 
existing power transmission line from 220 kV to 330 kV. The upgrade will improve efficiency, 
remove a power transmission bottleneck and is also a part of a program to improve the regional 
power trade between Belarus, Poland, Lithuania, Ukraine, and Russia. Cost estimate of this 
subcomponent is about US$ 30 million.  
 
Energy Efficiency Department Component (cost estimate US$30 - 40 million):  
 
Conversion of HOBs to mini-CHPs in medium size towns of Belarus. This component may 
include the conversion of a number of existing HOBs to gas-fired CHPs and possibly could also 
include conversion of HOBs for bio-fuel (wood waste, wood chips, etc.), if the feasibility studies 
demonstrate economic viability.  
 
For interventions with Belenergo and the Energy Efficiency Department the project will support 
the Government to design a GHG emission reductions program for development as a new Kyoto 
Protocol initiative under the JI mechanism.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The sites for the Belenergo component will be located in Borisov, Mogilev, and Grodno 
concerning conversion from HOBs to CHPs and the power line upgrade will be located in Brest 
Oblast.  
 
The sites under the Energy Efficiency Department will be located in medium and small size 
cities in Belarus. The sites for the first year’s investments will bedetermined before the pre-
appraisal mission and remaining sites will be determined annually for each following year.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The clients, Belenergo and the Energy Efficiency Department (EED), seem to have strong 
technical capacity in key areas related to environmental management. On the other hand, 
Belenergo is not experienced in World Bank financed projects and there are obvious gaps in 
terms of knowledge of safeguard policies and guidelines. This is one of the issues that will 
require attention during preparation.  
Page  3
Coordination with the Ministry of Environment will also be necessary. Municipal executive 
committees and related organizations will also be involved in implementation of the
 EED’s 
component at local level.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is assigned Category B, as the potential environmental impacts are well 
defined and site-specific, and the proposed technology of gas-fired combined heat and power 
(CHP) generation is consistent with international good practice. Environmental Assessment will 
be prepared for the project and Environmental Management Plans for each major project site. 
The Environmental Management Plans will address the environmental risks and impacts 
focusing on waste management during construction and particularly on air pollution control 
during plant operation.  In addition, the design of the proposed biomass-fired plants will need to 
be monitored to ensure that modern technology is chosen and the technical solutions are 
environmentally sound. Disclosure of the EMPs will be done by public consultation at each 
major project site (Borisov, Mogilev and Grodno) and at the first year's major smaller sites and 
on websites of the PMU. When other sites are selected, public hearings will be held at most 
typical smaller sites.  The environmental requirements will be included in the supply and 
installation contracts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
All of the sites belong to the government, and there are no households or businesses 
occupying land adjacent to the existing boilers that will be converted to CHPs.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/25/2008 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental studies which will result in Environmental Management Plans are 
planned to begin in March/April 2008 and will be disclosed according the Bank guidelines.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pekka Kalevi Salminen 
04/01/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
04/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
