Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3830
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Belarus 
Project ID:  P108023 
Project Name:  Energy Efficiency 
Task Team Leader:  Pekka Kalevi Salminen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (60%);District heating and energy efficiency services (40%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
125.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
47.60
47.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project development objective is to improve energy efficiency in heat and 
power generation in selected towns in Belarus.  
 
The key performance indicators will be based on sub-project specific indicators on 
operational efficiencies achieved in the sub projects. For each sub-project the following 
key performance indicators will be measured:  
 
•
Reduction of gas consumption  
 
•
Total efficiency of heat and power generation   
 
3. Project Description 
Details of the three components are provided below:  
 
Conversion of existing heat-only-boiler plants to combined heat and power plants. 
(US$160.8 million). The project will convert existing heat-only-boiler plants to combined 
heat and power plants at 6 sites. All plants will use natural gas as the main fuel. The 
Page  2
largest plant will be in Borisov with a new combined cycle CHP unit with an electricity 
capacity of about 65 MW. The other sites will be based on gas engine technology and are 
located in Mogilev (4 MW), Retchitsa (3 MW), Ruba (3 MW), Oshmiany (3 MW) and 
Borisov (1 MW). The introduction of combined heat and power generation will improve 
efficiency of the plants and thus reduce system-wide gas consumption.  
 
Design and supervision consultancy (US$9 million). The design and supervision 
consultancy will be performed by Belarusian design institutes and financed by the 
Belarusian side. In addition, the component will also finance construction management 
and investment monitoring.  
 
Project Implementation and Management: (USD 2.5 million). A Project Management 
Unit (PMU) will carry out the procurement, contract supervision, and financial 
management of the project including the auditing and other fiduciary requirements. The 
staffing costs for the PMU will be financed by the Government and the WB loan funds 
will cover additional training for PMU and financial audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The two larger investment sites will be located in Borisov and Mogilev. The smaller 
investment sites will be located in four municipal boiler houses, in Rechitsa, Ruba, 
Oshmiany, and Borisov.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. The proposed Energy Efficiency Project is in full compliance with all environmental 
requirements of the Government of Belarus and the World Bank. In accordance with the 
Page  3
World Bank Environmental Assessment (EA) safeguard policy and procedures 
(OP/BP/GP 4.01) the project has been assigned Category B and an Environmental 
Management Plan is required.  
 
2. There are two separate EMPs, one for the larger sites in Borisov and Mogilev and one 
for the smaller gas engine based CHPs in Borisov, Rechitsa, Ruba and Oshmiany.  No 
physical cultural resources would be impacted and 'chance finds' provisions will be 
included in the standard bidding contracts.  
 
3. The project is assigned an environmental screening category “B”, as it is expected to 
have generally positive impact on the environment. The proposed conversion of the heat 
boilers into CHPs will likely improve the thermal efficiency of the power system of 
Belarus as a whole and reduce fuel consumption and the emissions of greenhouse gases. 
However, the local consumption of fuel at the converted HOBs will increase, creating the 
need to assess and monitor the local air pollution levels for NOx and CO, as well as fine 
particulates in cases where/when fuel oil is used as back-up fuel; NOx/NO2 is of 
particular concern as it is relatively more difficult to control while the applicable 
standards are tight (100 Âµg/m3 daily average is the maximum allowable concentration 
in Belarus). The minor negative impacts which inevitably occur during the civil works 
will be mitigated by proper planning and adherence to measures described in the Project 
Operational Manual, specifically the environmental guidelines. The EA has been 
completed along with the EMP and these documents have been publicly disclosed locally 
including NGOs and also disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop on September 15, 2008.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With adequate implementation of mitigation measures, no indirect or long-term negative 
impacts are anticipated that would result from project activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No adverse impacts are expected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Two generalized EMPs satisfactory to the Bank have been prepared. Site specific EAs 
and EMPs will be prepared after detailed design (available by loan negotiations) and will 
include a summary of local baseline air quality conditions. Technical specifications of the 
bidding documents for all sites should include specific provisions for the choice of air 
pollution control technology (especially NOx). Site-specific EMPs will include technical 
guidance on such technology. The bidding documents would include requirements for 
waste management.  
 
In addition, the project team environmental and social specialist reviewed the capacity 
of PMU, Minskenergo, Mogilevenergo and the Energy Efficiency Department to 
implement EMPs and found this to be adequate. However the further training is proposed 
Page  4
for the staff responsible for supervision. Since this project will require supervision by the 
borrower (either directly or through a supervision contractor) the project will include 
training and capacity-enhancement on environmental management and compliance. The 
contractor is obligated to document the ’company approach’ for environment and worker 
health and safety before they start anyworks.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are government officials (The Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of 
Housing and Utilities, Minskenergo, Mogilevenergo, the Energy Efficiency Department, 
Local Environmental Authorities), local NGOs, population residing and business entities 
located in Borisov, Mogilev, Rechitsa, Ruba and Oshmiany. The Environmental 
Management Plans and related information in Russian was disseminated and disclosed at 
the following locations:  
 
Borisov (Minskenergo) and EED project sites:  
 
•
Borisov city at the premises Minskenergo of  on September 4, 2008  
 
•
Mogilev city at the premises of Mogilevenergo on September 11, 2008  
 
The small project sites, Borisov, Rechitsa, Ruba and Oshmiany:  
 
•
Borisov city at the premises of Minskenergo on September 4, 2008   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pekka Kalevi Salminen 
09/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov 
09/12/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria L. Amelina 
09/12/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
09/12/2008 
Comments:   
