Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4100 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/12/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Belize 
Project ID: P111928 
Project Name: Municipal Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 26, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 12, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Roads and highways 
(25%);Other social services (25%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (67%);Other social development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Municipal Development Project is to improve and maintain 
municipal service delivery in selected towns of Belize. An added benefit of the proposed Project 
would be the improved planning capacity (particularly in terms of the development of disaster 
management strategies) of the selected cities/towns in which the Project would be implemented, 
which could, among other things, place them in a better position to absorb people and activities 
displaced from Belize City if it is adversely affected by natural disasters to which it is highly 
vulnerable.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have the following four main components:  
 
Component 1:  Small-scale Municipal Infrastructure Investments: These investments, for which 
the major part of the loan would be made available, would include primarily investments related 
to drainage and traffic management (roads and road architecture, but also signage), as well as 
social infrastructure/facilities, public spaces, parks, tourism enhancements, bridges (smaller, 
Page  2
municipal-type), markets, and street lighting, which will indirectly improve the environment and 
the quality of life in the selected towns. Infrastructure investments that would not be financed by 
the proposed project include: solid waste collection and management (to be included by two 
future IDB projects), larger works that are national in terms of management responsibility (i.e. 
national highways, national bridges), and the construction of housing.  
 
Component 2:  Capacity Building for Town Councils:  The component would help to strengthen 
the capacity of town councils to govern more effectively. Included in this component would be 
activities to improve the revenue collection and land administration systems of town councils; 
improve environmental and social management and compliance with national law; increase town 
council accountability, increase citizen participation (via public council hearings, public budget 
discussions, use of citizen scorecards, participatory planning, and community counterpart 
contributions, among others), and improve financial management, traffic management, and town 
planning (including disaster risk reduction and mitigation activities).  
 
Component 3:  Technical Assistance to Central Government in Municipal Management:  The 
component would contribute to the strengthening of the relationship between the central 
government and the town councils in order to ultimately improve the prioritization and 
implementation of infrastructure investments and service delivery. This component would 
include activities such as developing a formula for transfers from the Central Government to 
town councils; strengthening the title registration/land ownership registration system (by 
increasing the number of human and physical resources available); strengthening the land use 
framework; and strengthening of environmental and social management at the municipal level.  
 
Component 4: Project Management/Administration: This component would support the 
implementing agency (still to be determined) by financing consultant services, goods, training 
and operating costs for management and administration, as well as monitoring and evaluation of 
project activities.  
 
Implementation Arrangements: Implementation arrangements for the proposed project will be a 
major challenge as it is multi-sectoral in nature and as many central government entities are key 
players, for example: Ministry of Economic Development (MED), Ministry of Local 
Government (MoLG), Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE), Ministry of 
Works (MOW), Ministry of Finance (MOF), and the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Development (MoHUD).  It was agreed during the Project Identification Mission that there are 
several options for the Implementing Agency that will be explored and that the principal 
agencies and entities involved should in any event by invited to sit on the Steering Committee. It 
was also agreed that the options should not just be limited to these Ministries, but should also 
include the Social Investment Fund (SIF # directly under the Ministry of Economic 
Development), particularly since they have experience with both infrastructure investments of 
this scale, as well as with some of the social and institutional aspects of the proposed project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The implementing agency/agencies have not yet been defined.  Therefore, during the team#s 
next mission (scheduled for February 2009), the safeguards specialists will compare the possible 
institutions# capacities in order to inform the team#s final decision. The assessment will consider 
whether the institution/s currently have the necessary capacity to implement the Bank#s 
safeguards policies and what kind of additional support might be needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSUW) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project does not foresee significant environmental impacts that could jeopardize the 
natural environment of its influential area. Following the Operational Policy [OP 4.01], the 
project would be #Category B# (TBD). This category is justified due to the type and magnitude 
of the works that will be developed in urban areas, because their potential impacts can be easily 
identified, and since mitigation measures are available.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed during 
project preparation in order to ensure adequate environmental and social management during 
project implementation. Additionally, once the ESMF has been carried out, an Environmental 
Assessment Report (EAR) will be completed applying the ESMF procedures to all of the 
subprojects that will be financed during the first year of project implementation. The EAR will 
assess the project#s direct, indirect and accumulative negative potential impacts, as well as the 
safeguard policies triggered, and will propose measures to prevent, mitigate, and compensate for 
the identified negative impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
During project preparation, the potential risks of affecting special natural habitats or sensitive 
areas located in the subprojects area of influence will be assessed. During the last Bank project, 
two special studies were carried out: #Declaration of the Gra Gra Lagoon as a National Park and 
its Environmental Management Plan in Dangriga,# and a #Base Line and Distribution 
Assessment of the Zamia Plants,# that are endangered and mainly located in the area of Punta 
Gorda. These locations will also be included in the new Project.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Given that the wetlands that may be affected by particular subprojects might be mangroves or 
wooded freshwater swamps that technically qualify as forests, this safeguard policy is being 
triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The EAR may include, as required, an assessment of pest management legal/ institutional 
framework and the existing capacity to safely handle pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Chance Find Procedures will be included in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The team is tentatively triggering 4.10 until a screening process is undertaken by the Bank to 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
determine whether Indigenous Peoples are present in, or have collective attachment to, the 
project area.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although no physical displacement is foreseen, some land acquisition might be needed, given 
the nature of the infrastructure projects on the menu of prospective investments.  Therefore, an 
involuntary resettlement policy framework will be prepared by appraisal, and specific plans 
(addressing any aspect covered by OP 4.12, including land acquisition) will be developed as the 
works are defined.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
During project preparation, it will be confirmed whether or not this policy will be triggered. 
If the policy is triggered, the Bank will review any existing riparian agreements between Belize 
and other riparian States and make sure, in accordance with OP 7.50, that (i) any riparian States 
are notified of the proposed Project; and that (ii) either the riparians do not object to the Project, 
or, in the assessment of Bank staff, the Project will not cause appreciable harm to the other 
riparians and will not be appreciably harmed by the other riparians' water use.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
A
long-standing territorial dispute between Belize and Guatemala covering at least the 
Southern part of Belize has not yet been solved. On December 8, 2008 both countries signed a 
Special Agreement referring "any and all" territorial claims of Guatemala against Belize to the 
International Court of Justice. Given the territorial scope of the proposed Project, OP/BP 7.60 
will be triggered. By supporting the proposed Project, the Bank does not intend any judgment on 
the legal or other status of the territories concerned or to prejudice the final determination of the 
parties' claims.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/07/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Studies should/will be finalized and disclosed by September/October 2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst 
06/12/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
06/12/2009 
Comments:   
