Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3329 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Benin 
Project ID: P110075 
Project Name: Increased Access to Modern Energy 
Task Team Leader: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (75%);General energy sector (15%);Renewable energy (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (P);Regulation 
and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
30.00 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
14.00
54.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's objectives are to improve the operational efficiency of the transmission and 
distribution system and to increase access to electricity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project as envisaged has four major components. Its overall financing requirement is 
US$114 million, with IDA financing of US$ 60 million.  
 
Component 1: Transmission Backbone (US$35 million)  
 
This component will help putting in place the necessary transmission and generation 
framework, which will allow for significant increases in electrification rates in Benin. A key 
element is the 300 km transmission interconnection between Onigbolo (south-eastern Benin) and 
Parakou (northern Benin). In addition to electrification, this transmission line will allow the 
Benin network to meet (n-1) criteria and address energy security concerns. The transmission line 
Page  2
will complement the interconnection between northern Togo and northern Benin that is being 
constructed under the existing World Bank Energy Services Delivery Credit (Cr.3951-BEN). 
This component may also include financing for complementary generation investment, such as 
support for gas-based power plant through guarantees, and required studies such as for the 
development for Adjarala Hydropower plant. This component will be implemented by CEB.  
 
Component 2: Electrification (US$14 million)  
 
This component will support rural and urban electrification in Benin in targeted areas. It will 
supplement and reinforce existing partner-funded programs by means of targeted investments in 
the distribution network and through extensions of this network. Targets and timetables for 
electrification are being reviewed under the ongoing ESDP project. This component will be 
implemented by SBEE.  
 
Component 3: Sustainable Energy Services (US$5 million)  
 
This component will focus on rendering energy services to consumers more sustainable through 
development of a business plan and strategy for the energy sector, which would set out the 
revenue profiles for key sector institutions to allow for the assessment of investment and 
operation decisions' impact on financial viability. To ensure implementation of such a plan will 
be provided with technical assistance. This component will be implemented by the Ministry of 
Energy.  
 
Component 4: Biomass Energy and Inter-fuel Substitution Component (US$6 million).  
 
This component builds on the work undertaken under the existing ESDP project. It will target 
community-based sustainable wood-fuel supply systems; (ii) biomass energy efficiency and 
inter-fuel substitution, and (iii) rural community development support. This component will also 
include an innovative financing mechanism to make efficient stoves financially accessible for the 
wider public. This component will be implemented by the Ministry of Energy.  
 
The project will have three implementing agencies: the Ministry of Energy, SBEE and the CEB. 
All three agencies are already implementing agencies under the existing ESDP project. It is 
intended to link implementation to the project management unit of the ESDP project, which is 
housed in the Ministry.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located on Benin's territory. One major transmission line of about 300 km length 
will be constructed between the town of Onigbolo in south eastern Benin and Parakou in 
northern Benin. Smaller distribution grid extensions may be constructed, but their exact location 
needs to be determined.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has a good capacity for implementing Safeguard Policies. CEB has an 
Environmental and Social Unit, which is capable of preparing simple EAs and RAPs. It has been 
agreed that SBEE will establish an Environmental and Social Unit under the existing ESDP. The 
Page  3
Ministry of Energy is responsible for the implementation of the biomass component, as is 
presently the case under the ESDP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the Onigbolo-Parakou transmission line is 
being prepared. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared 
for components 2 and 3. An EA was prepared for the biomass component under the ESDP. In 
case a gas based power plant will be financed under a guarantee an EA will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Transmission Line Onigbolo-Parakou will pass through natural habitat areas. No 
significant conversion will occur. Mitigation measures will be elaborated in the EA for the 
transmission line.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Transmission Line Onigbolo-Parakou will pass through forest areas. No significant 
conversion will occur. Mitigation measures will be elaborated in the EA for the transmission 
line.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
A
basic archaeological survey will be carried out along the transmission line and a chance 
fi
nd procedure will be included in the contractor’s contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the Onigbolo-Parakou transmission line is being 
prepared.  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared for components 2 and 3. 
The impacts of the biomass component were addressed under the ESFP. In case a gas based 
power plant will be financed under a guarantee a RAP will be prepared and disclosed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The above-mentioned studies  that will be disclosed prior to Appraisal in the country and at 
the InfoShop are under preparation. Their completion is targeted for end of January 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
01/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
