Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3540 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Benin 
Project ID: P110576 
Project Name: Education For All-Fast Track Initiative Program 
Task Team Leader: William Experton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
76.00
76.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the FTI/FCB program is to contribute to expanding equitable access to pre-
school and primary education and to supporting the development of literacy programs, while 
improving quality and retention at primary level as well as the management of the sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The FT/FCB program consists of the following three components:  
 
1. Improving Access, Equity, and Retention by: (i) constructing, rehabilitating, and equipping 
educational infrastructure (more than 2000 pre-school and primary classrooms, 45 literacy 
centers, and 12 alternative education centers), (ii) providing literacy training for girls and 
women, and the development and implementation of a national program for girls education; (iii) 
supporting an experimental program for alternative accelerated education for overage children; 
(iv) extending multi-grade teaching and the use of sub-cycles; and (v) developing new primary 
school canteens.  
 
2. Improving Quality of Teaching and Literacy Training by: (i) supporting  implementation of 
programs based on the ‘competence approach’; (ii) strengthening the qualifications of teachers 
Page  2
and management personnel with training and support to training institutions; (iii) introducing, on 
an experimental basis, national languages into the education system; (iv) purchasing and 
distributing textbooks, teachers’ guides, and school supplies for pre-school and primary school; 
and (v) improving literacy by elaborating new programs and materials, training literacy trainers 
and personnel, and providing literacy training to 52,000 adults using the ‘faire-faire’ approach 
(contracting out to NGOs).  
 
3. Improving Management and Steering of the System by: (i) improving pedagogical and 
institutional management with the use of student learning assessments, results-based 
management systems, and external evaluations of the efficacy of certain pedagogical 
interventions; and (ii) building management capacity within the PDDSE in order to improve the 
sector’s planning, programming, procurement, financial management, and monitoring and 
evaluation capacity, and putting in place an information management system with a school map.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
All activities
 will take place within the context of Benin’s June 1993 Environmental Action Plan, 
as well as Benin’s juridical framework, which includes: (i) the environmental framework (law no 
98-030, 12 February 1999); (ii) the public sanitation code (law no 87-015, 21 September 1987); 
(iii) the water code (law no 87-016, 21 September 1987); (iv) the law regarding territorial 
organization of the Republic of Benin (law no 97-028, 15 January 1999); and (v) the law 
regarding organization of communes (law no 97-029, 15 January 1999).  
 
The Government of Benin has prepared both an Environmental Assessment Management 
Framework (Cadre de Gestion des Risques Environnementaux et Sociaux – CGRES) and a 
Resettlement Action Plan (Cadre de Politique de Reinstallation – CPR) for the EFA-FTI 
program. In order to enhance borrower capacity to implement these measures, each Contract 
Management Agency charged with school construction will recruit an environmental specialist.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Policy triggered by planned expansion of schools and construction of training centers   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Policy triggered by planned expansion of schools and construction of training centers   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/25/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The team will review the existing ESMF and RPF - (Cadre de Gestion des Risques 
Environnementaux et Sociaux 
–
CGRES) and Resettlement Action Plan (Cadre de Politique 
de Reinstallation – CPR) and confirm that they cover the impacts expected in this operation, 
before their disclosure.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Experton 
03/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/26/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
03/26/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
