Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3243 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Benin 
Project ID: P109209 
Project Name: Second Decentralized City Management Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Franck Bousquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Roads and highways 
(30%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
33.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective for the Second Decentralized City Management Project is to 
increase access to infrastructure and basic services for residents of Benin’s primary cities 
(Cotonou, Porto-Novo, and Parakou) and selected secondary cities (Abomey-Calavi, Lokossa, 
and Kandi). The project development objective for the proposed Additional Financing (which 
consists in scaling up Component B of the project, see below) remains unchanged.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing would supplement the second and final phase of a two-phase 
Adaptable Program Loan (APL). The first phase of the APL, the First Decentralized City 
Management Project, included three components aiming at the three primary cities of Benin 
(Cotonou, Porto-Novo, and Parakou): (A) Municipal Management Strengthening, designed to 
improve management tools and financial resources of Benin’s primary cities to enable them to 
better provide urban services and maintain infrastructure; (B) Rehabilitation and Reconstruction 
of Basic Urban Infrastructure, using labor intensive construction techniques to reduce 
unemployment; (C) Community Participation and Integration to promote initiative from and 
participation of communities living in low-income neighborhoods and enhance municipalities’ 
Page  2
capacity for community outreach. The second and final phase of the APL, the Second 
Decentralized City Management Project, has been expanded to include activities for three 
secondary cities (Abomey-Calavi, Lokossa, and Kandi) under the original components and has 
added a fourth component: (D) Solid Waste Management in Porto-Novo.  
 
Additional Financing for Component B: Basic Infrastructure (cost US$40 million)  
 
The Additional Financing will complement the works being carried out in the cities of Cotonou, 
Porto-Novo, and Parakou under Component B of the original project. This Component comprises 
22 kilometers of road works and 4 kilometers of drainage works in the six cities under the 
original project. The additional program contains an additional 8.5 kilometers of road works and 
9.2 kilometers of drainage works in the three primary cities (Cotonou, Porto-Novo, and 
Parakou). Activities to be financed under the Additional Financing are currently expected to be 
completed by December 31, 2010, six months after the closing date of the original project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Second Decentralized City Management Project exclusively covers urban areas: Cotonou, 
Porto-Novo, and Parakou (primary cities); and Abomey-Calavi, Lokossa, and Kandi (secondary 
cities). The Additional Financing would cover the three primary cities: Cotonou, Porto-Novo, 
and Parakou.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Overall project supervision is provided by the Inter-ministerial Coordination Committee, which 
includes the Beninese Environmental Agency, an institution strengthened in its function by an 
earlier Bank project.  
 
AGETUR, the implementing agency for Component B, has extensive experience with 
implementing World Bank safeguards. The safeguard work of AGETUR has been satisfactory 
for the implementation of the Second Decentralized City Management Project to date.  
 
The types of investments included in the Additional Financing are covered by the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) prepared and disclosed on May 20, 2005, prior to appraisal of the original 
project. For the Additional Financing, because the project disposes of detailed information on the 
investment types, sub-projects characteristics and their locations, the Borrower will prepare 
specific sub-project Environmental Impact Assessments/Environmental Management Plans and 
Resettlement Action Plans to be reviewed along with the feasibility studies of the proposed civil 
works, approved and disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal of 
the Additional Financing.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The rehabilitation of urban roads and the construction of drainage and sewage networks 
could result in direct and indirect adverse environmental effects, thus requiring to trigger OP/BP 
4.01.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
To enable drainage channels which have been encroached upon to function properly, some 
residents who currently live on the site may have to be relocated or could lose access.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/28/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An ESMF and RPF will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to Appraisal, in the 
country and at the Bank's Infoshop.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Franck Bousquet 
01/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
