Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2009 
Report No.:  51257
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P110075 
Project Name:  Increased Access to Modern Energy 
Task Team Leader:  Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P115064 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (75%);General energy sector (15%);Renewable energy (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (P);Regulation 
and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.82 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
51.85 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
23.09 
 
FONDS FRANCAIS DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT MONDIAL 
1.30 
 
Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund 
2.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
18.70 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
8.25 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
105.19 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's objective is to improve reliability and access to modern energy services in 
Benin.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A - Electrical Network Up-grading: Construction and rehabilitation of key 
transmission and distribution framework and reduction of peak load through energy 
efficiency component.  
 
Page  2
Component B - Electrification and Modern Energy Services: Development of a sound 
institutional framework for provision of modern energy services in rural and urban areas 
by rendering the rural electrification fund functional and by improving biomass energy 
management in the Moyen Oueme region (sustainable fuelwood production for the 
coastal cities).  
 
Component C - Sustainable Energy Services: Rendering energy services to consumers 
more sustainable through the development of an overarching sector plan and through 
business plans at the level of power utilities, and by enhancing the capacity to regulate 
the energy sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located on Benin's territory. One major new transmission line of about 264 
km length will be constructed between the towns of Onigbolo in south-eastern Benin and 
Parakou in northern Benin. Smaller distribution grid extensions may be constructed, but 
their exact location has still to be determined.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTEG) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The construction of the new transmission lines from Onigbolo to Parakou and Sakete to 
Porto Novo are expected to have limited environmental and social impacts after the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and the Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) have been properly implemented. These limited environmental and social impacts 
triggered the Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy (OP 4.01). Contractors who 
will build the transmission lines will be required to prepare a Contractor Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (CESMP), which includes a Health and Safety Plan. The 
Page  3
contractors will employ a Social-Environmentalist Focal Point (SEFP) who will be 
responsible for the monitoring and implementation of these plans. The 
environmental/social unit within CEB will be strengthened to supervise the progressive 
implementation of these plans.  
 
Protected forest areas, sacred forests, and fetishers and their sacred areas will be 
avoided. The potential impacts on protected forest areas and natural habitat triggered the 
Forests and Natural Habitats safeguard policies. A potential impact on sacred forests, 
divinities and holy cultural sites were among the reasons for the triggering of the Physical 
Cultural Resources Safeguard Policy. As mentioned above these areas will be avoided.  
 
The new Onigbolo-Parakou and Sakete-Porto Novo transmission lines are expected to 
have relatively significant social impacts. For the Sakete-Porto Novo line both an 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) were initially prepared in 2004 and recently updated in April-May 2008. The 
ESIA and the RAP for the Onigbolo-Parakou transmission line were also prepared in 
April-May 2008. The RAPs found that along the T-line routing of the Onigbolo-Parakou 
transmission line 123 families (about 640 people) will need to be resettled and/or 
compensated while along the T-line routing of the Sakete-Porto Novo transmission line 
61 families (about 682 people) will need to be resettled and/or compensated. Both RAPs 
clearly identified the specific mitigation measures that need to be implemented, including 
for the compensation of concerned families, respectively.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared to screen and address the environmental 
and social impacts of the rural electrification component, the SBEE distribution 
component, the “improved management of biomass energy” component, and lighting and 
appliance efficiency component. These last two activities could have impacts like 
increased deforestation and release of mercury in the environment as a consequence of 
the use of CFL lightbulbs, if not managed properly. The objective of “improved 
management of traditional biomass” is the expected increase in sustainable forest cover 
of about 300,000 hectares. A Community Forest Management Plan will be prepared and 
disclosed. To avoid the release of mercury from improper destruction of CFL lightbulbs 
the contractors will be obligated to collect used CFLs and safely dispose of them.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Presently there is no law that prevents the usage of transmission line right-of-way for 
agricultural production including gardening for vegetable production. CEB has always 
allowed farmers and urban gardeners to pursue their income generation activities on the 
right-of-way, provided the users respect some minimal restrictions (such as not planting 
trees higher than 2m, or building shelters, etc.). Consequently, CEB will continue 
allowing farmers (in rural areas) and gardeners (in urban areas) to use the right-of-way of 
the transmission lines to be constructed as long as they respect these few restrictions 
mentioned above. This will not only help maintain the income generation activities that 
Page  4
help improve affected communities livelihoods, but also help maintain the rights of way 
clean and safe.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) teams worked in collaboration with the topographer who selected the line routing. 
In this way, environmentally and socially sensitive areas were avoided to minimize 
potential negative impacts. The areas avoided included: protected forest areas, sacred 
forest areas, fetisher areas and built-up areas. The selected line routing is the most 
optimal line routing from an environmental and social point of view. Small corrections 
will be made by the detailed design team, especially in sacred areas with fetishes like in 
the Onigbolo district where the transmission line routing will be slightly deviated (~40/50 
m
to the right side of the village towards Parakou to avoid the fetish and sacred sites.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
CEB has an Environmental and Social Unit, which is capable of preparing ESIAs and 
RAPs, but which lacks the appropriate capacity to implement/supervise the 
implementation of these instruments. SBEE (Benin’s Distribution Power Utility) and 
ABERME (Benin’s Rural Energy and Energy Efficiency Agency) have both 
establishedEnvironmental and Social Unit (ESU). These ESUs will be directly under the 
respective Managing Directors in order to improve their functionality and enhance their 
roles and responsibilities throughout the project cycle. The Ministry of Energy and Water 
is responsible for the implementation of the biomass component, as is presently the case 
under the ESDP. SBEE is in the process of reinforcing its technical capacity and is 
undertaking an environmental and social audit, which will be undertaken in 2009. The 
project includes a separate component to strengthen the environmental and social 
management capacity of energy sectors stakeholders in general and with regard to energy 
projects of the Benin Environmental and Social Agency (ABE) in particular, which is 
responsible for the preparation, clearance, permitting, implementation and monitoring 
and evaluation of both the ESIAs and RAPs in the energy sector. This particular last role 
and responsibility seems to be not very actively pursued by ABE, and consequently it 
needs more in-depth training on World Bank Safeguard policies, particularly 
Participatory Project Monitoring and Evaluation (PPME).  
 
Depending on the size and complexity of the concessions for rural electrification; the 
construction companies will also prepare their own Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMP) and a Health and Safety Plan (HSP). The companies will 
employ a socio-environmentalist (depending on the magnitude of the environmental and 
social issues to be dealt with in the given concession) responsible for the implementation 
of these plans. The supervising engineer will also oversee the adequate implementation of 
each of these three plans.  
 
The Project Coordination Unit at the Directorate for Energy will employ a person 
responsible for socio-environmental safeguards who will handle both issues together as 
Page  5
he/she will mostly rely on CEB’s ESU in charge of implementing the RAP,as well as 
liaise with others government agencies (ABE, SBEE and ABERME).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive public consultations and participation have been held with various key 
stakeholders of the affected population along the proposed transmission line. Meetings 
were held both in rural and urban areas involving a wide range of stakeholders. Those are 
mainly farmers and small local business owners especially in urban and suburban areas. 
Lists of PAPs as well as safeguard instruments have been disclosed respecting World 
Bank guidelines and non technical summaries translated into French and local languages 
were disclosed accordingly and respectively in specific locations in the field, sufficiently 
to further allow PAPs and beneficiary communities to appreciate the proposed project 
intended activities.  
 
The ESIA and RAP for the Onigbolo – Parakou and the Sakete-Porto Novo 
Transmission Lines have been reviewed and approved by the World Bank Safeguard 
team, and consequently disclosed on January 21, 2009. Both the ESMF and the RPF of 
the rural electrification component, the SBEE distribution component, the "improved 
management of biomass energy" component, and the lighting and appliance efficiency 
component have also been reviewed, approved, and disclosed on January 21, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  7
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
03/25/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
03/25/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
03/25/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/25/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/25/2009 
Comments:   
