Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4067 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P106700 
Project Name: Innovation and Agricultural Services 
Task Team Leader: Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 25, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective is to promote sustainable agricultural growth, especially 
among the rural poor, by strengthening Bolivia’s Agricultural Innovation and Information 
Systems and by facilitating the development of private sector based weather insurance.  The 
emphasis will be on the establishment of the lead organization in the Agricultural Innovation 
system, the National Institute for Innovation in Agriculture and Forestry (INIAF).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project has two main components:  
 
Component A: Strengthening the National Agricultural Innovation System (NAIS) and 
establishing INIAF as its lead organization (expected costs: US$ 20m)  
 
Over the last 20 years Bolivia has suffered larges changes in the institutional structure of its 
agricultural research and extension system. The result was a system which lacked coordination at 
the national level, which did not allow long term research activities, and which lacked clear 
priorities. Through the establishment of INIAF, the project aims to establish a public 
Page  2
organization to coordinate agricultural and forestry innovation activities across the country, as 
well as to take direct responsibility for priority public research programs. While some capacity 
exists that may be used to establish INIAF, there is an urgent need to strengthen the human talent 
base, the infrastructure and the institutional framework, especially regarding the distribution of 
responsibilities among different levels of the public sector and among public and private sector. 
This component will have the following three subcomponents:  
 
A.1. Establishing and supporting the national agricultural innovation system (NAIS).  At this 
moment a large number organizations is involved with agricultural research and probably an 
even high number with technical assistance activities on a relatively small scale (e.g., universities 
and NGOs). While there is an urgent need to strengthen coordination, it is important that the role 
of these different organizations is recognized, respected, and possibly strengthened. The 
following activities are foreseen to operationalize the NAIS: First, the project will establish 
within INIAF a unit that analyzes and proposes agricultural innovation policy, focusing strongly 
in the beginning on the distribution of responsibilities between national, regional and municipal 
and other partners and on establishing priority fields of attention. Secondly, the project will put 
in place a competitive fund for applied and adapted research, especially for improving 
production systems in the different regions. Thirdly, the project will develop Web Portal that 
provides access to the different partners in the NAIS and that makes available research results 
and innovation outcomes, from within and outside the country that can be diffused across the 
country. Fourthly, the project will put in place a communication strategy within the NAIS, with 
the farm and forestry community, and with the media in general. A series of annual meetings will 
be started to allow the different partners to share results and exchange experiences.  
 
A.2. Strengthening Research Capacity. This subcomponent will include two main activities 
with the objective to strengthen INIAF’s research capacity.  First, the institutional capacity of 
INIAF will be developed.  In May 2008 INIAF was established by legal decree, and while a 
Director General has been appointed, the institute at this moment does not have an organization, 
a
staff, an office building or an address. Institutional development will focus on the following 
activities: the design and implementation of appropriate administrative procedures and an up to 
date management information system;  the development of the internal ICT structure; the 
development and implementation of a five year human resource development plan; the 
establishment of an integrated monitoring and evaluation system;  the design and implementation 
of  INIAF’s national and regional managementstructure; the development of international 
cooperation activities. Secondly research programs on priority products and programs will be 
established.  In consultation with the organizations currently involved in research on priority 
products and with strong involvement of farmers and local associations, INIAF will formulate 
long term research programs and put in place the mechanisms (contracts, own execution) to 
implement them. For the moment potato, rice, wheat, maize, vegetables, milk and beef have been 
defined as priority products and genetic resources management and seed as other priorities. In a 
similar way a long term program for forestry research will be established, with emphasis on 
monitoring and improving forest use and reducing deforestation, and with a focus on establishing 
forests in deforested areas.  
 
A.3. Developing a program to support technical assistance and technology transfer.  While 
INIAF is not expected to be responsible for technical assistance within the regions (this will be a 
Page  3
responsibility of the Subnational Governments) INIAF will develop a program to support 
technical assistance activities in the regions and to ensure technology transfer towards the 
regions. During preparation the precise responsibilities for INIAF will be further delineated, but 
for the moment it is foreseen that the project would concentrate on establishing a national center 
of excellence to support regional and local extension activities. This center would analyze and 
compare alternative extension approaches, and put in place training programs for extension 
administrators on leading modern extension systems and for extension agents on participatory 
approaches, production and marketing support. The project may also establish a small fund to 
support pilot extension activities and will develop a community of practice and a website for 
extension practitioners. It is expected that different technical assistance programs will co-exist in 
Bolivia. The project will support the design of technical assistance programs for basic food 
products, and through INIAF it will provide technical support to market driven initiatives such as 
the one supported by the Bank-funded Rural Alliances project.  
 
Component B. Improving agricultural information systems and promoting the development of 
weather insurance systems (Expected costs 3.5m)  
 
This component will have two subcomponents.  
 
B.1. Promoting the development of weather based agricultural insurance, especially for small 
and medium-sized farmers.  The Government of Bolivia as well as several regional governments 
have shown interest in supporting the development of a market for weather insurance products, 
especially as a means to reduce income variability to small farmers. The project will provide the 
country with the meteorological infrastructure (weather stations; processing, analytical and 
forecasting capacity; mapping) required to generate the parameters for weather insurance 
products and with a web-based system to disseminate this information. The project will then 
undertake pilot initiatives to test and demonstrate alternative weather insurances schemes (e.g., 
coverage through cooperatives, regional or municipal governments, or through credit sources).  
The project will also provide technical assistance in the development of the policy and regulatory 
framework and in the development and marketing of private sector based weather insurance 
products.  
 
B.2. Strengthening the Information System for Monitoring Agricultural Production and Prices.  
The absence of reliable price and production information in the agricultural sector has been a key 
constraint to effective public policy development, and has limited the transparency of markets 
and the ability of many market participants to find their best options. The  Information System 
for Monitoring Agricultural Production and Prices (Sistema de Informacion y seguimiento a la 
produccioÂ³n y precios de los productos agropecuarios en los mercados; SISPAM) was 
established to fill this void. SISPAM will serve short, medium and long term needs (e.g., market 
interventions and sales strategies in the short run, seed production and planting decisions in the 
medium run, and road and processing infrastructure development in the long run). A needs 
assessment and an inventory of alternative information sources (e.g., Instituto Nacional de 
Estadisticas, INE; and Sistema de Mercado, SIMA) will be made during preparation and will be 
used to develop an investment and capacity building program that will allow MDRAyMA to put 
in place a nimble and effective information system and to share this information with different 
user groups.   
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
At the national level including both Altiplano and Valley regions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Rural Development, Agriculture and Environment (MDRAyMA, Ministerio de 
Desarrollo Rural, Agricultura y Medio Ambiente) has some experience in implementing relevant 
safeguards. An institutional assessment of current capacity will be needed. Plus the proposed 
new National Institute for Innovation in Agriculture and Forestry (INIAF) that will be 
established under this project will include the necessary capacity for implementing safeguard 
policies and oversight.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO) 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project activities may trigger this policy and an environmental assessment 
including an assessment of pest management will be done during project preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project as planned will not finance activities that will have be detrimental to critical 
habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project is expected to provide positive benefits with regards to forest resources by means 
of policy development and research activities.  Proposed activities will include setting up a long 
term program for forestry research, with emphasis on monitoring and improving forest use and 
reducing deforestation, and with a focus on establishing forests in deforested areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project is expected to advocate integrated pest management practices and in general 
provide favorable responses as far as this policy concerned. It may also potentially increase the 
use of pesticides in its research and technology transfer subprograms that may trigger this policy 
through its proposed activities under several subcomponents.  
 
Sub components include but not limited to, A.3. Establishing research programs on priority 
products; A.4. Consolidating the National Seed Program; A.5. Management of Genetic 
Resources; and A.6. Developing a program to support technical assistance and technology 
transfer.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous people form an important part of the rural population of Bolivia. The research 
and extension activities and the weather insurance system will also target indigenous people and 
their agricultural production systems. The project will ensure that these activities will take 
account of the concerns of the indigenous groups and will take special care to ensure their access 
to the resulting weather insurance system. An Indigenous People Development Plan will be 
prepared for this purpose.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/17/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   The 
project preparation fund that would be available for the Government of Bolivia will include 
budget items for environmental (including pest management) and social impact assessments. 
TORs for the study reports will be processed as soon as the Project preparation facility is in 
place (late January 2009). Such study reports are expected to be delivered by the second 
preparation mission (May 30, 2009).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen 
03/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/05/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
03/06/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
