Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/06/2009 
Report No.:  AC4175
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bolivia 
Project ID:  P111863 
Project Name:  BO (AF) Rural Alliances 
Task Team Leader:  David Tuchschneider 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (45%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (40%);Agro-industry (10%);Other industry (5%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
0.56 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
3.86
4.42 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective, as established in the credit agreement for the Rural Alliances 
Project, is "to test a model to improve accessibility to markets for poor rural producers in 
the Pilot Areas."  To achieve this, the project will continue to (i) promote strategic 
productive alliances between different economic players at the local level, (ii) empower 
rural producers through the strengthening of self-managed grass-root organizations, (iii) 
increase access to productive assets and technology, and iv) promote more effective, 
responsive  and accountable service organizations at the local level.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will help the Government of Bolivia to scale-up project 
activities in both the present pilot areas and in two additional areas of the country. The 
AF will finance the three components of the original project, with minor modifications: 
Page  2
(a) institutional support, (b) implementation of rural productive alliances, and (c) project 
management.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Support (Parent project: US$ 2.31 million; Additional 
Financing: US$ 1.78 million)  
 
This component finances technical assistance and training to provide the institutional 
and organizational support needed for the creation of productive alliances at the local 
level. The component gives a particular focus to the development of the institutional 
capacity of small producers to become partners in new marketing arrangements with the 
private sector. The component’s main outputs will bethe formation of rural productive 
alliances and the preparation of viable alliance plans. To realize this objective, the 
component will continue to: (a) support the implementation of a project dissemination 
campaign; (b) support collective action and empower groups of rural poor producers; (c) 
support the process of call for proposals, the preparation of pre-feasibility and feasibility 
studies and their evaluation and approval; and (d) assist with the organizational 
arrangements for the formalization of the alliances.  
 
The component has the following sub-components: (a) communication and 
dissemination, (b) institutional facilitation, (c) capacity building for service providers and 
local governments, and (d) appraisal of alliances. No changes are contemplated for the 
revised project. Activities will continue in the pilot areas and will be replicated in the 
additional ones.  Greater emphasis will be placed on reaching and supporting women and 
lowland minority indigenous groups.  
 
Component 2: Implementation of Rural Productive Alliances (Parent project US$ 28.92 
million; Additional Financing: US$ 19.19 million).  
 
The aim of this component is to provide support for the implementation of the rural 
alliances prepared under component 1.  The component’s main outputs will be: (i) to 
have producers and their marketing partners working together efficiently and effectively 
in long term relations; (ii) an improved production by the rural poor producers to meet 
their new market requirements; (iii) adapted systems in the markets to work with the 
alliances’ small producers; and (iv) the ensured co-participation in alliance plans of 
service providers and local governments.  To achieve these outputs, the project 
cofinances one or more of these potential alliance members: small producers, market 
agents and/or local governments. This assistance is made available for one or more of the 
following: (a) to co-finance the implementation of producer’s subprojects up to the 
storage stage; (b) to co-finance local governments which decide to become alliance 
members in design and construction of public infrastructure aimed at supporting a local 
alliance in its productive goals; and (c) to provide technical assistance to market partners 
to mitigate the relatively higher costs and risks associated with entering into financing 
and marketing arrangements with small rural producers.  
 
The component has the following revised sub-components: (a) producer organizations 
subprojects, and (b) municipal subprojects.  The “financing enhancement incentives” sub-
component will be eliminated from the revised project as practice has shown that demand 
Page  3
for this service is low and that access to credit for the implementation of subprojects 
which include post-production transformation and processing can be favored through 
technical assistance interventions provided to the alliances themselves. The scope of the 
municipal subprojects subcomponent will also be reduced in order to reflect existing 
demand.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (US$ 4.13 million; Additional Financing US$ 3.45 
million)  
 
This component’s outputs are the efficient and effective coordination of the project and 
an M&E system which can measure the improved access to markets by poor producers, 
and the enhancement in rural incomes. The component achieves this through the 
provision of technical assistance, goods, equipment and incremental operating costs 
which support the establishment and operation of a project coordinating team in the 
Ministry of Rural Development, Agriculture and Environment (MDRAMA), the setting 
up and operation of a management information system, the implementation of 
monitoring, evaluation and learning arrangements, and the completion of technical 
studies. The component also ensures that effective fiduciary and safeguard arrangements 
are in place during implementation.  
 
The component has the following sub-components: (a) studies, (b) technical services, 
(c) financial management, (d) monitoring and evaluation, (e) equipment, and (f) operating 
costs. As project management systems are well established and will require only minor 
adjustments to operate the Additional Financing, financing for this component will cover 
the incremental costs required to establish and operate project units in each of the new 
areas, and reinforcement of the central unit to ensure proper safeguard and fiduciary 
oversight.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The parent project presently operates in a total of 65 municipalities located in three 
distinct geographical areas (one for each major eco-region of the country): (a) the 
northern expansion zone in the sub-tropical lowlands of Santa Cruz, (b) the valley region 
extending from Cochabamba to Santa Cruz, and (c) the Altiplano area around the Uyuni 
Salt Lake in Oruro and Potosi. The Additional Financing will expand coverage to an 
additional 2 areas: (a) the 16 municipalities surrounding Lake Titicaca in the northern 
Altiplano; and, (b) 13 municipalities in the sub-tropical zone in the north of La Paz and 
west of Beni departments. The additional areas are similar, in social and ecological terms, 
to the original ones.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSAR) 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project involves the following safeguard policy issues:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).  No large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
negative environmental impacts are expected from the proposed Additional Financing.  
The impacts from the initial phase of the project have been positive or neutral and should 
continue to be so in the revised operation.  As the Additional Financing would fund 
producer organization and municipal subprojects similar in scale and scope to those 
implemented under the original project, the project will maintain its Category B 
classification. An EA report is available for the parent project and has been licensed by 
the Bolivian environmental authorities. Management of environmental safeguards in the 
parent project has been satisfactory.  
 
A
supplementary EA has been prepared for the scaling-up contemplated in the AF, 
reviewing the potential impacts in the new project areas. As with the parent project, no 
large-scale or irreversible impacts were identified for the new regions and impacts are 
generally positive for the typologies of rural alliances likely to be supported.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Forests (OP 4.36). Both Lake Titicaca and Northern La 
Paz regions have natural habitats including critical natural habitats that have been 
identified in the supplementary EA.  No activities are contemplated within critical natural 
habitats. Activities that might involve or induce significant conversion or degradation of 
natural habitats are ineligible and will continue to being screened out early on during 
subproject identification.  The project does not and will not support activities in natural 
forest areas. Timber subprojects are ineligible, and non-timber alliances may be financed 
if management plans for the use of the resource are satisfactory. The project will not 
support alliances involving fishing in Lake Titicaca. A complete exclusion list of 
activities has been prepared and is part of the Environmental Management Plan to ensure 
that activities are in compliance with Bank Safeguards, international conventions, and 
national environmental laws.  
Page  5
Pest Management (OP 4.09). Given the use of pesticides on the part of agricultural 
producers involved in some rural alliances, a PMP has been approved for the project and 
it is being applied to all relevant alliances. A review of implementation has been carried 
out to gauge its effectiveness and to propose additional instruments and activities.  The 
process of improvement and capacity-building is ongoing and will be strengthened in the 
AF phase of the project.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03).  Subprojects that may have a negative impact on 
physical and cultural resources are ineligible, and screened out during the ex ante review 
of alliances.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10).  As part of the social assessment for the original project, 
particular attention was paid to the situation of various indigenous groups. A majority of 
the likely beneficiary population in the pilot areas self-identified as indigenous, and the 
project as a whole was therefore designed in compliance both with the Operational 
Directive 4.20 and Operational Policy 4.10 (which was then in draft form).  No separate 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan was prepared in order to avoid parallelism and 
contribute to better integration of indigenous groups’ needs and concerns in the overall 
project design. Supervision shows that alliance implementation has been properly tailored 
to the cultural and organizational characteristics of producer groups. Project 
implementation in the parent project has validated this approach, as 98% of approved 
alliance members identify themselves as indigenous (whereas 70.4% of the target 
population does).  
 
In the proposed two new areas, indigenous peoples also constitute a majority of the 
population and thus the existing approach will continue to be applied in the revised 
project. In the Lake Titicaca area, 93% of the population identifies itself as Aymara. This 
area is marked by strong empowerment processes, both at the organizational and 
productive levels. In the sub-tropical region to the north of La Paz and west of Beni 
departments, 68% of the potential beneficiaries consider themselves Aymara and 8% 
Quechua. Most of the potential beneficiaries are descendants of migrants from the 
highlands who went to the area in order to farm lands that were opened for colonization 
after 1952. In addition, in this area, minority indigenous groups (Leco, Tacana, Chiman, 
Moseten and Esse Ejja) add up to 8% of the population. The Leco and Moseten have 
been granted collective indigenous titles (TCO), but some conflicts over land with 
highland groups persist. The supplementary Social Assessment recommends that 
particular attention be paid to these minority groups and to women in order to tailor 
interventions to their different production systems and organizational structures.  
 
Involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12). The project has not and will not finance any 
activities that may lead to physical or economic displacement. This has been incorporated 
into project plans and explicitly stated in the eligibility criteria for financing alliances.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts are expected to be positive or neutral from a social and environmental 
standpoint.  The project is seeking to improve productivity and rural income while 
mainstreaming environmental safeguards (including improved pesticide and water use, 
and organic production, among other aspects) into production.  These investments have 
shown to generate positive impacts in the parent project and should continue in the 
revised operation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental assessment procedure that complies with Bank and national 
environmental standards is included in the Operational Manual, and supervision missions 
have verified that it has been applied effectively in the subproject cycle. Safeguards 
compliance under the project has been consistently rated Satisfactory. The project is 
managed by a PIU which has a central office and regional offices in each project area. In 
the central office, a social and environmental specialist monitors operations, ensures 
compliance with safeguards, and coordinates the activities of the social and 
environmental specialists in each of the regional offices. The regional teams are in charge 
of reviewing both social and environmental framework activities, supervising field 
implementation, providing technical assistance to alliance members and service 
providers, and ensuring safeguards compliance. Several forms and checklists are in place 
to monitor and evaluate subprojects.  The information and vetting process is managed 
through an online project information system. Approved subprojects include a short 
environmental and social assessment, which determines potential risks, impacts and 
mitigation measures. The latter are included in the subproject agreements, fully financed, 
and the regional environmental and social specialists monitor their implementation, under 
the oversight and guidance of the central office.  
 
During the initial project phase there has been continual supervision by the Bank and 
several improvements have been made to the EMP and its instruments to ensure effective 
monitoring and oversight. The Pest Management Plan has also been updated and 
improved as the project learned its lessons from implementation of the alliances and local 
conditions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in regard to this project are indigenous rural inhabitants, in 
particular small farmers. Most of the farmers are Aymara or Quechua, though use of 
indigenous languages varies and most people are bilingual. In the north of La Paz, there 
are small indigenous groups practicing slash and burn agriculture combined with 
traditional forest use, though timber exploitation is growing. Most of the indigenous and 
Page  7
campesino groups are well organized at several levels (local, regional, national) and some 
of their organizations have important roles in government. Other stakeholders are buyers 
entering into alliances and municipal authorities and service providers, who also 
participate in some project activities.  
 
As part of AF preparation, a supplementary Social Assessment was carried out in the 
proposed new pilot areas. The consultation process was carried out in two phases.  In the 
first, carried out by the project implementation unit, a total of seven information 
workshops with 349 producers, social leaders and local authorities were held in the two 
proposed sub-regions. In the second phase, six workshops were held with 309 
representatives of producer organizations, potential buyers, middlemen, transport 
companies, union leaders, financial entities, NGOs and municipal governments. An 
additional workshop was held in the north of La Paz with 120 representatives of small 
indigenous groups (Leco, Tacana, Chiman, Moseten and Esse Ejja). Key 
recommendations of the social assessment, have been incorporated into the revised 
project. In particular, increased attention to the specific needs of women and minority 
ndigenous groups will be supported by targeted dissemination, training and technical 
assistance. Consultation was part of the process of the supplementary environmental 
assessment in the expansion areas.  In the Northern La Paz region workshops were held 
in the Provinces of Larecaja and Sud Yungas while in the Lake Titicaca region 
municipalities included Desaguadero, Guaqui, Tiwanaku, Taraco, Puccarani, Puerto 
Perez, Batallas, Achacachi, Copacabana,Tiquina, Tito Yupanqui, Ancoraimes, Carabuco, 
and Puerto Acosta.  The methodology of the consultations was based on initial surveys 
made in the areas of interest, followed by meetings with community leaders and 
municipal authorities prior to the workshops. Based on the workshops and presentation of 
the EA, the most important issues highlighted by the participants include: (i) use and 
management of agricultural chemicals (ii) biodiversity, and (iii) capacity-building on 
environmental issues. These aspects have been noted and incorporated into the project 
AF preparation from both an investment and operational standpoint.  In addition the final 
EA, EMP, and PMP considered these inputs for their inclusion in the AF phase 
documents prepared in this regard.  
 
The supplement
ary environmental assessment has been sent to the World Bank’s 
InfoShop prior to appraisal. The EA and the social assessment have been posted in the 
projects's website and hard copies are available to the public in the project’s offices in 
Bolivia.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  8
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/29/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/30/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Page  9
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Tuchschneider 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ruth Llanos 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
02/06/2009 
Comments:   
