Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3874 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P111863 
Project Name: BO (AF) Rural Alliances 
Task Team Leader: David Tuchschneider 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (30%);Agro-industry (30%);Other industry (10%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
0.63 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
4.37
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project remains unchanged, namely, to test a model to improve accessibility 
to markets for poor rural producers in the Pilot Areas; thus contributing to the Government’s 
goal of improving incomes and the quality of life in rural areas. This would be achieved by 
expanding the Pilot Areas to include new municipalities in 2-3 additional regions of the country, 
and scaling up project activities as designed in the parent project, namely: (a) promoting strategic 
productive alliances between different economic players at the local level; (b) empowering rural 
producers through the development of self-managed grass-roots organizations; (c) increasing 
access to productive assets and technology; and (d) promoting more effective, responsive and 
accountable service organizations at the local level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The parent project finances the following three components: (a) Institutional support, (b) 
Implementation of rural productive alliances, and (c) Project management.  No new components 
will be added by the Additional Financing, though some minor changes may be introduced at the 
subcomponent level. The project will be replicated in an additional 2-3 areas of the country.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Support (Parent project: US$ 3.3 million; Additional Financing: 
US$ 1.6 million). This component finances technical assistance and training to provide the 
institutional and organizational support needed for the creation of productive alliances at the 
local level. The component gives a particular focus to the development of the institutional 
capacity of small producers to become partners in new marketing arrangements with the private 
sector. The component’s main outputs will be the formation of rural productive alliances and the 
preparation of viable alliance plans. To realize this objective, the component will, (a) support the 
implementation of a project dissemination campaign; (b) support collective action and empower 
groups of rural poor producers; (c) support the process of call for proposals, the preparation of 
pre-feasibility and feasibility studies and their evaluation and approval; and (d) assist with the 
organizational arrangements for the formalization of the alliances.  
 
The component has the following sub-components: (a) communication and dissemination, (b) 
institutional facilitation, (c) capacity building for service providers and local governments, and 
(d) appraisal of alliances.  
 
Component activities will be replicated in the new areas.  
 
Component 2: Implementation of Rural Productive Alliances (US$ 26.63 million total [IDA: 
US$ 20.16 million]; Additional Financing: US$ 20.5 million total [IDA: US$ 15.6 million]). The 
aim of this component is to provide support for the implementation of the rural alliances 
prepared under component 1.  The component’s main outputs will be: (i) to have producers and 
their marketing partners working together efficiently and effectively in long term relations; (ii) 
an improved production by the rural poor producers to meet their new market requirements; (iii) 
adapted systems in the markets to work with the alliances’ small producers; and (iv) the ensured 
co-participation in alliance plans of service providers and local governments.  To achieve these 
outputs, the project cofinances one or more of these potential alliance members: small producers, 
market agents and/or local governments. This assistance is be made available for one or more of 
the following: (a) to co-finance the implementation of producer’s subprojects up to the storage 
stage; (b) to provide incentives that improve the prospect of alliance members to obtain market-
based credit or investment for the implementation of subprojects which include post-production 
transformation and processing; (c) to co-finance local governments which decide to become 
alliance members in design and construction of public infrastructure aimed at supporting a local 
alliance in its productive goals; and (d) to provide technical assistance to market partners to 
mitigate the relatively higher costs and risks associated with entering into financing and 
marketing arrangements with small rural producers.  
 
The component has the following sub-components: (a) farmer organizations sub-projects, (b) 
municipal subprojects, and (c) financing enhancement incentives.  
 
Page  3
The Additional Financing may not include subcomponent (c), given the absence of demand for 
it in project implementation. A decision will be made before appraisal on the basis of field 
evaluations.  
 
Component 3: Project Management. (US$ 4.9 million; Additional Financing US$ 2.8 million) 
This component’s outputs are the efficient and effective coordination of the project and an M&E 
system which can measure the improved access to markets by poor producers, and the 
enhancement in rural incomes. The component achieves this through the provision of technical 
assistance, goods, equipment and incremental operating costs which support the establishment 
and operation of a Project coordinating team in Ministry of Rural Development, Agriculture and 
Environment (MDRAMA), the setting up and operation of a management information system, 
the implementation of monitoring, evaluation and learning arrangements, and the completion of 
technical studies. The component also ensures that effective fiduciary arrangements are in place 
during implementation.  
 
The component has the following sub-components: (a) studies, (b) technical services, (c) 
financial management, (d) monitoring and evaluation, (e) equipment, and (f) operating costs.  
 
As project management systems are well established and will require only minor adjustments to 
operate the Additional Financing, financing for this component will cover the incremental costs 
required to establish and operate project units in each of the new areas, and reinforcement of the 
central unit to ensure proper safeguard and fiduciary oversight.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The parent project presently operates in a total of 65 municipalities located in three distinct 
areas: (a) the northern expansion zone of Santa Cruz, (b) the Cochabamba valleys, and (c) the 
area around the Uyuni Salt Lake in Oruro and Potosi. The Additional Financing will expand 
coverage to an additional 2-3 areas. Potential areas to be included are: (a) the Lake Titicaca 
region, (b) the campesino areas north of the city of La Paz, and (c) the Chaco region.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An environmental assessment procedure that complies with Bank and national environmental 
standards is included in the Operational Manual, and supervision missions have verified that it 
has been applied effectively in the subproject cycle. The project is managed by a PIU which has 
a
central office (UCN) and regional offices in each project area (UORs). In the UCN, a social 
and environmental specialist monitors operations, ensures compliance with safeguards, and 
coordinates the activities of the social and environmental specialists in each of the UORs. 
Alliances proposing activities included in the project’s negative list are rejected at the proposal 
stage. Approved subprojects include a short environmental assessment which determines 
potential impacts and mitigation measures. The latter are included in the subproject agreements, 
fully financed, and their implementation is monitored by each UOR’s environmental specialist 
under the oversight and guidance of the UCN. The November 2008 Mid-term Review mission 
will re-assess implementation of the environmental procedures established for the parent project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSAR) 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
As the Additional Financing would fund producer organization and municipal subprojects 
similar in scale and scope to those implemented under the original project, it is expected that it 
will maintain its Category B classification. An EA report is available for the parent project and it 
will be updated as needed for the Additional Financing. Management of environmental 
safeguards in the parent project has been satisfactory.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
No activities are contemplated in critical natural habitats. Activities that might involve or 
induce significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats are ineligible and screened out 
early on subproject identification.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project does not and will not support activities in natural forest areas. Timber subprojects 
are ineligible, and non-timber alliances may be financed if management plans for the use of the 
resource are satisfactory.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
A
PMP has been approved for the project and it is being applied to all relevant alliances. A 
review of implementation will be carried out before appraisal to gauge its effectiveness and to 
propose additional instruments or activities, if needed.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Subprojects that may have a negative impact on physiscal and cultural resources are 
ineligible, and screened out during the ex ante review of alliances.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
More than 80% of the population in the potential new areas is indigenous; thus, for the 
project as a whole, OD 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) will apply. The Additional Financing will 
maintain the design features that have made the project compatible with local customs and 
traditions, while ensuring that indigenous groups participate through a process of informed 
consultation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
If the Lake Titicaca reagion is included as one of the additional project areas, this safeguard 
may be triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/22/2008 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The team will review safeguards implementation under the parent project and will prepare an 
initial safeguards compliance note during a mission to be completed before the end of 
September 2008. In this mission, the team will also agree with government the new areas into 
which the project will expand. This will permit the team to establish which additional studies 
are required to complement the existing EA and social assessment. All studies are expected 
to be completed before the end of November 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Tuchschneider 
09/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
09/25/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
