                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC4224


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/23/2009

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina               Project ID: P111780
Project Name: Enhancing SME Access to Finance
Task Team Leader: Irina Astrakhan
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2010
Managing Unit: ECSPF                          Lending Instrument: Financial
                                              Intermediary Loan
Sector: General finance sector (60%);General industry and trade sector (20%);Micro- and
SME finance (20%)
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (25%);Regulation and competition policy
(25%);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (25%);Other financial and
private sector development (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            35.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
                                                                         0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective is to maintain or improve access to finance for small and
medium enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context of global financial crisis.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
(i) SME Line of Credit (appr. US$ 27.0 million) to provide medium to long term funding to
eligible commercial banks for on-lending to SMEs in order to increase the flow of credit to the
SME sector, particularly export-oriented enterprises. In addition, the line of credit would aim to
encourage investment in new equipment and technology, which would create higher value added
production capacity in Bosnia. This would, in turn, provide new sources of employment and
result in increased exports and more diversified trade flows.

 (ii) Funding for Microcredit Organizations (MCOs) (appr.US$ 10.0 million)was initially
considered, but the decision to drop this component has been made due to limited finding
availability.
 (iii) Matching Grant Facility (MGF) (appr. US$ 3.0 million) that would help enterprises
improve their competitive position, both to maintain exports and secure their domestic positions,
and/or deal with issues that have emerged due to the global economic crisis. The Project will
facilitate SMEs access to external expertise in the areas of productivity, quality, and
diversification of production. The eligible consulting services would include preparation of
business plans, feasibility studies, marketing, development of new products and services,
upgrading technological processes, improving quality of products and production technology;
obtaining international quality certifications, and capacity building of management and
personnel. The financing will be provided on a cost-sharing basis. The assistance from the
matching grant facility is expected to complement the financial resources provided to SMEs
through the line of credit. The project will provide the grant facility and technical assistance and
some administrative costs of the MGF administrator.

 PFIs qualification process. The Participating financial institutions (PFIs) will be selected based
on the criteria specified in Bank#s OP8.30. PFI appraisal will be completed before effectiveness
and new PFIs interested in participation will be appraised by the Bank before they will be
allowed to participate. Details on the PFI qualification process are outlined in Annex 2. A set of
specific criteria will be developed for MCOs in the course of the project preparation.

 Possible Partnerships. The project team has been closely coordinating with USAID, which has
been providing an on-going support for clusters development. The team also explored
opportunities for cooperation with EBRD and IFC in the area of matching grants for access to
external expertise. FIAS/IFC support for improvement of business environment through
conducting comprehensive regulatory review in the Federation and introducing Regulatory
Impact Assessment in the RS will enhance the outcomes of the proposed project#s activities.

D. Project location (if known)
Bosnia & Herzegovina, nationwide

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Funds for sub-projects will be channeled through Apex Institutions. In the case of Republika
Srpska, the apex function will be assigned to Investment and Development Bank, which was the
PIU for a number of Line of Credit projects, including two very similar to this project. In the
case of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the apex will be placed with Foundation for
Sustainable Development (OdRaz) which has also been a PIU for a number of WB-financed
project, including credit lines. Originally the project concept targeted both commercial banks and
microfinance organizations, but later on the decision has been made to focus on banks only. A
matching grants scheme totaling $3-4 million for consultant services may or may not be
involved.

  The Environmental Framework and Operations Manual which was used for the previous Line
of Credit project will be updated and adapted for this project. Both PIUs will use the same OM.
It sets out an environmental screening process in which PFIs do initial screening, which is then
reviewed by the respective PIUs.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment may be triggered by the project. Sub-projects which
would qualify for Category A for environmental assessment purposes are excluded from
participation in the project. The project will support small and medium enterprises. The WB
funding is expected to be used mostly for working capital finance, that is, to allow enterprises to
continue with their standard activities, where environmental assessments are not expected to be
needed. For the investment finance, eligibility will be limited to low risk sub-projects whose
environmental impacts are expected to be negligible, and for which no environmental evaluation
will be required. Intermediate risk subprojects may be considered, if environmental impacts can
be readily identified and standard preventative and/or remedial measures can be prescribed
without a full EIA.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: 06/22/2009

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   N/A


1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Irina Astrakhan   02/12/2009
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Agnes I. Kiss     06/17/2009
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Lalit Raina       06/23/2009
   Comments:
