Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4036 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/14/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID: P108000 
Project Name: Sava Waterway Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the operational performance and 
safety of commercial and leisure vessels on the Sava River, contributing to improved utilization 
of the river ports.  The project proposes to achieve this objective through the following: (i) the 
rehabilitation of the River Sava to Class IV/Va status (tbc) between Sisak and Belgrade; (ii) 
targeted investment in a river information and vessel tracking systems; and (iii) necessary 
implementation assistance and institutional support.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed investments include activities related to the enhancement of the navigability of the 
river/waterway, together potentially with associated investments in port infrastructure in the river 
ports. Specifically, works will involve dredging of the main fairway to increase the water depth, 
construction of bank protection work, potentially involving land take, groynes and sills, to 
alleviate erosion and impede sedimentation in the channel, and small bridge 
Page  2
rehabilitation/construction. In addition, the waterway has a number of areas along its banks that 
are protected, or of special scientific or environmental significance.  
 
The provisional components in the project are as follows:  
 
a) 
Improving the navigability of the Sava River: This component will involve the restoration 
of the Sava waterway, the rehabilitation of navigation, and the upgrade of navigability to class 
IV on some sections. This will include removal of debris, dredging of the navigation channel and 
securing port access, strengthening of river banks, marking of the navigation channel, and 
construction of supporting infrastructure for control and management of river traffic;  
 
b) 
River Information and Vessel Tracking System: This component will involve the the 
introduction of a river information and vessel tracking system on the waterway, using vessel 
based transponders. Such a system, which is now obligatory on the River Danube, allows for the 
accurate mapping of all traffics, considerably strengthening efficiency and safety on the 
waterways;  
 
c) 
Institutional Capacity Building Component: This component will include consultant 
services for the assistance in institutional reform in the IWT, the review of river transport 
legislation in BiH, and the identification of legislative, regulatory and institutional changes for 
the implementation of the EU requirements under the Acquis Communataire; and  
 
d) 
Investments in mine clearance, port and access infrastructure:  This final component 
encompasses any additional and parallel investments in port or access infrastructure to facilitate 
the privatization of the port of BrÄ?
ko, depending onthe recommendations of the PPIAF funded 
study, and if necessary, and the as yet indeterminate costs of mine clearance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The location of the project is the basin of the River Sava, between the confluence of the River 
Sava with the River Danube at Belgrade, and the port of Sisak in Croatia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is familiar with the Bank safeguard policies triggered by this project given its 
experience developed during preparation and implementation of similar Bank-financed projects. 
The environmental and social aspects related to the proposed new investments will be 
implemented under the supervision of an assigned specialist within the respective PMU. Civil 
works contracts for specific port rehabilitation investments will include provisions on how to 
address environmental mitigation and monitoring aspects during works. The project 
environmental management plan will recommend the appropriate institutions responsible to 
implement the related environmental aspects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project (APL) is proposed as category A for environmental assessment purposes given 
the specific infrastructure works related mainly to Component A. The Client will prepare a 
project EIA related to specific infrastructure investments together with one or more site/works-
specific EMPs covering the major sub-components (e.g. channel dredging, river bank 
strengthening, etc.). This EIA (Category A) will cover the entire 3-country APL target area and 
will need to pay particular attention to cumulative impacts, induced development and potential 
conflicts (e.g. with planned hydropower schemes in the Sava basin). The WB will work with the 
ISRBC to finalize TORs for the final EIA at detailed design stage to ensure that it will meet 
OP/BP requirements.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The waterway has a number of areas along its banks that are protected, or of special scientific 
or environmental significance.  The policy is triggered since project interventions including 
dredging, river banks rehabilitation, and possibly land clearing might be located in proximity to 
protected areas including Ramsar sites, for which provisions of appropriate conservation and 
mitigation measures will be necessary during works.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The preliminary EIA (FS stage) has determined the possibility of archeological chance finds 
in the Sava riverbeds or river banks areas.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project activities might involve some land take in the river correction  and riverbank 
strengthening works, even for restoring to Category IV but particularly if upgrading to V-a.  The 
precise locations involved cannot be identified until detailed designs are prepared. A 
Resettlement (Land Acquisition) Policy framework will be prepared as a condition of appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The policy is triggered since the Sava River is an International waterway, passing through 4 
riparian countries, and is linked hydrologically to the Black Sea basin and the Danube sub-basin. 
Based on LEGEC and LEGEN's meeting, the team was advised to request the help of the Sava 
River Basin Commission Secretariat to notify the Danube Comission about the nature and scope 
of this project, to meet the requirements of the Bank Policy and the Framework Agreement. The 
Bank will offer its assistance in preparing such draft letter of notification.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
The team was advised to explore whether this policy is triggered.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/11/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
preliminary EIA has been prepared in parallel with a preliminary design as part of a  
feasibility study.  The Environmental Specialist on the project team has reviewed this 
comprehensive document and found it to be of good quality although falling short of OP 4.01 
requirements in some aspects (e.g. analysis of alternatives, Mitigation & Monitoring Plans, 
coverage of public consultations). The team will also ensure that the EIA is carried out by an 
independent consulting firm not associated with the feasibility studies or design. Also, a 
Land Acquisition Framework will be prepared by the Client before project appraisal. The 
Environmental Impact Assessment with executive summary, work specific EMP, and the 
Land Acquisition Framework will be the subject of public meetings (at least two for EIA) 
before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
12/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
01/06/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
