Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3382 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID: P107998 
Project Name: Second Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Aniruddha Dasgupta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.50
3.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objectives of the Second Solid Waste Management Project (SWM-2) would remain the 
same as under the first SWM Project and are to: (a) cost effectively improve solid waste services 
in participating priority areas; (b) increase administrative and technical capacity for solid waste 
management at the local and Entity level; (c) improve cost recovery in the sector and encourage 
private sector involvement; and (d) correct environmental problems and reduce health hazards 
caused by inadequate waste collection and disposal systems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project approach is to rehabilitate existing landfills in line with EU standards and 
subsequently close wild dumps sites throughout BH. Project design is based on the successful 
implementation of the first Solid Waste Management (SWM) Project that supports the 
Government’s strategy to establish waste management districts through cooperation of 
municipalities. It assists with the most urgent investments focusing on rehabilitating existing 
landfill sites, finding safe methods of disposal, raising public awareness, training sector staff and 
extending collection service. A nationwide Solid Waste Management Strategy, funded by the 
European Union (EU), was completed in 2000. The key recommendation of the strategy was the 
development of regional landfill facilities serving multiple municipalities. The Government is 
Page  2
proceeding in three phases; the existing SWM project supports the first phase (2002-2008). In 
light of successful implementation progress, the Government had sought additional financing for 
the project. The Bank approved an amount of US$8 million in June 2005. The existing bank 
support (US$ 26 million) for the sector will result in development of 5 international standard 
regional landfill facilities. The Project will close on November 30, 2009. Given the enormous 
funding needs to continue and finally complete implementation of the strategy, the Government 
has approached the Bank for continued support to the sector to expand the project to other 
regions.  
 
The second Solid Waste Management Project has five components that are based on the 
successful project design of SWM-1 and were designed to ensure continued successful 
implementation. Component A (Waste Management) invests in rehabilitation of existing disposal 
sites, wild dump closures, collection infrastructure, support equipment, and to a limited extend 
conversion of existing small dumpsites to transfer stations. At more advanced regional landfills 
the component will also support upgrading processes such as sorting, recycling and gas 
capturing. Component B (Institutional Strengthening) finances technical assistance and capacity 
building activities benefiting the entity level institutions involved in solid waste management. 
The Institutional Strengthening Component also finances a Public Communication Program and 
Environmental Monitoring. Component C (Technical Assistance and Engineering Services) 
provides technical assistance and engineering services. This component supports the preparation 
of feasibility studies, financial, environmental and social assessments of landfill sites and 
provides support for bidding procedures for the investments and services provided under 
Components A and B. Component D (Project Management Unit) and Component E (Incremental 
Operating Cost) give assistance in project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
SWM-2 will increase the project size achieved under the first solid waste management project so 
that eventually full country coverage can be attained. Nevertheless, investments under 
component A will continue to finance activities in regions that are currently part of the first 
SWM and need additional funding to complete investments or scale-up their operation. These 
regions include Banja Luka, Bihac, Bijeljina, Mostar, Sarajevo, Tuzla, and Zenica.  
 
Specific Environmental Mitigation Plans (EMPs) were completed for each site in the regions 
included in the first solid waste management project. Full Environmental Assessments (EAs) 
were prepared where the investment required rehabilitation of a landfill. All documents were 
disclosed in the country and made available through the INFO Shop. Each of the landfill sites 
has a technical and design study that reviews the environmental issues such as groundwater 
quality, surface water quality, soil quality and leachate quality. The studies have been prepared 
by qualified international and local environmental specialists. Feasibility studies on the clean up 
of wild dumpsites are being conducted in regions where landfills have been rehabilitated.  
 
Under SWM-2, all regions that have established inter-municipal boards will be eligible for TA 
(component C). Although regions and their corresponding municipalities may become eligible 
for component A at different stages of the project, only those that meet all selection criteria will 
be eligible to receive funding for investments. In a preliminary screening, the government 
identified 6 potentially eligible regions to be ready within the first year of the project 
Page  3
effectiveness date. These regions have already taken important steps toward meeting the 
eligibility criteria based on the premises promoted by this project. These regions include Prjedor, 
Zvornik and Doboj in the RS, and Gorazde, Visoko and the Central-Bosnian Canton in the 
Federation.  
 
For additional sites that will be identified for inclusion in the project, the Environmental 
Covenant in the Legal Agreements confirms that EAs/EMPs must be prepared for those project 
regions/landfills and the same analysis as that used in the EA/EMPs must be conducted as part of 
project preparation, and the EMP will be applied. Local disclosure of any such documentation 
will be provided.  
 
As with the previous project, the sites will not require any land acquisition or resettlement. The 
sites included are existing landfill sites which will be rehabilitated.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower will develop an Environmental Screening and Assessment Framework to serve as 
the basis for preparation of site-specific EAs/EMPs when the investment sites are identified. The 
framework will follow national requirements and standards for EIA while making provisions for 
compliance with World Bank requirements The Borrower will also develop and enforce 
Environmental Management Plans for individual sites included in the project to mitigate 
identified risks related to the rehabilitation and raise contractor awareness of environmental 
issues. As the project is a repeater of the existing project, institutional capacity to implement 
safeguard policies already exists. Through this project, the capacity of the implementing 
agencies, utilities, will be further strengthened especially related to environmental quality 
monitoring, which should be based on the recommendations from the National Solid Waste 
Management Strategy and the EU Landfill Directive, which include following parameters to be 
monitored: leachate quality on site, groundwater quality, surface water quality, soil quality, gas 
emissions from the suite, incinerator emissions, weight and composition of waste, construction 
activities, after decommissioning monitoring. The project will also support training on a variety 
of solid waste management issues including monitoring and regulation which will improve 
capacity to enforce safeguards policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Management Framework and a completed EIA (including EMP) for a 
representative site will be submitted as a model. At least one consultation nationally on the 
framework and at least one local consultation on the EIA for the identified site will be 
conducted. Local consultations will be done for additional EIAs as investment sites are 
identified. The project will not require land acquisition through eminent domain or resettlement 
for any of the known or potential project sites. There are no waste pickers occupying or working 
at any of the formal or informal waste disposal sites under consideration for upgrading or 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
conversion to a transfer station.  Thus, this investment will not trigger OP/BP 4.12.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/29/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Management Framework and an EIA (including EMP) for an existing 
representative site will be disclosed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aniruddha Dasgupta 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
