Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3497
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P107998 
Project Name:  Second Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Aniruddha Dasgupta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.50
3.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective of the Second Solid Waste Management Project 
(SWM-2) is to improve the availability, quality, environmental soundness and financial 
viability of solid waste management services in participating regions. Key impacts 
include an improved disposal management system and enhanced coverage of formal 
waste management services, improved ground water quality at disposal sites, higher 
citizen satisfaction with waste management services and an increased cost recovery rate 
of participating utilities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project approach is to rehabilitate existing landfills in line with EU standards and 
subsequently close wild dumps sites throughout BH. Project design is based on the 
successful implementation of the first Solid Waste Management (SWM) Project that 
supports the Government’s strategy to establish waste management districts through 
cooperation of municipalities. It assists with the most urgent investments focusing on 
rehabilitating existing landfill sites, finding safe methods of disposal, raising public 
awareness, training sector staff and extending collection service. A nationwide Solid 
Waste Management Strategy, funded by the European Union (EU), was completed in 
2000. The key recommendation of the strategy was the development of regional landfill 
Page  2
facilities serving multiple municipalities. The Government is proceeding in three phases; 
the existing SWM project supports the first phase (2002-2008). In light of successful 
implementation progress, the Government had sought additional financing for the project. 
The Bank approved an amount of US$8 million in June 2005. The existing bank support 
(US$ 26 million) for the sector will result in development of 5 international standard 
regional landfill facilities. The Project will close on November 30, 2009. Given the 
enormous funding needs to continue and finally complete implementation of the strategy, 
the Government has approached the Bank for continued support to the sector to expand 
the project to other regions.  
 
The Second Solid Waste Management Project will build upon the successful project 
design of SWMP-1 and will ensure continued successful implementation. However, 
lessons learned during implementation of SMWP-1will be introduced. Main adjustments 
include i) introduction of a more flexible and performance-based mechanism for 
allocation of project funds; ii) amended funding mechanism for Technical Assistance and 
the PMU; and iii) consolidation of components by reducing the overall number from five 
to three.  
 
The project has three components. Component A (Waste Management) invests in 
rehabilitation of existing disposal sites, wild dump closures, collection infrastructure, 
support equipment, and to a limited extend the conversion of existing small dumpsites to 
transfer stations. At more advanced regional landfills the component will also support 
upgrading processes such as sorting, recycling and gas capturing. It will also cover 
operational cost of regional PITs. The component includes 10 percent co-financing from 
the Government. Component B (Technical Assistance) provides technical assistance and 
engineering services to participating regions and will finance institutional strengthening 
and capacity building activities benefiting the entity level institutions involved in solid 
waste management. This component supports the preparation of feasibility studies, 
financial, environmental and social assessments of landfill sites and provides support for 
bidding procedures for the investments and services provided under Component A. The 
Component will also finance a Public Communication Program and Environmental 
Monitoring. In addition it may support strategic studies for Hazardous Waste 
Management and Inter-state cooperation in Solid Waste Management. Component C 
(Project Management Unit) supports operation of the PMU and gives assistance in project 
implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
SWMP-2 will increase the project size achieved under the first solid waste management 
project so that eventually full country coverage can be attained. Nevertheless, 
investments under component A will continue to finance activities in regions that are 
currently part of the first SWMP and need additional funding to complete investments or 
scale-up their operation. These regions include Banja Luka, Bihac, Bijeljina, Mostar, 
Sarajevo, Tuzla, Zenica and Livno.  
 
Page  3
Specific Environmental Mitigation Plans (EMPs) were completed for each site in the 
regions included in the first solid waste management project. Full Environmental 
Assessments (EAs) were prepared where the investment required rehabilitation of a 
landfill. All documents were disclosed in the country and made available through the 
INFO Shop. Each of the landfill sites has a technical and design study that reviews the 
environmental issues such as groundwater quality, surface water quality, soil quality and 
leachate quality. The studies have been prepared by qualified international and local 
environmental specialists. Feasibility studies on the clean up of wild dumpsites are being 
conducted in regions where landfills have been rehabilitated.  
 
In order to participate in SWMP-2 regions will need to meet eligibility criteria for 
Technical Assistance (Longlist) and Investment Funding (Shortlist). These criteria for 
sub-project eligibility have been agreed upon to ensure effective implementation and 
economic efficiency of regional sanitary landfills. In a preliminary screening, the 
government identified 6 potentially eligible regions to be ready within the first year of the 
project effectiveness date. Most regions have already completed important steps toward 
meeting the eligibility criteria based on the premises promoted by this project. These 
regions include Prjedor and Zvornik in the RS, and Mostar, Gorazde, Zenica and Livno in 
the Federation.  
 
Regions that meet eligibility criteria in the Longlist will be eligible for TA (Component 
B). Although regions and their corresponding municipalities may become eligible for 
component A at different stages of the project, only those that meet all selection criteria 
(Shortlist) will be eligible to receive funding for investments.  
 
For those sites to be identified for inclusion in the project, the Environmental Covenant 
in the Legal Agreements confirms that EAs/EMPs must be prepared for those project 
regions/landfills and the same analysis as that used in the EA/EMPs must be conducted as 
part of project preparation, and the EMP will be applied. Local disclosure of any such 
documentation will be provided.  
 
As with the previous project, the sites will not require any land acquisition or 
resettlement. The sites included are existing landfill sites which will be rehabilitated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The interventions envisaged under the project trigger the Banks’ Environmental 
Assessment Safeguard Policy OP 4.01. The project has been identified as category B 
project. To comply with the OP 4.01 policy the borrower has prepared an Environmental 
Framework (EF), an environmental screening and assessment instrument, since the final 
selection of landfills for rehabilitation will take place during the course of the project. 
The EF serves as a tool to ensure that the proposed investments implemented through the 
Project comply with the existing environmental protection laws, regulations and 
standards in BH as well as with the World Bank’s Operation Policies and Practices. The 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Mostar landfill, as a representative EMP, 
was prepared by the borrower to comply with the Bank’s criteria on environmental 
assessment. The EA for Mostar landfill has been approved by the Bank during the first 
SWMP. All mentioned documents were publicly disclosed and discussed.  
 
The project will not cause any large scale or irreversible impacts. The project is 
expected to have positive environmental benefits by improving collection, transfer and 
disposal of solid waste and reducing wild dumping, i.e. will reduce environmental 
degradation related to inadequate solid waste management. As with operation of any 
landfill, potential negative impacts include pollution of air and soil. These impacts are 
associated with a) construction/rehabilitation of landfills, b) collection, transfer and 
storage, c) management of leachate and gas emissions, d) operation of landfill, and e) 
decommissioning of landfill. To mitigate environmental impacts, the borrower will 
prepare and implement EIA with the EMP for each selected landfill, including for 
transfer stations and closure of wild dumps, where applicable. All these documents will 
be publicly disclosed and discussed before commencing construction works as defined in 
the Environmental Framework. The borrower will use the best technical practices (EU 
landfill directive) for landfill rehabilitation.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential negative environmental impacts of the project are expected to be minimal and 
manageable. In addition to potential direct negative impacts on air and soil quality, more 
indirect impacts are related to aesthetic properties of landfills. However, experience from 
the first SWMP show rather significant improvements in aesthetics of landfills after 
rehabilitation. This type of practice will be continued in SWMP-2.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The National Waste strategy recommends the development of regional landfill facilities 
serving multiple municipalities. For the preparation of this strategy site alternatives were 
discussed, i.e. opening of new landfills vs. rehabilitation/extension of existing ones. Since 
the existing landfills did not comply with technical standards, rehabilitation of the same 
was necessary. Decisions on the siting of new landfills are difficult to make, due to 
negative perceptions of landfills by the community and the NIMBY attitude. This option 
was rejected since it would have increased costs and caused significant delays in 
implementation of the Waste Management Strategy.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has developed an Environmental Framework to serve as the basis for 
preparation of site-specific EAs/EMPs when the investment sites are identified. The 
framework follows national requirements and standards for EIA while making provisions 
for compliance with World Bank requirements. The environmental impact assessment 
legislation in the country has been amended in 2006 and is fully in line with the EU EIA 
directive. All investments to be financed under component A of the second SWMP will 
prepare EIAs in line with the new legislation as determined in the EF. The Borrower will 
also develop and enforce Environmental Management Plans for individual sites included 
in the project to mitigate identified risks related to the rehabilitation and raise contractor 
awareness of environmental issues. EIAs and EMPs prepared under the second SWMP 
will be approved by the Bank on a no-objection base. As the project is a repeater of the 
existing project, institutional capacity to implement safeguard policies already exists. 
Through this project, the capacity of the implementing agencies, utilities, will be further 
strengthened especially related to environmental quality monitoring, which should be 
based on the recommendations from the National Solid Waste Management Strategy and 
the EU Landfill Directive, which include following parameters to be monitored: leachate 
quality on site, groundwater quality, surface water quality, soil quality, gas emissions 
from the suite, incinerator emissions, weight and composition of waste, construction 
activities, after decommissioning monitoring. The project will also support training on a 
variety of solid waste management issues including monitoring and regulation which will 
improve capacity to enforce safeguards policies.  The project also supports preparation of 
social assessments in the areas in which landfills are to be upgraded.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the citizens in the regions to be served by the project’s rehabilitated 
sanitary landfills. During preparation of both projects stakeholders, including local and 
national NGOs, were involved in workshops, local level community meetings, and public 
consultations. The project includes a sub-component on "Public Communication" which 
will foster communication between the communities and the SWM authorities.  
 
The EF public consultation was organized by the Federal Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism of and Ministry of Urbanism, Civil Engineering and Environment of Republika 
Srpska in Sarajevo on March 7, 2008. The Environmental Framework and Management 
Plan will be published on the web site of the Federal Ministry for Environment and 
Tourism. Stakeholders present were representatives from the mentioned ministries, 
representatives from the regions included in the first phase of the project, the Ministry of 
Foreign Trade and Economic Relations and representatives from NGOs. The project 
concept and EF were greeted by all participants.  
 
The first public disclosure of the EA for the rehabilitation of the Mostar landfill was 
presented in a public consultation in 2002 and has been approved by the Bank during the 
preparation of the first SWMP. A public consultation of the EF and EMP for 
rehabilitation of Mostar landfill was organized by City Council of Mostar on 4 March, 
2008. The Environmental Framework and Management Plan have been published on the 
web page of the City of Mostar and the Board of the Public Utility “Deponija” Mostar. 
The Meeting was concluded with general approval of all those present, while stating that 
there are no significant issues that need to be overcome in implementing the project.  
 
Zenica undertook an extensive social scoping process, including conducting surveys of 
nearby inhabitants and hiring of a local NGO to manage the outreach and consultation 
process. The scoping undertaken here can provide the basis for the development of 
subsequent practice at other sites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/11/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  7
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aniruddha Dasgupta 
03/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
03/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/13/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
03/19/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
