Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC3901
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Botswana 
Project ID:  P102368 
Project Name:  Botswana Integrated Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Supee Teravaninthorn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (75%);General transportation sector (15%);Railways (10%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
177.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
134.64 
 OPEC 
FUND 
20.00
154.64 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary development objectives of the project is to enhance the efficiency of the 
transport system and competitiveness of transport services, through building modern 
business capacity in the public administration, improving inter-regional and critical 
transport infrastructure and empowering private sector participation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project seeks to achieve the above mentioned development objectives through 
investment in the following three major groups of components.  
 
Component A:   Capacity Building, Institutional Strengthening, Knowledge Transfer, 
and Training estimated at US$14.70 million, inclusive of 15 percent for price and 
physical contingencies. Various studies to sharpen transport activities and contribute to 
the regional integration vision of Botswana are also included in this component.  
 
Component B:   Roads Sector Investment estimated at US$236.0 million, inclusive of 
15 percent for price and physical contingencies, out of which US$122.0 million proposed 
Page  2
to be financed by the Bank and US$114.0 million by the GOB. It will finance the road 
asset management (area-wide OPRC contracts) of 800 kilometers of road network in 
Kanye District, the most travelled network of the country.  
 
Component C:   Urban Roads Infrastructure Investment estimated to cost US$81.0 
million, inclusive of 15 percent for price and physical contingencies, out of which 
US$42.50 million financed by the Bank and US$38.50 million by the GOB. It will 
finance the improvement of Gaborone City urban roads and some critical junctions which 
are currently very congested.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The physical investment component of the project will support the roads sub-sector 
(rehabilitation and maintenance). The investments will be done on primary road networks 
administered by the Ministry of Transport and Works (civil works), and a few urban 
roads administered by the Local Government (feasibility study).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social  
 
From a social safeguards perspective, the implementation of civil works under the 
physical investment component is expected to remain within the existing road reserves. 
However, for the urban traffic component, this cannot be ascertained until Feasibility 
Studies are completed; and for the OPRC pilot road, the nature of the planned civil works 
might change over the course of the Contract for any unforeseen reasons, requiring 
additional land acquisition beyond the existing road reserves.  A Resettlement Policy 
Page  3
Framework (RPF) consistent with the World Bank's OP 4.12 and the country's laws and 
regulation on land acquisition and compensation was prepared and disclosed before 
Project appraisal (in-country on December 12, and at InfoShop on December 23, 2008). 
This RPF sets forth the procedures and operational principles that guide the preparation 
and implementation of specific Resettlement Action Plan if new land were to be acquired 
during project implementation.  The proposed project does not trigger OP 4.10 because it 
does not involve any new road constructions into areas inhabited by Indigenous Peoples.  
 
Environment  
 
The physical investments financed under the ITP focus on the rehabilitation and output 
based long term maintenance of existing road networks (approximately 800 km) and the 
improvements to major intersections in Gaborone.   Potential adverse impacts are likely 
to be minor and localized and, therefore, the Project is classified as environmental 
category "B" in accordance with OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment.  An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared prior to 
Project appraisal (in-country on December 12, and at InfoShop on December 23, 2008). 
Regarding the implementation of the component improvement of major city of Gaborone 
intersections, individual road segments have not yet been designed, the preparation of 
EAs and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), including consultation with project 
affected groups and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as appropriate, will be 
prepared when the design consultants are on board and before the commencement of the 
works.  
 
Regarding the implementation of the 800 km of road, the type of works intervention for 
each of the road segments cannot be determined prior to actual civil works 
commencement and in line with the Output- and Performance- Based Road Contracts 
(OPRC) - Total Roads Asset Management approach to rehabilitation and maintenance, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared in 
accordance with national legislation on EA and the World Bank Operational Policy on 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).  The Framework would present the policy, 
principles and procedures for EA in the sub-sector.  All sub-projects will be screened for 
environmental impacts and appropriate studies carried out based on this initial 
screening/scoping.  The main objective of the ESMF is to operationalize the Botswana 
EIA Act 2005, MWT Road Sector Guidelines and the Bank's OP 4.01 within the roads 
sector.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
From the social perspective, the proposed will contribute to addressing the issue of high 
unemployment by supporting the diversification of Botswana's economy beyond diamond 
mining through the promotion of regional transport services.  Furthermore, the 
introduction as pilot of a modern asset management method using the OPRC to one of the 
most traveled district in Botswana (Kanye) is expected to attract large investors in the 
road sector, which will result in increased competition, reduced prices for road 
construction and ultimately lower transport costs for the service users.  A key social 
Page  4
indicator retained to measure success is the users' satisfaction that will be monitored 
through annual or biannual surveys, and through the frequency of complaints from the 
public.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
On the Road Asset Management component (Component B), the extent of safeguard 
works are minimal as all civil works intervention will be done on the existing alignment.  
 
On the urban road component (Component C), various alternatives to minimize 
environmental and social disruption will be considered as part of the design work which 
is expected to be done after the feasibility study for Gaborone traffic improvement is 
completed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
brief overview of the Botswana environmental assessment (EA) system in terms of 
assessing equivalency and acceptability as it relates to the Bank's OP on Environmental 
Assessment was conducted by the Bank team during project preparation.  Main 
conclusion is that Botswana systems for EA are in most respects equivalent to the World 
Bank's policies and procedures.  However, a few gaps in implementation practice and 
track record within the roads sector were identified and measures to close the gaps were 
recommended and will be implemented as follows:  
 
•
An environmental specialist to be put in RD together with DEA in order to expedite 
the process of recruiting and seconding one DEA staff to RD.  
 
•
Procedures manual that integrates the environmental assessment process into the road 
development process needs to be prepared. The Roads Department has been at the 
forefront of EA compliance in the country.  It has developed EA guidelines for the sector 
and sought out in-house expertise for EA several years back.  
 
•
Training program targeted at relevant stakeholders will be developed.  Raising 
awareness in the sub-sector as well as more substantive training for engineers is being 
considered.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main thrust of the ESMF was to take existing information and integrate into one 
Framework to be used in the roads sub-sector. Along with the Framework document, the 
Consultant will also prepare a Procedures Manual for EA for the roads sub-sector i.e. 
taking legislation and guidelines and integrating them into the road development process. 
Any resettlement plan to be identified during the project implementation will be handled 
with a participatory approach. Affected people and various agencies will be invited to 
participate in the social economic survey, impact census and formulation of the 
compensatory plan. Project information, relevant government policies and regulations 
will be broadly disseminated in the project areas. A project information handbook will be 
developed and distributed to affected people.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/23/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
01/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
01/12/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
01/12/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
01/12/2009 
Comments:   
