Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4258
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Botswana 
Project ID:  P095617 
Project Name:  Northern Botswana Human Wildlife Coexistence Project 
Task Team Leader:  Juan Gaviria 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (50%);Other environment and natural resources management 
(25%);Rural non-farm income generation (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
14.10
14.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's Global Environment/Development Objective is to enhance coexistence 
between rural communities and key wildlife species in Northern Botswana through 
proactive Human Wildlife Conflict prevention and skills development for nature-based 
tourism. The GEF Project will enhance the Department of Wildlife and Natural Parks' 
(DWNP) overall operational capacity and will assist subsistence farmers in Northern 
Botswana to mitigate wildlife conflict through proactive prevention strategies. It will 
further offer local people employment choices and increasing opportunities to benefit 
from the presence of wildlife. By improving adequate responses to HWC and 
complementing other development partners' interventions the Project will contribute 
directly to rural economic and social development and impact positively on biodiversity 
conservation and ecosystem function.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will comprise three related components.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Strengthened extension service delivery for Human Wildlife Co-
existence strategies (GEF: US$ 1.15 million, GoB: US$ 5.8 million). Activities that will 
be financed under this component include:  
 
(i) Training for national and district based staff in strategic and operations management; 
(ii) Implementation support, community mobilization and training in proactive HWC 
interventions for DWNP staff; (iii) Implementation support for safeguard policies; (iv) 
Support for development and provision of training in Management Oriented Monitoring 
Systems (MOMS) and Decision Support Systems (DDS); (v) Provision of a geo-
information-systems (GIS), GPS and related training; (vi) Provision of IT and office 
equipment as well as vehicles for HWC related extension activities; and (vii) Support to 
develop a Green Paper and a White Paper on Human-Wildlife-Coexistence strategies.  
 
Component 2: Strengthened Capacity of Targeted Communities to implement Human 
Wildlife Co-existence strategies (GEF: US$ 3.81 million and GoB US$8.31 million. 
Activities that will be financed under this component include: (i) Training for local 
community members in Operations Management (i.e for Community Trust Members), 
MOMs (Management Oriented Monitoring Systems) and DSS (Decision Support 
Systems); (ii) Support for proactive HEC prevention with demonstration plots and scaling 
up support for chili-pepper deterrent techniques, including technical assistance and 
provision of  training by experienced service providers, distribution of elephant 
restraining kits, support for initial chili-pepper cultivation, extension and monitoring;(iii) 
Support for the piloting and eventually rolling out less conventional prevention strategies 
like early maturing seeds (sorghum, maize, millet and cowpeas) as a mechanism to 
support HEC mitigation; (iv) Support for improved kraaling and herding to mitigate 
livestock-predator conflict particularly caused by lions and the use of herding dogs as 
additional preventive devices for mid-size predators; (v) The construction of solar-
powered elephant restraining fence lines (including solar units) to manipulate elephant 
spatial use and reduce conflict as well as piloting the use of bees as a means to deter 
elephants and support for an alternate food/income source; and(vi) Skills development for 
tourism-related employment, including wildlife guides, chefs, waiters/waitresses, 
restaurant and/or lodge managers, receptionists and accountant/book-keepers.  
 
Component 3: Project management support (GEF: US$ 0.54 million and GoB: US$ 0.86 
million). Activities that will be financed under component 3 include: (i) Support for 
Project administration, including procurement and financial management and related 
training for DWNP staff; (ii)Logistical support, IT and office equipment for Project 
coordination; and (iii Development of a communication strategy including the 
establishment of a permanent dissemination forum, a Project launch workshop, and bi-
annually discussions thereafter.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The three Project sites comprise thirteen villages with a projected population of over 
12,000 people (based on 2001 census data with projections to 2011). These villages are 
located along the three primary and critical wetlands in Botswana. In the Okavango Delta 
Panhandle these are the villages of Seronga, Beetsha, Eretsha, Gudigwa, and Gunitsoga.  
Page  3
In the Chobe-Linyanti wetlands these villages are Mabele, Kavimba, Satau, Parakarungu, 
Kachikau, and Lesoma.  In the Makgadikgadi wetlands, these villages are Kumaga and 
Moreomaoto. Further, the Project areas are in the vicinity to the following protected 
areas: (i) Moremi Game Reserve and Kwando Wildlife Management Area; (ii) Chobe 
National Park and Chobe Forest Reserve; and (iii) Makgadikgadi Pans National Park and 
Nxai Pan National Park. More precisely, Project sites are situated in Wildlife 
Management Areas (WMA), which were established to serve as migratory corridors for 
wildlife between the network of parks and reserves.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTQK) 
Mr Karsten Feuerriegel (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Two safeguard policies are triggered by the proposed Project including OP 4.01 
(environmental assessment) and 4.10 (indigenous people). Given the demand-driven 
nature of the Project and the fact that subprojects will be more specifically designed and 
implemented only after project effectiveness, an Environment and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) have been 
prepared with relevance to OP 4.01 and OP 4.10. The ESMF and the IPPF have been 
disclosed in-country and internationally. The Project will support the implementation of 
these mitigation instruments (see PAD Annex 10).  
 
The project will not finance any activity involving involuntary land acquisition, leading 
to physical relocation or compensation. Rather, it is designed to prevent any of these 
effects.  Therefore, strict screening mechanisms are included to that effect in the project's 
ESMF and, as a result, no mitigation measure was identified.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant adverse impacts on the environment were identified. Also, project 
activities will not result in any physical resettlement and therefore the Project will not 
finance any resettlement related activity. It is not anticipated that Project activities will in 
any manner restrict local people in access to natural resources. Subprojects under 
component 2, such as Chili pepper deterrents and solar-powered electric wiring for 
example are targeted to restrain specifically elephant and their design will neither restrict 
human or livestock movements. Project activities will assist the GoB to enable local 
populations to continuously engage in subsistence agriculture and livestock activities in 
Wildlife Management Areas without imposing additional restrictions to natural resources. 
Furthermore, all Project interventions are voluntary for local people and the result of 
consultation processes, all of which would continue during Project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Chili-peppered deterrent fences and the solar-powered electric wiring at 2 meters of 
height are preferred over more expensive structural fences given that the wiring restrains 
specifically elephants but not human or livestock movements.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared and adopted an ESMF and an IPPF for the Project. Both will 
be implemented by DWNP. The ESMF sets out the kinds of eligible subprojects to be 
financed, arrangements for project coordination and implementation, and environmental 
and social management requirements. These include environmental assessment 
requirements, provisions for the active participation of communities, and provisions that 
ensure that project implementation does not have negative impacts. Due to DWNP's 
limited experience and capacity to implement the two triggered safeguard policies, 
provisions for capacity building, training and technical assistance are also included, 
together with a budget for implementing these provisions and guidelines for annual 
reviews of the Project.  
 
In order to prepare and screen subprojects and ensure adequate implementation of the 
ESMF and IPPF the DWNP will deploy some 80 staff in the Project areas all of which 
will need training in environmental and social safeguards as well as implementing the 
ESMF and IPPF. If required external support will be placed in the PCU inter alia to 
facilitate the development and implementation of IPPF activities where necessary for 
screening subproject-supported activities, monitoring the effects on all beneficiaries 
including Indigenous Peoples, preparing an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), and 
addressing any grievances. If need arises, a local NGO with expertise in San culture and 
issues of wildlife conflict will be subcontracted to assist with IPP implementation.  
 
Implementation of the ESMF and IPPF will not require major costs, except for capacity 
building of project staff dealing with social issues and the cost of preparation of an IPP 
subproject. All costs required to implement the IPP and/or EMP will be incorporated in 
Page  5
the relevant subproject budget (Component 2). In any case, US$ 75,000 is allocated in the 
Project budget for DWNP to procure ESMF/IPPF implementation support and safeguard 
facilitation respectively (Component 1).  
 
Procedures for preparing, screening, approving and implementing subprojects are 
outlined in the ESMF, together with their monitoring and evaluation. ESMF Annex 1 
presents an ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CHECKLIST which is compulsory 
before any subproject can be considered for approval. The application is complete, if all 
significant environmental and social issues are resolved, and no further subproject 
planning is required otherwise a field appraisal is required.  
 
When a subproject includes distinct HWC mitigation measures such as physical works 
or management activities an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) needs to be 
included with the subproject application. Activities triggering an EMP are listed in the 
checklist in Annex 1 and Annex 2 presents GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING AN EMP 
and Annex 3 an example of an EMP for a subproject.  
 
An IPP is prepared in a flexible and pragmatic manner, and its level of detail varies 
depending on the specific project and the nature of effects to be addressed. The IPP 
includes the following elements, as needed: (i) A summary of the social assessment;  
 
(ii) A summary of results of the free, prior, and informed consultation with the affected 
Indigen
ous Peoples’ communities that was carried out during subproject project 
preparation and that led to broad community support for the subproject; (iii) A 
framework for ensuring free, prior, and informed consultation with the affected 
Indigenous Peoples’ communities during subproject implementation; (iv)An action plan 
of measures to ensure that the Indigenous Peoples receive social and economic benefits 
that are culturally appropriate, including, if necessary, measures to enhance the capacity 
of the subproject implementing agencies;  (v) When potential adverse effects on 
Indigenous Peoples are identified, an appropriate action plan which includes measures to 
avoid, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for these adverse effects; (vi) The cost 
estimates and financing plan for the IPP; (vii) Accessible procedures appropriate to the 
subproject to address grievances by the affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities arising 
from subproject implementation. When designing the grievance procedures, the borrower 
takes into account the availability of judicial recourse and customary dispute settlement 
mechanisms among the Indigenous Peoples; and (viii) Mechanisms and benchmarks 
appropriate to the subproject for monitoring, evaluating, and reporting on the 
implementation of the IPP.  The monitoring and evaluation mechanisms should include 
arrangements for the free, prior, and informed consultation with the affected Indigenous 
Peoples’ communities.  
 
The consultation and participation of Indigenous Peoples will be ensured in formulation 
of the IPP/subproject to ensure that it adequately deal with their needs, priorities, and 
preference. Indigenous Peoples will be provided with relevant project information in 
language(s) and manner suitable to them. Separate focus group discussions will be 
carried out to assess the subproject impacts and benefits to these groups.  Accordingly, 
Page  6
the IPP/subproject will be prepared in consultation with the beneficiaries.  The outcome 
of social assessment and IPP will be presented in community workshops/meetings.  
 
The Project shall make available the following documents to the project-affected 
indigenous peoples and disclose to the public:  
 
(i) 
A draft IPP, before subproject appraisal;  
 
(ii) 
A final IPP, after completion of such an IPP; and  
 
(iii) 
The revised IPP, following the detailed technical design or change in scope in the 
subproject.  
 
The PCU will establish a quarterly monitoring system to monitor the implementation of 
IPP(s) against a set of monitoring indicators determined during IPP preparation. A survey 
of existing socio-economic status and cultural practices of Indigenous Peoples, which 
will be carried out during subproject feasibility study/design, will be the basis for 
establishing the baseline data to monitor the project impacts on Indigenous Peoples. The 
PCU will prepare quarterly monitoring reports, post them on its website, and submit to 
the Bank for its review.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Community consultations have been important in the preparation of this Project. Project 
preparation has involved a series of village level meetings following the 
traditional
 kgotla  format to discu
ss local level priorities, experiences and concerns 
regarding the proposed project design, finance and implementation.  These meetings 
carried out several times in the 13 selected villages involved a call by the Village Chief to 
all members of the community when the project team or consultants visited the project 
area.  Care was taken to avoid community fatigue especially since the preparation took 
longer than anticipated. The PC has taken a lead role during the consultations including 
the preparation of the Social and Environment Assessment, Institutional Assessment, 
Feasibility Study of Community Investments as well as general consultation required for 
project design. The consultants contracted for the Social and Environmental Assessment 
carried out consultations which are documented in their report (see Annex 10). In 
addition to the village levelœkgotla?
meetings, there were District level Workshops 
which always included village and District level stakeholders. Based on the village and 
District level consultation a National Workshop is being planned for May 2009 with local 
representation to discuss the PAD. The National Workshop will allow the project team to 
present the final PAD for comments in order to secure a feedback mechanism to 
participants regarding the process which will continue during Project Implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2009 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/04/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  8
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Gaviria 
04/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Karsten Feuerriegel 
07/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jean-Christophe Carret 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
05/15/2009 
Comments:   
