Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3946 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/26/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Botswana 
Project ID: P112516 
Project Name: Botswana - Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader: Varadarajan Atur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (80%);Mining and other extractive (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
450.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
800.00 
 
African Development Bank 
200.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
150.00
1,150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objectives are to (a) expand domestic power generation capacity that will support 
sustained economic growth in Botswana, and (b) build institutional capacity for sustainable 
development of the energy sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed scope includes the Morupule B power station, transmission lines and substations, 
water supply connections, and technical assistance (TA). The Morupule B power station consists 
of a 600 MW (4 x 150 MW) coal fired CFB power plant, right next to the existing Morupule A 
power station in the township of Palapye, northeast of Botswana. The plant will include: coal 
yard and coal preparation equipment, coal crushers, limestone preparation and feed systems, 
CFB boilers with associated particulate removal equipment, fans, steam turbine and balance of 
plant.  Also, the plant will be equipped with air cooled condenser to minimize use of water.  
Morupule B will be a new plant, but it would utilize existing infrastructure including roads, coal 
transport system, water supply and solid waste disposal facilities. BPC will build and operate the 
Page  2
power plant.  During project preparation, further consideration will be given to the need to 
support investments in emissions control at Morupule A, which currently exceed national and 
international standards for sulfur dioxide, and which under World Bank guidelines will require 
mitigation measures at Moropule A to offset the additional emissions from Moropule B.  
 
The transmission line part includes the following: Isang 400/220 kV substation, Morupule 
–
Phukoje 400 kV line (102km), Isang – Morupule 400 kV line (215km),Morupule – Isang 220 kV 
tee in 2 lines, Morupule – Phukoje and Morupule – Isaang fiber optic lines and control 
equipment.  
 
The water supply component includes an interconnection to the North-South Carrier and, as a 
backup water supply, water wells and pipelines.  
 
The TA component covers five main areas: (a) Morupule B power station: supervision of 
construction and implementation; (b) Power system: AGC system software, system harmonic 
studies, control area establishment and training; (c) Morupule A power station: operational 
improvement study and feasibility studies for CSP and CCS; (d) Sector development: regulatory 
agency set up and capacity building; and (e) a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to 
examine the cumulative impacts, particularly on air quality and water resources, of all the 
planned and existing energy sector investments on both sides of the border with RSA.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Morupule, near the township of Palapye, in the eastern part of Botswana.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Institutional capacity for environmental management in Botswana has been significantly 
strengthened in recent years, culminating in the promulgation of the Environmental Impact 
Assessment Act 6 of 2005, and the creation of the Ministry of Environment, Wildlife and 
Tourism (MEWT) with a mandate to coordinate environmental conservation and protection.  
 
The Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) is mandated to implement the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Act which requires that an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA, which 
includes a Social Impact Analysis, SIA) be undertaken for the project.  The DEA has sufficient 
capacity to review the ToR and results of the assessment.  
 
The Department of Mines (DM) is separately mandated to implement the Mines and Minerals 
Act 17 of 1999, which includes requirements for the environmental assessment of coal mining 
operations.  In practice the environmental impact assessment process is driven by the DEA and 
the Department of Mines is consulted on its requirements during the process. In addition to the 
EIS authorizations, several additional permits and licenses will be required from several 
Botswana Government Departments for the successful implementation of the Project.  
 
Though there is sufficient government capacity for the review and approval of environmental 
assessments, there is little experience with implementation and monitoring. Further capacity 
strengthening is needed in the relevant institutions to handle these new challenges.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EIA has been completed for the Morupule power plant, which indicates that current 
levels of emissions from Morupule A cause occasional local exceedances of national and 
international standards for sulfur dioxide, which under World Bank guidelines will require 
mitigation measures at Morupule A to offset the additional emissions from Morupule B.  The 
DEA has requested that an environmental audit of the existing Morupule A operations be 
conducted, which should focus in particular on the collection of reliable data on current 
emissions and air quality.  In addition to planned emission control measures, dust control, in 
particular road surfacing, will be important to control particulate matter concentrations as a result 
of combined Morupule A and B operations.   
 
The EIA also identified existing elevated levels of sulfate in groundwater adjacent to the 
Morupule A ash disposal lagoon.  To avoid further groundwater contamination it is proposed that 
a
new ash lagoon with sealed base be constructed for Morupule B, that run-off be captured for 
recycling, and that Morupule A ash be rerouted to the new lagoon.  In order to mitigate the risk 
that groundwater depletion occurs as a result of abstraction from the BPC Paje Wellfield for 
combined Morupule A and B operations, it is proposed that water consumption at Morupule B be 
minimized by recycling drainage water and runoff, and disposing of ash with minimal wetting.  
 
With the operation of Morupule B, the EIA estimates that abstraction of water from the Paje 
Wellfield (80km northwest of Morupule) will increase from the current 650,000 m3/yr to around 
2
million m3/yr.  The EIA states, however, that a detailed analysis of the impacts of groundwater 
usage fall outside the scope of the study.  Consequently it is not clear whether this rate of 
abstraction is sustainable.  Clarification  will be sought on this point during project preparation.  
 
It is planned that some 2.6 million tons per annum (mtpa) of coal for Morupule B operations 
will be provided by the adjacent coal mine operated by Morupule Colliery Limited (MCL).  This 
additional coal production will comprise an element of the planned expansion of MCL 
operations from current levels of about 1 mtpa to about 10 mtpa, largely to meet export demand.  
An EIA of this planned expansion is underway.  
 
The EIA of the transmission component has been completed, but has not yet been received 
in full by the Bank.  This will be reviewed during project preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be clarified whether operations to clear vegetation from 
transmission line alignments will trigger OP 4.09 on Pest Management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The EIA of the Morupule B power plant
included an archeological survey, which concluded 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
that nothing of archeological significance was found within the development area.  However, 
chance finds procedures will be incorporated into construction contracts, including a requirement 
to inform Botswana National Museum if anything of archeological significance is encountered.  
Similar procedures will be incorporated into construction contracts for the transmission lines, 
which although not directly affecting any known sites, pass through areas considered to be of 
archeological interest.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
In September 2008, social screening was carried out to identify whether indigenous peoples 
are present in, or have attachment to, the project area. Based on the results of the screening, the 
decision was taken that OP4.10 is not triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Social impact assessments have been carried out for Morupule B and for the transmission 
lines. Within the immediate area of the proposed Morupule B power station, there is reportedly 
one family of squatters; the process of re-locating that family is underway. During preparation, it 
will be confirmed whether that relocation has occurred and whether it met OP 4.12 standards. At 
the time of the September 2008 mission, the area to be developed under Morupule B had not 
been fenced to prevent further encroachment, and the mission's aide memoire strongly 
recommended that this work be carried out as soon as possible. It is also expected that the influx 
during the construction period would have significant social impact, separate from any safeguard 
issues. Although HIV/AIDS prevention programs are in place, these will need to be scaled up 
and carefully targeted.  
 
With respect to the transmission lines, the SIA indicates that there is potential negative 
impact on land use and possible resettlement of individual households. The transmission line SIA 
includes a Resettlement Framework, citing the IFC's performance standards. During project 
preparation, this framework will need to be reviewed to ensure that it is consistent with OP/BP 
4.12 and that a comprehensive Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
OP 4.37 on the Safety of Dams applies inter alia to ash impoundment dams for thermal 
power plants.   While both the existing and proposed new ash impoundment dams exceed 15 
meters in height, thereby qualifying as large dams under OP 4.37, they do not impound 
significant amounts of water.  During project preparation the team will seek expert guidance on 
the applicability of OP 4.37 and the safety measures to be implemented.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2009 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An EIA including a Social Impact Assessment was prepared for Morupule B Power Station 
in October 2007, and approved by the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) in 
February 2008.  
 
An EIA of the expansion of MCL operations was submitted to the DEA in November, 2008, 
and is currently under review.  When this report becomes available for public disclosure in 
Botswana, the Bank will also disclose it in the InfoShop.  
 
The Department of Environmental Affairs has requested that BPC contract an 
environmental audit of Morupule A operations.  During project preparation the team will 
clarify with BPC when this will be completed.  
 
An EIS for the Transmission Lines, including a Social Impact Assessment was completed in 
November 2007, but has not yet been received in full by the World Bank.  This will be 
reviewed during project preparation.  
 
For the transmission lines a Resettlement Policy Framework following IFC guidelines has 
been prepared as of November 2007.  This needs to be revised to reflect OP 4.12 and 
endorsed by the government prior to appraisal.  
 
If the screening determines the presence of indigenous peoples, the Government and the 
BPC will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan following OP/BP 4.10, prior to appraisal. The 
existing document refers to the definition of indigenous with respect to Botswana law, not 
World Bank policy.  
 
All safeguard instruments will be disclosed in-country as well as in the Bank Infoshop prior 
to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Varadarajan Atur 
01/16/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/22/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
01/21/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
