Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1772 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Botswana 
Project ID: P095617 
Project Name: Wildlife Conflict Management and Biodiversity Conservation for 
Improved Rural Livelihoods in Botswana 
Task Team Leader: Juan Gaviria 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 21, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Rural 
non-farm income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project is to assist the Botswana Department of Wildlife and 
National Parks (DWNP), in collaboration with local NGOs, Ngamiland and Chobe District 
governments, and key agencies, in strengthening conservation, sustainable use and 
mainstreaming wildlife and biodiversity in Botswana's economic development, through policy 
and institutional reforms, strengthening CBNRM policy and implementation, and on-the-ground 
interventions in high biodiversity and conflict areas, focused on livelihood-enhancing 
community participation in wildlife management, conflict resolution, and monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
Performance Indicators. Achievement of project objectives will be measured by indicators in 
three main areas (to be refined through stakeholder consultations during project preparation 
phase: (i) ecologically, through securing biodiversity resources in key wetland ecosystems under 
threat in Northern Botswana through improved resources management and reduction of wildlife 
Page  2
conflict; (ii) institution ally, through policy and institutional reform of the current wildlife policy 
and its links to Community-Based Natural Resource Management, and other development 
polices impacting biodiversity; and (iii) socio-economically, through the development of 
community based participatory management and institutional capacity that will lead to a 
improved livelihoods and significant reduction of wildlife conflict.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Four main components are envisaged:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening the Policy and Institutional Framework (estimated cost $ 6.2 
Million; GEF contribution $2.0 Million). This component would finance: (a) A comprehensive 
policy and legal framework review impacting biodiversity; (b) Development of a National 
Wildlife Conflict Management Policy and Strategy grounded in broad stakeholder participation 
and baseline socio-ecological data; (c) Development of a biodiversity monitoring framework for 
communities engaged in CBNRM;  (d) Development of institutional capacity for wildlife conflict 
management and biodiversity conservation through: (i) strengthening the Department of Wildlife 
and National Parks (DWNP) technological, data collection, and human resource skill-base, as 
well as capacity to work more effectively in partnership with communities and local government; 
and (ii) strengthening capacity of other key natural resource management agencies (e.g., Land 
Boards, Water Boards, Ministry of Agriculture's Departments of Livestock Production and 
Animal Health) to mainstream biodiversity and wildlife conflict issues in sector plans and 
processes; (e) Development of animal specific management strategies for elephants (whose 
protection has led to significant increases in their population with negative impacts on their 
habitat), rhinos, and endangered predators; and (f) Development of a national capacity for 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of policies and programs related to biodiversity and 
wildlife management, including land and water management, and fencing.  
 
Component 2. Strengthening Community-Based Natural Resource Management (estimated cost 
$
7.3
Million;  GEF contribution $ 3.0 Million).  This component would finance: (a) Community 
capacity building activities in the project target sites including: (i) development of a 
comprehensive CBNRM Handbook, (ii) basic training  for CBO boards and traditional leaders, 
(iii) strengthening CBO administrative structures and procedures, (iii) development of 
publications, training courses and workshops for CBO/communities regarding the principles of 
CBNRM, quota allocation processes, legal implications and rights and benefit sharing 
procedures; (b) Community empowerment activities aimed at influencing policy on sustainable 
use and conservation of biodiversity in Botswana, through information dissemination to CBOs, 
traditional leaders and community members in project sites to facilitate effective participation in 
policy dialogue formation and access/linkage to key NRM agencies and NGOs; (c) Community 
piloting of wildlife mitigation options and resource use approaches through the provision of 
small community biodiversity matching grants; and (d) Development of the capacity of 
Botswana Council of Non-Governmental Organizations (BOCOBONET) to: (i) provide 
administrative and technical support to communities for accessing CBNRM resources; and (ii) 
address continuing education needs and technical backstopping for CBOs/Communities and 
assure sustainability of project derived outputs beyond the life of the project.  
 
Page  3
Component 3.  Developing a Community-Based Wildlife Conflict Management and Early 
Warning System Framework (estimated cost $ 21.0 Million; GEF contribution $ 1.0 Million).  
This component would finance: (a) Development of a GIS based community information 
systems including, an inventory of Traditional Knowledge Systems in wildlife conflict 
prevention and mitigation, patterns of wildlife conflict, community and social mapping of key 
wetland resources required to sustain rural livelihoods and traditional needs in Botswana's 
Northern Wetlands System, and other community pertinent information; (b) Together with 
communities and DWNP, development of a community-driven natural resource and wildlife 
conflict monitoring framework with adaptive management feedback mechanisms and early 
warning systems, linking communities and DWNP District offices; and (c) conflict mitigation 
activities including animal control and fencing management, provision of equipment, boreholes 
and water provision for wildlife, and operating expenses for animal control activities, community 
compensation fund, and related extension services.  
 
Component 4. Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project Management (estimated cost S $ 2.0 
Million; GEF contribution $1.0 Million). This component would finance: (a) Incremental 
capacity of project implementation partners, including financial management, procurement, and 
technical capacity; (b) Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation framework of project 
outputs and outcomes (including a communications strategy).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
While the institutional and policy focus of the project will be national, on-the- ground activities 
supported by the project will be piloted in the northern part of the country, home to Botswana's 
Northern Wetland systems (Chobe-Linyati-Kwando, Makgadikgadi Basin, and Okavango Delta).  
 
The total population of Botswana's northern wetlands is estimated to be about 250,000, with 
about a third living in the Okavango Delta area.  Several ethnic groups, including populations 
from the main ethnic groups of Botswana are found in the area.  Despite the richness of the area's 
natural resources, it is characterized by high levels of poverty, HIV/AIDs prevalence, and a large 
number of female headed households. This general picture will be thoroughly unpacked for each 
of the project areas, through a detailed social assessment which will be undertaken during project 
preparation.  
 
Chobe Linyanti Kwando  
 
The Transboundary Chobe Linyanti Kwando Wetland System covering more than 1,200 sq km 
is situated within the Zambezi Basin and straddles Botswana and Namibia. This wetland is the 
center of exceptional biodiversity and increasingly the focus of development pressures both for 
tourism and subsistence agriculture. The Chobe Linyanti Wetlands System was proposed as a 
Ramsar Site and provides the only permanent water in Northern Botswana and the Caprivi, in 
Namibia, apart from the  
 
Okavango/Kavango system.  
 
This wetland is comprised of a mosaic of perennial and temporary riverine wetlands, 
interspersed with palustrine wetlands. There are six different land types: flood plains, open 
water, riverine woodlands, mopane woodlands and Kalahari woodlands. A number of ecoregions 
Page  4
are found in this area comprising a focus of biodiversity. It supports one of the most expansive 
wildlife areas in southern Africa and is characterized by the largest elephant population in the 
world (144,000, 2004 population estimate DWNP Aerial Survey).  Community livelihoods are 
dependent on subsistence agriculture activities, which are focused largely on the limited 
floodplain areas of the wetlands ecosystem.  
 
Makgadikgadi Basin  
 
The Makgadikgadi Basin spans a massive 12,500 sq km and comprises an extraordinary array 
of seasonal saltpans in an extremely arid environment. The Boteti River, although not perennial, 
contains important ground water resources for water dependent species, both wild and domestic 
animals.  This wetlands ecosystem provides a unique and important habitat for wildlife including 
a
high diversity of bird species with both migratory and resident populations occurring in the 
area. This site is also proposed for Ramsar status with many of the water bird populations found 
in excess of the Ramsar 1% criteria (e.g., the Lesser and Greater Flamingo, White Pelican, Pied 
Avocet, Chestnut banded plover and Black-winged Pratincole, underscoring the wetland???s 
importance at the National, regional and international level. Communities living in the area are 
dependent on the ecosystem and compete strongly with wildlife for limited grazing and water 
resources.  
 
Okavango Delta  
 
The Okavango Delta is the largest Ramsar site in the World, covering approximately 68,640 sq 
km.  It is one of only two inland deltas in sub-Saharan Africa and supports a diversity of habitats 
from perennial swamp to semi-arid scrubland. This wetland is identified as an area of 
exceptional biodiversity and focus of vulnerable species with over 87 red data species including 
the largest populations of the endangered African Wild Dog (Lycaon pictus) and the globally 
threatened water birds species, Wattled Crane (Burgeranus carunculatus) and Slaty Egret 
(Egretta vinaceigula). Hence, the Okavango Delta represents a critical wetland ecosystem of 
national, regional and global importance. Communities within the Delta rely heavily on natural 
resources for subsistence and therefore rural livelihood strategies are directly linked to ecosystem 
function and long-term conservation planning for this important wetland. The Department of 
Environmental Affairs is presently leading the management-planning phase for this important 
wetland under the Okavango Delta management Plan (ODMP). The Okavango River Basin 
Permanent Commission was identified to develop effective joint management of the basin and is 
a
partner in the ODMP initiative.  
 
However, it is important to note that the main project activities in these areas would involve 
working with specific communities (in locations which will be more specifically identified 
during project preparation).  Moreover, the main activities will entail strengthening community-
based conservation and wildlife conflict mitigation measures, community capacity to access 
CBNRM resources, and participate in a national early warning and wildlife conflict monitoring 
system, and building social capital.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  5
Overall institutional capacity of Government of Botswana for safeguard policies is relatively 
weak.  The country has a Ministry of Environment Wildlife and Tourism, in charge of 
environmental policy.  A new Environmental Impact Assessment Act (2004) has been approved 
by Parliament, together with setting up a new Department of Environmental Affairs (replacing 
the National Conservation Strategy Coordinating Agency (NCSA)) tasked with EIA 
implementation. Moreover, a comprehensive legislation (Environmental Management Act) is 
being drafted. On the social side, Botswana has a multitude of social programs, including the 
'destitute' grants program focusing on the poorest and most vulnerable groups (administered by 
the Ministry of Local Government).  However, the government's resettlement policy,through its 
Remote Dweller Program, introduced in the 70s to promote development and better service 
delivery, has been disputed by the San or Basarwa People particularly in the Central Kalahari 
Game Reserve area.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTEG) 
Mr Jean-Christophe Carret (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohammed A. Bekhechi (LEGEN) 
Mr Navin K. Rai (SDV) 
Mr Karsten Feuerriegel (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to result in significant environmental social benefits, because of its 
twin focus on: (i) wildlife conflict management and biodiversity conservation (including 
institutional strengthening in strategic environmental assessment), and (ii) strengthening and 
implementation improvements in Government of Botswana's (GOB)Community-Based Natural 
Resources Management (CBNRM). Therefore, the project is not expected to have any potential 
negative environmental or social impacts.  During preparation an Environment and Social 
Assessment as well as an Environment and Social Management Framework will be prepared 
following specific TORs to establish roles, responsibilities and procedures for planning, 
assessing and approving any project activities before each is for funding.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Project area includes significant natural habitats, but project activities will have no negative 
impact. Even if the proposed project causes no negative impacts, human interests may be 
divergent, and the team will need to develop clear and accessible consultation grievance redress 
mechanisms. This will be assessed during project preparation. The project is not expected to 
affect conversion of natural habitats such as adding grazing areas with changes in animal 
husbandry.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Since the project will work with local communities in the Northern Wetlands area of 
Botswana, a determination will be made during preparation regarding whether any vulnerable 
groups (besides the main Tawana group of Botswana) are present in these areas.  
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
A
detailed social assessment (SA) will be undertaken during project preparation following 
TORs that would specifically screen and inform the decision of triggering OP 4.10.  
 
Once the Social Assessment (SA) is prepared and after review by the project team, if it is 
confirmed that OP 4.10 is triggered (to address "remote area dwellers" or "vulnerable ethnic 
groups" concerns as agreed with Government including San/Basarwa and other groups), the 
project team would prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to be included in the PAD as an 
Annex. If the areas of intervention are still undefined, an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) would be prepared prior to appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project activities will involve no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition.  However, a 
possibility exists that a community may want to use the matching grant facility under the project 
for piloting wildlife mitigation measures (e.g., a fence or wall, a corral to keep livestock or crops 
safe from predators, thus requiring community endorsement), in which case a simplified version 
of an RPF will be prepared to guide communities, in case they undertake this sort of mitigation 
activities on communal property.  
 
A
detailed social assessment (SA) will be undertaken during project preparation and will 
assist in preparing ther RPF in accordance with OP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The Chobe Linyati Kwando is a transboundary water system with Namibia, but the project 
will involve no water related activities that would involve water abstraction. However, this issue 
will be further investigated during project preparation.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Social and Environmental Assessment (E&SA)and an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) are part of project preparation and will be funded under 
the PFD-B Grant funded preparatory services (contract to be awarded by end of May 2008). 
A
draft E&SA and RPF will be available by Sep, 2008, in time for the QER.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Gaviria 
04/08/2008 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
04/04/2008 
Comments:  This is an interesting operation, which will require sensitive handling. During the QER we 
will get a better handle on the safeguard issues and how they are addressed. Adequate budget is a must. 
