Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1831 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P094233 
Project Name: Espirito Santo  Biodiversity and Watershed Conservation and Restoration 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Gunars H. Platais 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.69 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
2.53 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
2.78
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Global Environment Objective: Reduced threats to globally important biodiversity (for example 
the critically endangered Muriqui monkey) from agricultural production systems and increased 
habitat for species in two key rain forest watersheds of the Atlantic Forest. Key indicators will 
include number of endemic endangered species whose status has improved; area of critical 
habitat restored and/or protected from encroachment; implementation of sustainable market-
based mechanisms to finance protected areas (PA) management and conservation of biodiversity 
in agricultural landscapes.  
 
Project Development Objective: Widespread adoption of sustainable land use practices in two 
key Atlantic Forest watersheds in Esp?rito Santo, resulting in higher income for farmers and 
improved water supplies. Key indicators will include increase in area under sustainable land use 
practices; establishment and implementation of payment mechanisms for watershed 
conservation.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. Strengthening the policy and regulatory framework in the watershed:  
 
Strengthen participatory institutions responsible for planning and implementing NRM strategies 
in the watersheds.  
 
2. Targeted biodiversity protection and Protected Area management:  
 
This component will undertake targeted intervention to restore and enhance the protection of 
critical areas for biodiversity conservation, and support the PAs in the watersheds, including the 
elaboration of management plans, and assisting land owners in the creation of private nature 
reserves.  
 
3. Integrating biodiversity in production landscapes:  
 
Sustainable management of landscape mosaics requires a two-pronged approach: (a) measures 
to remove obstacles to the adoption of land use practices that would be beneficial both to farmers 
and the environment, such as lack of knowledge or non-availability of inputs; this sub-
component will seek to remove these barriers; and (b) measures to induce the adoption of 
practices that generate positive externalities, particularly in biodiversity conservation and water 
services protection, but are unattractive to individual land users; this sub-component will seek to 
address these tradeoffs by fostering a range of markets for biodiversity goods and services, and 
in particular by developing payment for environmental services (PES) mechanisms in 
collaboration with water users (such as CESAN and small HEPs), mechanisms that will also 
contribute to PA support.  
 
4. 
Project management:  
 
This component will coordinate, manage, and monitor all activities supported under the project. 
A
Monitoring and Evaluation System will be implemented with capacity to undertake spatial 
analysis (including GIS capability). In order to analyze the true impact of the project this 
component will design and implement impact evaluation that includes specific data collection 
activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Juc? and Santa Maria da Vit?ria watersheds in the state of Esp?rito Santo, Brazil.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has shown its capacity for the implementation of Safeguard Policies in previous 
partnerships with the Bank. Additional assessment will be undertaken for the present project to 
ensure that the capacity covers the areas of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project would be rated B. It will not involve building 
of dams, reservoirs or roads, nor 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
any resettlement. Six in depth analysis were undertaken in order to provide substantive 
background material for the EA. These reports are on 1) the Rural landscape; 2) the 
Hydrological-Physical environment; 3) the Social-Environmental context; 4)a Socio-Economic 
analysis; 5) an analysis of the potential for Payment for environmental services; and 6) the Biotic 
environment. These have provided important insights and substantiated the EA in light of 
potential impacts and informed possible mitigative measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project does not anticipate negative impacts on natural habitats. Much to the contrary, 
the project aims to improve the conservation and increase areas for natural habitats thereby 
increasing critical habitats which will allow for an improved genetic flow of the regions rich 
biodiversity.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
An agreement would be sought that tree planting would be with appropriate native species.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project supports an integerated pest management approach to dealing with leaf cutter 
ants. The project supports significantly reducing (through IPM) if not entirely eliminating 
(adoption of organic agriculutre) pesticide use.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Under preparation specialists indicated that it was not expected that there would be chance 
finds of physical cultural resources. However, it is difficult to ascertain this with absolute rigor. 
Therefore the EA incorporates language that accomodates possible chance finds of physical 
cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
In preparation it has been determined that there are no indigenous or quilombo communities 
in the project area.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
In preparation it has been ascertained that the creation of private reserves is completely 
voluntary and that any restriction of use is thus of personal choice and not involuntary. These 
private reserves however do by law still allow for income generating activities through eco-
tourism for example and it is envisioned that the project will support management plans that will 
allow for a sustainable use of these natural resources.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/10/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Several diagnostic studies have already been undertaken which have provided important 
input to the Environmental Assessment.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
03/04/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
