Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3229 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P099469 
Project Name: Second National Environmental Project - Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Renan Alberto Poveda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (89%);Central government 
administration (11%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Decentralization (P);Water resource 
management (S);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
22.12 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
9.46
9.46 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching goal of NEP-II is for States to increase their capacity to effectively manage their 
natural resources control pollution, and reduce environmental degradation which would bring 
about improvements in environmental quality.  
 
The Development Objective for the proposed Phase 2 of the Second National Environmental 
Project is for States and selected municipalities to achieve measurable improvements in 
environmental quality through strengthening their management capacity. Currently 24 out of 
Brazil’s 26 States plus the Federal District are eligible for participating in NEP II by having 
fulfilled the eligibility criteria laid out during phase one.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Phase 2 of the Second National Environmental Program (NEP II) seeks to improve 
environmental quality in priority areas by increasing the effectiveness of environmental 
institutions at local, state and national levels in Brazil.  Phase 2 of NEP-II will focus primarily on 
investments in the management of selected environmental assets at the State level.   The 
Page  2
proposed project will have three components: (a) Environmental Assets; (b) Institutional 
Development; and (c) Project Coordination, Articulation and Communication.  
 
a) Environmental Assets Component: This component is based on the principle that states and 
selected municipalities identify and address their key environmental priorities.  For Phase 2, the 
first requirement for participation in this component would be for each state and participating 
municipality to update their top ranking environmental priorities (from those identified during 
Phase 1) to reflect the current conditions.  As in Phase 1, States or selected municipalities will 
qualify for subproject funds by demonstrating advances in environmental policy implementation 
(based on a matrix that includes ten or more categories of environmental management and four 
levels of achievement for each category). Subprojects would be aimed at addressing the states or 
municipalities priority environmental issues.  
 
b) Institutional Development Component: Based on the lessons and core structure implemented 
during Phase 1, Phase 2 of NEP-II will include the following subcomponents: (i) Strengthening 
environmental licensing policies and procedures in states and municipalities; (ii) Development of 
environmental quality monitoring; and (iii) Promotion of economic instruments for 
environmental management.  
 
c) Project Coordination, Articulation and Communication Component: The project will support 
a
unit with the technical and administrative capacity needed to articulate subprojects and 
activities at a decentralized level.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
NEP-II will have nationwide coverage but participation is voluntary. States can participate 
through the fulfillment of policy reforms measured by performance on a matrix of policy reforms 
and actions.  By providing evidence of adoption of specific environmental policy reforms, States 
and selected municipalities, would benefit from project activities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional capacity both at MMA and the States for addressing safeguard issues has been 
developed and strengthened through the first National Environmental Project, and through Phase 
1
of
the Second National Environmental Project. Through these operations MMA and State 
Environmental Agencies proved their institutional capacity to comply with safeguard policies by 
screening and, where necessary, licensing the corresponding subproject activities, fulfilling Bank 
requirements for Environmental Assessment. As with the previous phase, the operational manual 
for the proposed Phase 2 would include guidelines for participating states on how to select and 
screen subproject proposals which could potential trigger safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (ENV) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Subprojects that may need environmental assessment are those related to sanitary landfills.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
While unlikely, it is possible that a subproject could trigger the Indigenous Peoples Policy.  
In such a case, an IDP would be prepared with full consultation with the indigenous group or 
groups involved.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While physical displacement of populations is extremely unlikely, it is possible that the 
Involuntary Resettlement policy would be triggered as a result of deprivation of access to a 
resource in a protected area or landfill.  In such cases, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy would 
be invoked and a Process Framework would be prepared with full consultation with the affected 
population.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/18/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/13/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since the specific investments that would be made under the Environmental Assets 
Component are not known, it is not possible to provide an environmental or social 
assessment of the potential impacts of these subprojects.  Therefore, the Project is presented 
under an Environmental and Social Impact Framework.  Activities supported under the 
Institutional Development Component are mainly organizational and instrumental.  There is, 
however, a potential social impact to new policies in taxation or regulation that could benefit 
or adversely affect the interests of resource users, investors and their employees.  Such 
impacts would be assessed under the framework.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The MMA would train the states in World Bank Safeguard Policies but it would also screen 
all subprojects proposed under the Institutional or Assets components for possible safeguards 
implications.  It is possible that individual subprojects would have an impact on Natural 
Habitats, Physical Cultural Resources or Forests.  In nearly all conceivable cases, the impact 
would likely be positive.  Nevertheless, MMA would assure full compliance with the 
requirements of the relevant policies.  While unlikely, it is possible that a subproject could 
trigger the Indigenous Peoples Policy.  In such a case, an IDP would be prepared with full 
consultation with the indigenous group or groups involved.  While physical displacement of 
populations is extremely unlikely, it is possible that the Involuntary Resettlement policy 
would be triggered as a result of deprivation of access to a resource in a protected area or 
landfill.  In such cases, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy would be invoked and a Process 
Framework would be prepared with full consultation with the affected population.  
 
While unlikely, it is possible that a subproject could trigger the Indigenous Peoples Policy.  
In such a case, an IDP would be prepared with full consultation with the indigenous group or 
groups involved.  While physical displacement of populations is extremely unlikely, it is 
possible that the Involuntary Resettlement policy would be triggered as a result of 
deprivation of access to a resource in a protected area or landfill.  In such cases, the 
Involuntary Resettlement Policy would be invoked and a Process Framework would be 
prepared with full consultation with the affected population.  
 
The proposed project may have some small scale infrastructure works, hence an 
Environmental Category B has been established in order for appropriate measures to be 
taken, and given the fact that the main objective of the project is to obtain environmental 
quality improvements.  Other subprojects that may be supported by the Program could be, to 
name a few, of water quality management; environmental licensing and monitoring; 
environmental degradation control; protection and conservation of natural resources, etc.  
 
During Phase I of the National Environmental Program, the only specific safeguard 
triggered was OP4.01 (Environmental Assessment), because of subprojects related to sanitary 
landfills.  For Phase II, although subprojects aim at improving environmental conditions, 
they could potentially cause environment damage or involuntary resettlement; hence all 
subprojects would be screened for potential negative impacts. As necessary, mitigatory 
measures would be taken to avoid or minimize environmental damage or involuntary 
resettlement. Indigenous peoples are eligible for subprojects benefits; in the event that such 
groups form part of a beneficiary group, the guidelines in OP 4.10 would be followed.  
 
Other safeguard policies could be triggered in the future depending on the EA for individual 
subprojects.   
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renan Alberto Poveda 
10/29/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
 
Comments:   
