Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC3167
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P104752 
Project Name:  Rural Poverty Reduction Project II -- Paraiba 
Task Team Leader:  Jorge A. Munoz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Power (10%);Water 
supply (10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.90 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
4.50 
 Local 
Communities 
2.50
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed COOPERAR II project would support the Government of Paraiba's efforts 
to reduce the incidence of rural poverty, addressing both its income and non-income 
dimensions, by: (a) improving access to small-scale socio-economic infrastructure and 
services: (b) raising incomes and capital assets through investments in productive 
activities and facilitating linkages between small producers and national and international 
markets; and (c) strengthening the capacity of Municipal Councils (MC) and Community 
Associations (CA) to raise funding and harmonize policies and institutional arrangements 
for the delivery of public investments intended to benefit the rural poor.   
 
3. Project Description 
Total project cost is estimated at US$27.9 million, of which US$20.9 million would come 
from the Bank loan.  The Project's structure by component is:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Community Subprojects (US$23.7 million or 85% of total project cost) to 
support community matching grants for about 1,000 small-scale socio-economic and 
productive activities, infrastructure, health/sanitation, and other investments aimed at 
helping the State raise HDI, in complement with other State and Federal programs.  
Community associations would identify and implement the investments.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Development (US$2.8 million or 10% of total project cost) 
executed by the State Technical Unit (STU) would finance technical assistance and 
training to support: (a) mobilization and strengthening of CA in their role of identifying, 
preparing, executing, operating and maintaining subproject investments; (b) capacity 
building for MC in their decision-making, oversight and facilitation role, as defined in the 
Project Operational Manual; (c) the STU's Regional Management Units (RMU, boosting 
their capacity to facilitate the STU's project coordination activities; and (d) workshops 
and seminars for MC and CA to exchange experiences and explain/facilitate project 
integration with other State and Federal programs.  
 
Component 3: Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.4 
million or 5% of total project cost) would finance operational costs (excluding salaries) 
of project administration, supervision, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project Area would comprise the same 222 municipalities included in the previous 
project, with more intense focus on 100 municipalities with lowest HDI-M. These 100 
poorest municipalities would receive about 60% of total subproject resources.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSAR) 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
(a) Safeguard Issues and Impacts: The project is a Category B, i.e., its potential 
environmental impact on human populations and ecologically important areas is 
considered moderate/modest. As spelled out in the EMP, the Project defines procedures 
for ensuring that the environmental screening of water resource subprojects identifies any 
possible environmental, economic and social effects/impacts of dams/irrigation or other 
water supply systems which utilize a single water source, including cumulative impacts. 
In this regard, the EMP and Operational Manual respond to issues on this theme 
identified in the Bank report "Thematic Review - Rural Infrastructure Projects in Brazil" 
(QAT Thematic Review, 2002).  All approved subprojects involving the use of water 
resources, before signature of the agreement with the community association, must be 
examined according to criteria which include the level of water demand, and supply 
capacity of the watershed involved.  This process may include an analysis/estimate of 
aggregate impacts at the watershed level. Finally, a study of cumulative impacts will be 
carried out during Project implementation (TOR are being prepared).  
 
Environmental screening and technical/legal requirements and procedures are 
summarized in the EMP for 14 types of subprojects commonly demanded by CA in 
Paraiba: manioc mill; water supply system (complete); desalinization equipment; water 
supply (artesian well); water supply (Amazon well); water supply (small-scale reservoir); 
water supply (cistern); agricultural mechanization (tractor and equipment); agro-industry 
(fruit processing); goat herding; shrimp farming; fish farming; milk production plant; 
and, honey production.  
 
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A.  Measures to Address Safeguard Issues:  
 
Subproject environmental screening procedures established and periodically upgraded 
under the previous Rural Poverty Alleviation Project in Paraiba (classified as a Category 
B)indicate a sound and effective framework for all stages of subproject preparation, 
implementation and operation which merits continuation (updated and with minor 
adjustments). Environmental monitoring performance was satisfactory and the 
Page  4
specialized environmental technical support networks created will be sustained under the 
Repeater.  
 
Safeguards applying to the Repeater Project and measures to be applied are as follows:  
 
(a) Environmnental Assessment (OP4.01):  
 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the proposed Repeater Project, which 
is an integral part of the Project Operational Manual, will apply environmental screens 
during the technical assessment of subproject proposals in order to ensure that these are 
compliant with applicable Bank safeguard policies and relevant Federal and State 
regulations.  Specifically, the EMP includes: (i) environmental provisions based on 
lessons learned from the previous project; (ii) a negative list of Category A-type 
subprojects; (iii) provisions for assessing cumulative environmental impacts from 
implementation of certain subproject types; (iv) environmental management criteria, 
screens, and procedures for different subproject types; (v) standard environmental 
mitigation measures for typical subproject types; (vi) environmental rules for civil works; 
(vii) environmental capacity-building measures; and (viii) an annex summarizing the 
project's public consultation events.  This document was reviewed by the Bank and 
submitted to the InfoShop on September 17, 2007; it is also available through the 
Project's State Technical Unit website.  
 
(b)  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):  
 
The screening procedures in the EMP explicitly prohibit approval of any community 
subproject proposal which is likely to cause degradation to essential natural habitats. The 
EMP prohibits approval of any subproject located in Legal Reserves and Permanent 
Preservation areas.  
 
(c) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09):  
 
No major pest management issues are expected under the project.  The EMP includes 
screening criteria for detecting the use of pesticides under any community subproject 
proposal.  The EMP also includes provisions for promoting integrated pest management, 
where appropriate, in relevant agriculture investment subproject.  
 
(d)  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11):  
 
The Project Operational Manual incorporates procedures to be followed in the event of 
"chance finds" of culturally significant materials during subproject implementation.  
 
(e)  Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10):  
 
Paraiba has an indigenous population of about 12,600, the majority comprising the 
legally-recognized ethnic grouping of Potiguara. There are also Quilombola (slave-
descendent) communities (162 benefited from the previous project).  The Repeater 
Project will continue to support these groups by expanding coverage to groups not 
already reached and intensifying actions for those already served.  An Indigenous Peoples 
Participation Plan (IPPP), an integral part of the Project Operational Manual, reviews the 
experiences with indigenous peoples and Quilombola communities under the previous 
project and lessons learned.   The IPPP also defines guidelines and specific procedures 
Page  5
for engaging these communities in project activities.  Culturally-appropriate methods will 
be used to promote inclusion - outreach, studies, information and mobilization 
campaigns, consultation with leaders/community members, technical assistance and 
training.  This document was reviewed by the Bank and submitted to the Infoshop on 
September 17, 2007; it is also available through the Project's State Technical Unit 
website.  
 
(f)  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):  
 
Because the project will not finance physical or economic displacement of people, OP 
4.12 is not triggered.  The Project Operational Manual explicitly prohibits approval of 
any subproject proposal which would result in involuntary resettlement, physical or 
economic.  
 
B.  Borrower/Institutional Capacity:  The STU has a total staff of 147 of which 99 are 
professionals and technical specialists in agriculture, agrarian and environmental 
sciences, social sciences, economics and civil construction, supported by 48 
administrative and financial staff.  
 
The State Technical Unit for the previous project complied with Bank safeguard policies 
and project environmental rules (including Federal and State norms) applicable at the 
time.  For the proposed project, a fully-revised Environmental Management Plan 
incorporating current Bank safeguard provisions, has been prepared.  
 
The STU (based in Cabedelo)also has seven Regional Management Units/teams 
responsible for seven regions of the state.  Four teams are located in the field while the 
other three teams are  based at STU headquarters but responsible for the regions of Cariri, 
Camalau and Regiao Litoranea. The three teams located at headquarters have their own 
structure and identical responsibilities to the four, field-based units.  The STU can call on 
specialized consultants in irrigation, environment, water resources management and the 
social sciences and has established partnerships with an extensive list of public and 
private agencies/entities with environmental mandates, responsibilities and/or interests to 
support project environmental monitoring, supervision and legal/safeguards compliance. 
These include:  State Secretariat of Science, Technology and the Environment 
(SECTMA), Brazilian Institute for the Environment (IBAMA), Executive Agency for 
Water Management (AESA), National Institute for Semi-arid Regions (INSA), Federal 
University of Paraiba (UFPB), State University of Paraiba (UEPB), National 
Environmental Council (CONAMA), the Environmental Protection Council (COPAM) 
and the Fundacao Parque Tecnologico.  
 
Environmental capacity-building is an integral part of the project's overall training and 
technical assistance program under Component 2, Institutional Development. Further 
agreed actions taken by the STU include: (a) additional environmental technical expertise 
on staff; (b) environmental modules inserted into the Project Monitoring and Information 
System (MIS); (c) application of a broader negative list of prohibited investments; (d) an 
updated Operational Manual which reflects Bank Safeguards as well as new State and 
Federal legal requirements; (e) creation of a new category of community investment 
Page  6
already in use in other participating states - environmental subprojects - which might 
include for example, soil and/or water recuperation activities by communities; and (f) 
reinforcing through training (STU, MC and CA) the identification, analysis and 
management of environmental events.  
 
The State of Paraiba has the legal and institutional capacity and experience to execute 
all environmental requirements under the project.  While the State's environmental laws 
are quite demanding in the number of requirements, the implications for the new project 
are not onerous given simplified procedures agreed with the State based on the small 
scale of individual investments. The Project Operational Manual, part of the legal 
documents of the Project, reflects the enhanced EMP and includes all key measures for 
environmental preservation, addressing the Bank's Safeguard policies and Brazilian law.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key Stakeholders: The primary project stakeholders are poor rural communities 
organized into Community Associations, with particular focus on indigenous peoples, 
Quilombola communities and female-headed households, generally among the very 
poorest. Secondary stakeholders include State and local authorities and civil society 
linked to and integrated with the project throughout the subproject cycle.  
 
Mechanisms for Consultation and Disclosure: Public consultation on all aspects of 
Project design including environmental standards and requirements has been conducted 
in a highly-effectuve manner through the participatory MC and this will continue under 
the Repeater.  The Councils provide an open forum which meets regularly, has 
committed membership, includes the participation of technical specialists, and is 
recognized as a legitimate, inclusive chamber for knowledge dissemination and debate.   
The Repeater project will promote special meetings of the Councils to discuss 
environmental aspects of specific subprojects for which environmental impacts are 
foreseen. The Operational Manual reflects this decision and the EMP has been posted on 
the project STU website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
Yes 
Page  8
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge A. Munoz 
09/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa 
09/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves 
09/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/21/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
09/21/2007 
Comments:   
