Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  47875 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
February 6
,
2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: 
Brazil
 Project 
ID: 
P096337 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: Reforestation Project Using Native Species Around AES-
Tietê Reservoirs
.
Task Team Leader: 
Maria Isabel J. Braga
 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2009  
Estimated Board Date: None 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: BioCarbon Fund 
Sector: Forestry
 (80%), General Water Management (20%)
 
Theme: 
Climate Change (P), Biodiversity (P), Water Resources Management (S)
 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0.00 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 0.00 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0.00 
 
BioCF Amount (US$m.): 1.275 
 
Other financing amounts by source:
 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [x]                              No [ ] 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The Reforestation Using Native Species Around AES Tietê Reservoirs Project intends to 
sequester a total of approximately 6.6 million tonnes of CO
2
e
through 2029, while supporting the 
conservation of threatened and endangered biodiversity through restoration of degraded Atlantic 
Forest riparian habitats. The project would also foster a decrease in sediment inputs into ten 
hydropower reservoirs, and the creation of sustainable local livelihood options associated with 
this and other future similar reforestation activities around other reservoirs in the State of São 
Paulo, and throughout Brazil. 
 
C. Project Description: 
 
The project would reforest, with a minimum diversity of 80 and up to 126 species of native trees, 
approximately 12,763 ha of unmanaged grasslands along the margins of ten hydropower 
reservoirs in the State of São Paulo, Brazil. Of these, 1,800 hectares were already reforested 
Page  2
between 2001 and 2007, and planting of the remaining areas would be completed by 2014. All 
the areas are owned, controlled and operated by the project proponent, AES-
Tietê. The project 
will also develop a new methodology specific for afforestation and reforestation (A/R) activities 
implemented on unmanaged grassland in reserves or protected areas that are not likely to be 
converted to any other land use except forestry, and which have no potential to revert to forest 
without direct human intervention. 
 
This proposed BioCarbon Fund Project is being developed in close coordination with the State of 
São Paulo Secretariat of Environment, especially with the team involved in the implementation 
of the Bank-supported 
Ecosystem Restoration of Riparian Forests in São Paulo
 GEF Project. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The project area consists of approximately 18,300 hectares of mostly old grasslands around ten 
hydropower reservoirs in the state of São Paulo, Brazil, which constitute the project activity 
boundaries. Five of the reservoirs - Bariri, Barra Bonita, Ibitinga, Promissão, and Nova 
Avanhandava - are located in the Tietê River Basin. The Água Vermelha reservoir is located on 
the Grande River, on the border between the states of São Paulo and Minas Gerais, and is the 
largest AES Tietê hydropower plant. The other four reservoirs – Euclides da Cunha, Limoeiro, 
Caconde, and Mogi-Guaçu - are located in the Pardo River Basin. The ten reservoirs intersect 
with the territories of 92 municipalities.  
 
The vast majority of the riparian areas to be reforested are currently occupied by pasture lands 
constituted mostly of aggressive exotic grasses. 
 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
AES Tiete has an environment department responsible for implementing several ongoing 
environmental projects and activities, including the production and release of fingerlings of 
native fish species, prodution of seedlings of native trees to be used in their own reforestation 
activities or to be sold to the public, and environmental education for school children. 
Implementation of the
 project EMP will be under the responsibility of AES Tietê’s permanent 
technical team composed of five professionals, including one agricultural engineer, one 
biologist/forester, one biologist, one agro-chemical enginneer, and one environmental technician. 
In addition, AES Tietê is working closely with the Secretariat of Environment of the State of São 
Paulo, and both have good capacity for following local environmental legislation and Bank 
safeguard policies. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Maria Isabel Braga: Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Judith Lisansky: Social Safeguards Specialist 
 
Page  3
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
x
An environmental assessment has been carried out to examine the potential impacts (mostly 
positive) of project activities on the surrounding environment and people living in areas adjacent 
to the reservoirs. An Environmental Management Plan will be prepared and the bank will 
supervise its execution during the first three years of project implementation, after which the 
Designated Operational Entity (DOE) in charge of monitoring and verification will include 
supervision of the EMP as part of their monitoring activities. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
x
The project will contribute to the restoration of forests in selected stretches of  permanent 
conservation areas (APPs) around existing AES Tietê reservoirs. 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
x
The project envisions the establishment of approximately 12,000 ha of native riparian forests in 
the Atlantic Forest and Cerrado biomes, with positive impacts on native biodiversity. 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
x
Control of leaf-cutter ants and of aggressive grass species may be required in some areas only 
during the first three years after planting. There are clearly defined procedures in the state of São 
Paulo for the use of pesticides for these objectives, and those will be included in the EMP. A 
separate Pest Management Plan is not required. 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
x
Although unlikely to happen, AES Tietê already has in place tested procedures to deal with 
potential findings of arqueological material during project implementation. 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 x  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 x  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 x  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 x  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 x  
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  April 17, 2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
Page  4
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: 
An Environmental Assessment has been done and the EMP prepared by the proponent is 
expected to be revised and updated as needed by April 17, 2009.  
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Maria Isabel J. Braga 
03/20/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
03/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Laura Tlaiye 
03/20/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
