Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
43114
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
March 26, 2008
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P105389 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Novagerar II Landfill Gas Project  
Task Team Leader: Paul Procee 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
November 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance 
Sector: Solid Waste 
Theme: Climate Change, Pollution Management and Environmental Health 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
CF Amount (US$):     US$ 10 million (until 2012) 
Other financing amounts by source: Community Development Carbon Fund 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [X ] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]: 
 
The main objective of the Novagerar Carbon Finance and Solid Waste Management Project II is 
to capture landfill gases and reduce the environmental impact of uncontrolled disposal of waste 
by (i) rehabilitating and closing open dumpsites, (ii) operating new sanitary landfills with the 
highest technological and environmental standards, (iii) composting. The project includes flaring 
of methane, as well as its use for electricity generation where the potential exists within the 
selected umbrella of sub-projects. 
 
The project activity will generate Certificates of Emission Reductions (CERs) and revenues 
through the selling of CERs in the Clean Development Mechanism. The revenues obtained will 
facilitate the implementation of this project. 
 
The emission reduction credits generated through the project activity will help Annex I countries 
meet their emission reduction obligations as agreed under the Kyoto Protocol 
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]: 
 
The proposed Novagerar Carbon Finance and Solid Waste Management Project II is a standalone 
umbrella, nevertheless it is strongly linked to the Integrated Solid Waste Management and 
Carbon Finance Program (P106702) the World Bank is pursuing jointly with Caixa Economica 
Federal (CEF). The Caixa project intends to create an investment strategy and a framework for 
investment and carbon finance in the solid waste management sector in Brazil using CEF as a 
financial intermediary. In this perspective, one of the intent of the Novagerar II project is to 
document and get out the best practices and lessons learned from the experience of Novagerar in 
order to mainstream them in the Caixa Program. This includes the environmental and social 
framework being developed for the two pilot projects (Itaoca and CTR Candeias), that are 
expected to allow for the effective screening of SWM sub-projects for potential adverse 
environmental or social impact and their appropriate mitigation. 
 
The project comprises of individual sub-projects at different stages of preparation. A preliminary 
assessment has identified 5 initial sub-projects; more will be added as they are identified. 
 
Sub-project 1
:
Operation of the existing landfill of São Gonçalo (850 tons/day). The landfill has 
already been contracted in the form of a municipal concession and will be closed in 2008. About 
200 waste-pickers are living on the project location and have been organized in the form of a 
cooperative since the beginning of the rehabilitation process of São Gonçalo from a dumpsite 
into a proper landfill. 
 
Sub-project 2:
 Novagerar is developing an entirely privately operated landfill in Jaboatao do 
Guararpes, a municipality close to the city of Recife. The site is already operating and waiting 
for nearby municipalities to start bringing their solid wastes. The site has already secured an 
estimated 900 tons/day of municipal waste and the addition of Recife would bring the potential 
to 2,700 tons/day. 
 
Sub-project 3:
 As part of the concession for the rehabilitation and closing of the old dumpsite in 
São Gonçalo, the contract with the municipality also includes the opening of a new sanitary 
landfill in the municipality with an estimated disposal of around of 900 tons/day.  A site has 
already been identified and is currently in the process of receiving the environmental licenses to 
start the project designs. 
 
Sub-project 4
:
Novagerar has identified a site for a new landfill in the southern part of the 
metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro (Santa Rosa) and is currently getting the environmental 
license for the area. The potential amount of solid waste to be disposed is very high, between 3 to 
5,000 tons/day. Besides there are plans to use an existing railway link to transport the waste 
between the city of Rio de Janeiro and the landfill, providing additional benefits. This sub-
project is likely to be ready by next year. 
 
Sub-project 5
:
Novagerar is currently operating a landfill but is planning the construction of a 
composting plant in Petrolina, Bahia, which could receive waste from neighboring cities, 
including Juazeiro. The organic content of the waste is high, but no detailed studies have been 
undertaken to assess the emission reduction potential of the project. 
Page  3
The first two sub-projects will be processed first, while the next are likely to follow within the 
next 12 to 18 months.  A detailed viability study for the composting plant will be conducted 
before deciding how and when to move ahead 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The landfill and dumpsites considered for the project are typically located in or near densely 
populated urban areas in Brazil. An environmental and social framework is being developed for 
the project and will use transparent criteria to screen future sub-projects, identify and mitigate 
potential negative environmental impacts. Existing landfills will notably undergo a  preliminary 
environmental diagnostic, and new landfills will undergo detailed environmental and social 
impact and alternative analysis to reduce potential impacts on environment and surrounding 
communities or avoid impacts on highly sensitive areas. 
 
Two pilot projects have already been identified.  (1) The Itaoca dumpsite is located in the 
Municipality of São Gonçalo, suburbs of Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region. With about 1 
million inhabitants, the municipality is the second largest of the State of Rio de Janeiro. The 
densely populated neighboring communities are very poor, lacking basic infrastructure and 
sanitation services. The landfill is located in a mangrove area, close to the Salgueiro River, 
which flows into Guanabara Bay. (2) The CTR Candeias is a new landfill that will be 
implemented in the Municipality of Jaboatão dos Guararapes, in Recife Metropolitan Area. 
Located in an area of a little over 17 hectares, the selected site has been awarded all necessary 
environmental licenses. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
Novagerar Eco Energia Ltda, the project sponsor, has an excellent track-record in developing 
sanitary landfills and addressing environmental impacts from waste disposal sites. The company 
has a team of highly qualified consultants to address environmental impacts from solid waste 
operations and a team of social assistants to supervise and implement social programs in and 
around the landfill. Prior projects have shown Novagerar’s commitment to environmental and 
social causes, which have improved quality of life and surrounding environment in a substantial 
way. 
 
For the Itaoca pilot project, the project will finance the preparation and implementation of a 
social management plan to assist waste-pickers that used to be working and sometimes living on 
the dumpsite. The project will help with segregation process, stocking and selling of recycled 
materials in a cooperative form. The project will strengthen cooperatives, provide social 
assistance, train waste pickers, provide infrastructure and equipment improvements to help 
improve quality of life and increase average income of waste pickers. The project will also help 
build the Municipality capacity to address environmental and social aspects, which could, 
possibly, be financed from carbon credit revenues. 
 
The CTR Candeias pilot project being a new sanitary landfill, waste pickers are absent form the 
dumpsite and it is the responsibility of the municipality to prevent invasion of the new facilities 
Page  4
by wastepickers. A social communication plan is to be implemented to outreach the local 
surrounding communities. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Name 
Title 
Unit 
Paul Procee 
Environment Specialist 
LCSEN 
Haddy Jatou Sey 
Social Development Specialist 
ENVCF 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The project is expected to have local environmental and social benefits, which include better air 
quality, as LFG usually contains substances that may cause respiratory diseases; diminished risk 
of explosions in the site, as more gas wells will be installed and the gas will be properly 
extracted.. Project activities will also include the treatment of leachate, reducing the impacts on 
local water bodies. Global environmental benefits include climate change mitigation through 
methane emission reductions. 
 
As part of the environmental and social framework being developed jointly with Novagerar, each 
sub-project will be screened on transparent criteria, undergo the environmental licensing process 
and have their own Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA). Those will be reviewed and 
cleared by the World Bank and, depending on each EIA’s findings, could trigger other 
appropriate Bank safeguards policies. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
X 
As part of project preparation the environmental assessment of each project will include detailed 
screening and assessment to identify potential impacts. Alternative analysis should minimize 
risks of affecting sensitive environmental habitats; however, projects at existing dumpsites might 
trigger the policy. For instance, the Itaoca pilot project is located in a mangrove area linked to 
the Guanabara bay and classified as a protected area under Brazilian legislation. 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X 
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X 
 
 
The project includes existing dumpsites with waste pickers, either living or squatting on the site, 
such as the Itaoca pilot project. The new landfills are not expected to have issues with waste 
pickers, but will include a public consultation and communication plan to work with affected 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
communities. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
 
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address 
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)  
 X  
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   November 30, 2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  November 30, 2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the 
client to help mitigate and prevent potential impacts of each project and provide clear 
guidelines to the client on the environmental and social requirements that have to be fulfilled 
for each project. The ESMF will briefly describe the requirement by Brazilian law and 
Bank's Safeguards and include specific guidelines and timeline for: 
 
1.  Environmental and Social Management Framework 
a. 
Environmental Impact Assessment of New Landfills 
b.  Environmental Diagnosis of existing dumpsites 
c. 
Environmental Rehabilitation Plan for Existing Dumpsites 
d.  Environmental Management Plan for New Landfills 
e. 
Environmental Monitoring and Supervision 
f. 
Public Consultation and Communication Program 
 
2.  Resettlement Framework (Social Integration of Wastepickers) 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal 
(i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible 
to potentially affected persons.
 
Page  6
The framework will be applied to each project as they are being prepared. The 
documentation of the first two projects 
–
CTR Candeias and Itaoca – will be finalized and 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Paul Procee 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
Date 
Comments:   
Acting Sector Manager: 
David Sislen 
Date 
Comments:   
