Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC3599
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P107843 
Project Name:  Brazil Federal District Multisector Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Joana Godinho 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (28%);General education sector (27%);General public administration 
sector (25%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme:  Managing for development results (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
270.00
270.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project will co-finance the US$400 million Federal District Multisector Management 
Program through a Sector Investment Loan (SIL) of US$130 million to be disbursed in 
three years (2009-2011). The project will follow a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp), with 
the Bank co-financing a percentage of Government Eligible Expenditure Programs 
(EEP). Disbursements will be triggered by the execution of the agreed reform programs 
and achievement of specific result targets. The project will use state government systems, 
procedures and staff, both to foster ownership and strengthen the GDF’s institutional 
capacity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will support GDF reform in public sector management as an overall 
strategy, as well as targeted programs in the education, health and transport sectors.  The 
program is to be implemented in two phases over a period of 10 years. The first phase is a 
3-year project, with Bank financing consisting of: (i) a SWAp component of US$120.0 
million disbursing to the State Treasury against budgeted and actual expenditures in 
Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEP) in the education, health and transport sectors; and 
(ii) a US$9.7 million technical assistance component disbursing against SOEs.  
Page  2
The proposed project development objectives (PDOs) are the following:  
 
•
improve public sector management and accountability by establishing results-based 
management practices and improving fiduciary oversight;  
 
•
increase access, quality and efficiency of the education, health and public transport 
services (by modernizing the education system; modernizing, decentralizing and 
integrating various levels of health care; and strengthening the institutional and 
operational capacity of the public transport sector).  
 
Project Development Indicators (PDIs).  The project will track 31 indicators, including 
(a) project development indicators to measure progress towards achievement of the 
PDOs; (b) project results indicators that will trigger disbursements (Disbursement-Linked 
Indicators, or DLIs); and (c) “Secondary indicators” for project monitoring indicators to 
measure implementation progress and contribute to substantive dialogue between Bank 
sector experts and government counterparts during project implementation.  
 
Component 1. Strengthening Results-Based Management in the Public Sector 
(US$390.0 million). This component will contribute to the implementation of the 
proposed program by supporting critical public sector management reforms targeting the 
education, health and transport sectors. The Component follows a SWAp approach by 
financing a percentage of the EEPs in these sectors. Under this Component, Bank funds 
will be pooled with those from the GDF. Institutionalizing RBM in policy-setting and 
public administration, as well as strengthening fiduciary oversight, will have a positive 
impact on the efficiency and effectiveness of government expenditures, including the 
three targeted sectors.  The SWAp Component will finance EEPs in the areas of 
education, health and transport that will contribute to:  
 
•
Modernizing the education system, aiming at improving the quality, efficiency and 
equity of basic education.  These reforms will be achieved by adopting the Gestao 
Compartilhada model, which includes performance-based results strategies and 
performance-based incentives for schools.  
 
•
Modernizing, decentralizing and integrating various levels of health care (primary, 
secondary and tertiary), aiming at increasing access, quality and efficiency.  These 
objectives will be achieved through the establishment of RBM practices in the sector, 
development of managerial and clinical information system and of the Cartao de Saude; 
extension of PHC (including by establishing 127 Family Health teams in Administrative 
Regions) to decrease pressure on hospitals; and piloting a public-private partnership for 
management by an OS of the Hospital Sta. Maria.  
 
•
Modernizing, improving management and capacity strengthening in the SET and 
DFTRANS to permit them to more effectively and efficiently plan, regulate, manage, and 
supervise public transport services and ultimately improve their quality, including access.   
 
Page  3
Component 2. Building Capacity in the Public Sector (US$9.7 million).  This 
component will finance technical assistance and training to support fulfillment of the 
performance targets established in Component 1.  In addition, this component will 
finance preparatory studies for a possible future operation to support the Competitive 
Brasilia Program (Brasi
lia Competitiva), seeking to improve the DF’s economic 
competitiveness and reduce unemployment in the region.  This TA component will 
follow Bank procurement guidelines and disbursement methods.  
 
Specific technical assistance activities are included to support the implementation of 
results-based management in the GDF, particularly in the targeted sectors.  Resources are 
included for training in strategic planning, definition of indicators (for first- and second-
level RAs), and M&E for staff of SEPLAG and the Secretariats of Education, Health, 
Transport and DFTRANS.  As it is critical to evaluate progress and draw lessons for 
ongoing improvement, the Project assigns TA resources to carry out an impact evaluation 
of the Management Modernization program, to be completed in 2011. Resources are 
allocated to support the design and implementation of cost-accounting systems in the 
education and health sectors.  Developing this capacity for measuring the costs of outputs 
of individual service delivery units (e.g., schools, surgical units in hospitals) is critical for 
improving over time the quality of performance indicators that may be included in the 
Results Agreements (both for first- and second-level RAs) to drive greater efficiency as 
well as effectiveness in government expenditures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Brazil Federal District   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project does not involve any resettlement and indigenous safeguards will not be 
triggered.  The proposed project will strengthen public sector policies and improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures, especially in the education, health 
and transport sectors. These investments will not cause any direct or irreversible impact 
on society or the environment.  
 
In the education sector the project will support the refurbishing of 52 schools throughout 
the Federal District. The nature of the activities is facility improvement (electrical, 
plumbing, roof) and enlargement of classrooms. The objectives are to provide a better 
teaching environment through the updating of the physical infrastructure.  
 
In the health sector the project will also support refurbishing of existing facilities in 
order to be able to offer a better service to the population. Similar to the education sector 
support the health sector reforms will focus on facility improvement (electrical, 
plumbing, roof) and enlargement of facilities for immunization, consultations and doctors 
quarters. Equipment will also be acquired and include standard portable 
electrocardiogram and ultrasound machines.  
 
While the project will not support activities that generate health care waste, the GDF is 
aware of the precarious situation health care waste management in the district. It is 
interested in tapping into the Banks expertise and undertaking strategic assessments of 
health care waste in Federal District health care units. It is expected that this exercise will 
generate recommendations which the GDF will seek to implement. Waste segregation is 
recognized as being weak and the project will support capacity building and also provide 
an enabling environment for segregation to occur efficiently.  
 
In the Transport sector the project will focus on improving management and thus 
delivering improved public sector management and accountability in the sector. There are 
no environmental impacts envisioned other than a positive outcome due to efficiency 
gains.  
Page  5
The GDF has good capacity in what concerns safeguards and environmental assessment, 
and it already prepared an environmental action plan for the Brasilia Sustentavel Project. 
The construction activities that are envisioned in the health and education sectors under 
the proposed project are all minor repairs to existing clinics and schools and are not 
anticipated to create any disturbances out of the ordinary. The GDF will include in the 
Operational Manual guidance to contractors on minimizing any environmental impacts 
(dust, noise, etc.). The project does not present any potential environmental impacts that 
will be of environmental concern. In the health sector it will not support activities that 
generate health care waste.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Joana Godinho 
06/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
07/15/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
09/12/2008 
Comments:   
