                                                                                     49829


                     INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

Date prepared/updated: July 28th, 2009

I. Basic Information

1 BaSlc PrOJectDaa
 .     .      .       t

Country: Brazil                                     Project 10: PI06702
                                                    Additional Pr~ject ID (ifany):
Project Name: Integrated Solid Waste Management and Carbon Finance Project
Task Team Leader: Paul Procee
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 24, 2009           Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2009
Managing Unit: LCSUW                                Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary
                                                    Loan
Sector: Solid waste management (100%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Climate change (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             50.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              50.00
Other financing amounts by source:
Borrower                                                                   150.00
                                                                           150.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Is this a transferred project                       Yes []                  No (X]
Simplified Processing                               Simple [Xl              Repeater [ 1
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises             Yes []       No [Xl
and Emergencies)                                                                        I

2. Project Objectives:

I. The Project's development objective is to improve the treatment and final disposal of
    municipal solid waste in Brazil. Specifically, the Project will support: (i) the closing
    of open dumps and implementation of modem and environmentally safe landfills or
    alternatives to waste disposal, such as recycling and composting; (ii) improved
    municipal solid waste management practices; (iii) increased private participation in
    solid waste service provision; and (iv) strengthening of Caixa's capacity to manage
    carbon finance Projects in the solid waste and energy sectors.

2. The Project will develop national-level mechanisms for investment and Carbon
    Finance in the solid waste sector. Institutional models and tools (such as concession
    and Carbon Finance agreements) will be developed, and technical assistance
    provided, to help attract private sector participation in the final disposal and treatment
    of municipal solid waste. Lessons learned will be replicated throughout the country.

Project Description:

3. The Project has two components:

4. Component 1: 1~frastructure Investments in Solid Waste Disposal and Treatment.
    Through a credit line of USD 195 million, this component will finance public or
    private sector infrastructure investments to improve final waste disposal and
    treatment within comprehensive SWM strategies, so as to reduce negative
    environmental and health impacts. The Project will assist states and municipalities in
    the preparation of subprojects and institutional arrangements for private sector
    participation in waste treatment and final disposal. Carbon Finance opportunities will
    be assessed and, where viable, integrated into subprojects. The component supports
    three types ofactivities:
        (i)    the construction and operation of sanitary landfills;
        (ii)   the closing of open dumps and management ofenvironmental impacts; and
        (iii) the development of alternative waste treatment facilities (e.g., transfer
               stations, composting and recycling facilities).


5. Eligibility criteria have been established for the selection of participating cities,
    consortia, autarchies, I and private enterprises investing in municipal solid waste
    service delivery. Contractual arrangements with the private sector may include
    activities in one or more ofthese components (e.g., a contract to close existing dumps
    and open a sanitary landfill). The Project will finance subprojects focused on final
    disposal and alternative treatment. In cases where transfer stations are needed and
    additional financing is required, the Project will consider such financing.


6. The basic conditions will follow Caixa's current lending to the sector with a
    maximum duration ofthe loans of 19 years, including a maximum 4-year grace
    period. Currently, Caixa pays a Referential Interest Rate (TR) of 1%+ 6% to FOTS
    for funds used for solid waste management. The referential rate is determined by the
    weighted average deposit rate for the 30 largest financial institutions in the country,
    meaning this rate is commercially detcrmined and responsive to market changes. The
    Central Bank releases the referential rate on a monthly basis. When onlending the
    funds, Caixa adds to this rate an administration fee (of maximum 2%) and a risk fcc
    (of maximum 1%), making the current maximum yearly lending rate about 10%. The
    referential rate - and therefore, the overall rate - will adjust over time, automatically
    responding to inflation and other financial market factors.

7. As Caixa will be onlending the funds based on its own criteria, Caixa will assume the
    credit risk. Caixa will manage a blend of funds - IBRD funds, worth USD 50 million
    and counterpart financing from FOTS for USD 150 million. Caixa will sign a USD
    50 million fixed spread loan, to be converted by the Bank into local currency through


IPrivate operators directly managed by the municipal administration, which are common in the sanitation
sector.

  a USO/BRL swap by the Treasury at the time of each disbursement. This will enable
   Caixa to onlend to final borrowers in BRL and avoid a mismatch between a USD-
   denominated debt and BRL denominated revenues.

8. Component 2: Technical Assistance and Institutional Strengthening and Project
   Management. This component will focus on the development of an integrated
   approach to SWM at the national, state and local levels. Regulatory, financial and
   technical guidelines will be developed to enable and encourage private investment in
   the sector. The component is divided into three set of activities:
   (i)   Technical assistance and capacity building Jor the public sector in project
        preparation Jor private sector involvement. Caixa is setting up a Project
         Preparation Fund to provide technical assistance to the public sector in
        subproject preparation, focusing on such key issues as: (a) increasing
        accountability and transparency in service delivery; (b) improving municipal
        capacity in financial management and cost recovery; (c) assessing the technical
        and economic viability of final treatment and disposal alternatives; (d)
        developing new models for private sector participation (e.g., contracts, bidding
        documents, and the supervision and monitoring of services); (e) environmental
         licensing of final disposal and treatment activities; (f) addressing the presence of
         waste pickers in an equitable, viable and sustainable way; and (g) promoting the
         preparation of Carbon Finance projects and maximizing their benefits.
         Expenditures incurred as part of project preparation will be recovered through
        the private operator. In other words, the public sector will include the
         preparation costs in the bidding documents and require that these expenditures
        be repaid by the winning bidder.
   (ii)  Technical assistance to strengthen Caixa's capacity to invest in SWM and
         support Carbon Finance projects. An important Project goal is to strengthen
         Caixa's institutional capacity to manage credits and design appropriate lending
         products for investment in the waste sector and to blend these, wherever viable,
         with Carbon Finance. The Bank will provide the necessary technical support to
         build the Caixa team's capacity to apply the necessary Bank policies in
         subprojects, so as to allow Caixa to serve as both a financial intermediary for
         future on-lending IBRD resources to the private and public sectors for finance
         investments (described in Component 1), and for delivering Carbon Finance to
         projects that generate carbon credits. Caixa is allocating its own training budget
         and resources to these capacity building activities (as it has done throughout
         Project Preparation).
   (iii) Project Management. This component will ensure that the proper management
         and supervision structures are in place to monitor Project implementation. The
         Project's complexity and nature require that considerable resources be devoted
        to this component. It is also important that external experts and consultants be
         involved in order to assist Caixa in the technical aspects of implementation.

9. The Bank team has reviewed the Project's ESMF to establish its equivalence and
   acceptability for use as a Corporate System with regard to each applicable World
   Bank Safeguard Policy. The Safeguards Diagnostic Report (SDR) accepting the

      EsrvlF as the implementing instrument for the Use of Country Systems under         or 4.00
      fo r the Project has been prepared and disclosed on the Bank 's Infoshop. Cai:\':<1 has
     agreed to the key findings and recommclldntions oftllc Bank review ofthc ESMf-'.
     and has publicly disclosed a revised draft. addressing the gaps identified and
     suggcstions provided in the SDR. The SDR will be presented to the Board by
     November 2009, together with the Project.



..I. Project Loca tio n and sa li cnt physical ehll r!letcristics rclevant to the safegu ard
analysis:


 10. Potentiall y, specific investments could be implemented in any of the states in Brazil.
     However. as this is a framework..type Project, specific invcstmcllts have yetla be
     identified and thc exact locatiolls of warks arc not yet known. A kcy featurc of the
     Project wi ll neverthcless be thc closing of"cxisting open dumps. which should
     significantly improve conditions ofwastc disposal and rcduce related environmcntal
     and social impacts. As some dUlllpsites may be located in cnvironmcntally sensitive
     areas (e.g., ncar rivers. mangroves, animal or bird sanctuaries, etc.), however. their
     closing will necessitate specific mcasures to reduce potential risks and a plan for the
     regular monitoring of potential impacts. A thorough assessment ofalternati vc
     locations to prevent or reduce potential impacts is fundamental to the site selection
     process for solid wastc managcment faci lities, and every possible measure will be
     taken to avoid si ting ncar sensitivc areas whenevcr viable al ternati ves are avai lable.


II . As subproject locations in the Project are as yet undetermined, selected municipalities
     will be required to apply thc ESMF as pan ofsile selection and landfill design and to
     adopt the Environmental and Social Managemcnt Plan (ESM ll) as part of their
     construction process. lfa prc..identified subproject landfill were to receive financing
     retroactively, the respective municipal ity would need to have updated. concluded.
     consulted, and disclosed their EIAs and EM Ps, according to the requirements of thc
     Bank environmental safeguard policies and Disclosure policy.



s.En   vi ronmenl al and Social Sareguards Specialists all the Te:lIn:
Paul Procee (LCSEN), Environmental Safcguards Specialist
Petcr Cohen (LCSSO), Social Safeguards Specialist

6. Safe~uard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                Yes           No      OP/BP 4.00
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4~01)                                X                        X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                        X                        X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            X                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                             X                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X                        X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Watenvavs (OPIBP 7.50)                                   X
Pro.iects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                           X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


A. SlImmary ofKey Safegllard Issues


I. Describe any safegllard isslles and impacts associated witll tile proposed project.
Idellti/y alld describe ally potential large scale, sigllijicallt amI/or irreversible impacts:

The most common environmental impacts related to waste management methods. such as
landfilling, composting, recycling, incineration and transport, may be summarized as
follows:
      (i)   Air: emissions of methane (CH4). air pollutants (CO, S02, NOx, NMVOC,
             C02, N20), heavy metals (Pb, Zn, Cu, As), dust, dioxins, and odors;
      (ii)   Waler: leaching of salts, heavy metals, and biodegradable and persistent
            organics to surface water and groundwater;
       (iii) Soil: accumulation of hazardous substances in the soil;
       (iv) Landscape: visual intrusion, restriction for other users;
       (v)  Ecosystem: contamination and accumulation of toxic substances in the food
            chain;
      (vi) Human health: exposure to hazardous substances, spread of vector diseases,
             nuisance from odors, and increased traffic in surrounding communities.

Technical standards for the design and construction of waste treatment and disposal
facilities will be integrated into the contracts with private sector providers responsible for
building, operating, and maintaining the solid waste final disposal systems. A
comprehensive set of mitigation measures will also be included in the contractors'
bidding documents, to ensure that potential impacts mitigated throughout the operation of
facilities and to avoid any harmful impacts on the surrounding population and
environment. The procedures by which the environmental compliance of subprojects will
be monitored by selected municipalities and reviewed by Caixa will be described in the
Operational Manual.

Although involuntary resettlement will be avoided to the greatest possible extent in the
siting of new facilities (e.g., sanitary landfills, transfer stations, recycling facilities and
composting plants), their development may nevertheless require some land acquisition,
with corresponding impacts on property values in the surrounding areas. The Bank policy
on Involuntary Resettlement is thus triggered. The closing of open dumps and opening of
sanitary landfills in selected subprojects may affect people living and working on those
sites, in all three areas of impact covered by the policy, namely:
    (i)    relocation or loss ofshelter;
    (ii)   loss of assets or access to assets; and
    (iii) loss of income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the affected
           persons must move to another location.



2. Describe allY potelltial indirect alUl/or long term impacts due to anticipatedfuture
activities in tile project area:

A key feature of the Project will be the closing ofexisting open dumps, which should
significantly improve conditions of waste disposal and reduce related environmental and
social impacts. As some dumpsites may be located in environmentally sensitive areas
(e.g., near rivers, mangroves, animal or bird sanctuaries, etc.), however, their closing will
necessitate specific measures to reduce potential risks and a plan for the regular
monitoring of potential impacts. A thorough assessment of alternative locations to
prevent or reduce potential impacts is fundamental to the site selection process for solid
waste management facilities, and every possible measure will be taken to avoid siting
near sensitive areas whenever viable alternatives are available.



3. Describe any project alternatives (ifrelevant) considered to Ileip avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

The main alternative would be the "business-as-usual" scenario, in which open dumps
would continue to exist and pose significant environmental and social risks. At the
subproject level, various alternatives for landfilling, composting, recycling, etc.will be
considered and analyzed, as appropriate,. Environmental and social aspects will be
carefully taken into account in the evaluation in order to minimize adverse impacts.



4. For tllose safeguards to be addressed tlITougll OPIBP 4.00, cllaracterize in general
terms tile extellt to wllicll borrower systems are equivalent to tile Objectives and
OperatiOllal Principles ofOP 4.00, Table A1. For tllose safeguards to be addressed
througll conventional OPIBPs, identify ti,e reasOllfor tile decision to not apply OP 4.00
(e.g. absence ofeqllivalellce and/or acceptability report).

 An in-depth equivalency analysis was carried out for all safeguard policies triggered by
the project, and the results show that Caixa's systems for all of them, as reflected in the
ESMF, are fully equivalent to the objectives and operational principles of OP 4.00, Table

A1. As such, none ofthe triggered policies will be addressed through conventional
OP/BPs.




5. Describe measures taken by tile borrower to address safeguardpolicy isslies to
identify any significant gap-Jilling measures necessary to/ulfill tile conditions/or
application o/OP 4.00. Provide an assessmellt o/borrower capacity to p/ml and
imp/emellt ti,e measllres described:

Caixa will require potential environmental, social, health, and safety impacts to be
specifically identified and adequately addressed, starting with the conducting of an
Environmental Screening, followed by an Environmental Assessment (EA). All major
new waste facilities will require a full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and
Environmental Licenses. Brazilian law also requires appropriate environmental siting
investigations for all investments in new waste management facilities to avoid, minimize,
or mitigate any potential environmental and social impacts.

The Project will also develop strategies for preventing or mitigating any long-term
impacts during the operation and closing phases, and comprehensive strategies for
minimizing waste streams and maximizing cost-effective recycling and composting
activities. Finally, the Project will provide technical support and guidance on public
participation in siting, facility design, solid waste service delivery operations, the social
inclusion ofwaste pickers, support for informal recycling activities, and other programs
to properly address related livelihoods issues, specifically tailored to each SUbproject
context and local target group. Based on the Project-wide Environmental Assessment,
each subproject will require the development ofa dedicated Environmental Assessment,
focused on context-specific issues within the local legal, institutional and operational
framework.

The bank team conducted the acceptability analysis focused on Caixa's capacity to
implement its own ESMF. Because Caixa has substantially improved the ESMF through
a highy participatory process in the last few months, the bank team was not able to
directly evaluate Caixa's implementation of the current ESMF. However, the
acceptability analysis shows that Caixa has the staffnecessary to successfully implement
its ESMF and also has in place a roster ofqualified consultants that can be used to
support Caixa staff in the analysis ofspecific technical issues, as needed. As such, the
one gap filling measure recommended is a series of training sessions on the new ESMF,
targeted at the various groups of staff and consultants, both technical and managerial,
having different roles and accountabilities for its implementation. Caixa has a well-
developed system for providing professional staff training, and specific modules on the
ESMF and its implementation will be added to the curriculum.

6. Identify tlte key stake/,olders alld describe tl,e mecltanismsfor consultation and
disclosllre 011 safegllardpolicies, illcilldillg tile Safegllard Diagllostic Review (SDR)
witll all empllasis on potentially affectedpeople:

Key stakeholders for this Project include:
        Caixa Economica Federal;
        Local government authorities and state environmental agencies;
        Private Sector Operators;
        Waste pickers and their representative organization; and,
        Residents and Community Ba~ed Organizations in affected areas.

Stakeholder consultations on the Project and Caixa's ESMF were conducted on three
occasions. First, the Project and early draft ESMF were consulted and discussed in Brazil
by Caixa at a multi-stakeholder workshop on December t 8th, 2008. A second technical
consultation ofthe revised frameworks was held on April 25th, 2009, and a third one on
the final draft ESMF took place on"June 9th, 2009. Furthermore, each individual
subproject will be required to engage in consultations with local stakeholders, at both the
environmental screening and draft EA stages, as part ofthe process of identification of
environmental and social impacts and the development ofcorresponding mitigation
measures. Additional public consultations will be held during Project implementation, as
specified in the ESMF. Specific consultation and participation processes will also be
conducted with waste pickers, in accordance with the Waste Picker Social Inclusion
Strategy.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Safe2uard Dia2nostic Review (Equivalence and Acceptability Report):
  Dates of "in-country" consultation and disclosure                                    06/09/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                       08/03/2009
  For category A prQjects, date ofdistributing the PID to the Executive Directors      08/03/2009
Ifin-country disclosure ofany ofthe above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliallce Monitorillg lI,dicators at tile Corporate Level (to befilled ill wilen tlte
ISDS isfinalized by tile project decision meetillg)

OPIBP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including            Yes [X]       No [ ]     N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector        Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.00 - Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social
Safe2uard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects

Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit              Yes [X]       No [ ]       N/A [ ]
(QACU) and the ESSD and International Law Practice
Group (LEGEN) review and approve the Safeguard
Diagnostic Review report?
OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [ ]       No [X]       N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management         Yes [X]       No [ ]       N/A [ ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                Yes [ 1       NorX]        N/Al]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OPIBP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to           Yes [X]        No [ ]      N/A [ ]
physical cultural resources?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate    Yes, especially regarding chance
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural         findings for archeological artifacts.
resources?
OPIBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples PlanlPlanning            Yes [ ]       No [ ]      N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [X]         No [ ]      N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OPIBP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]       No [ ]       N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OPIBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes r ]  No [ ]  N/A [Xl
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]  No [ 1  N/A [Xl
Ifthe project falls under one ofthe exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?

OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    Yes [ ]  No [ ]  N/A [X]
international aspects ofthe project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PADIMOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes [X]  No [ ]  N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [X]   No [ ]  N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the           Yes
project include the monitoring ofsafeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the proiect lellal documents?


 D. Approwlis


Signed (f1U1submitted by:                  N ame              Sigllilfllre       Date

Task Team Leader:                    Paul Preece

Environmental Specialist:            Paul Proeee        '".,                  0'11 lOll 03
                                                             .
Social Development Specialist:       Peter Cobell                            O쩤/.o
                                                          ~ ~

Additional Environmental and/or      Clarisse Dall'Acq ua ( '"
Social Development Specialist(s):    Soraya Mclga~o

ApprOl'ed by:

Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Rcidar Kvam        j ;J7~ o]-/.2}/o/
                                                       ' j
  Comments:



Sector tvlanager:                     Guang l he Chen        O J          A. 7/2-1 /tf7
  Comments:

