Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC4078
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P111996 
Project Name:  Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit Project   II 
Task Team Leader:  Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
211.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
9.30
9.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objective is to: a) improve the level-of-service provided to the 
urban (commuter) rail transport users in RJMR in a safe and cost-efficient manner, and b) 
to continue the strengthening of the transport management and policy framework in the 
RJMR.  These objectives will be met by: (i) financing rolling stock which is critical for 
increasing the peak-hour carrying capacity of the rail-based system; and (ii) designing 
urban transport strategies and actions to mitigate the impact of rising transport costs on 
the mobility of the poor by introduction of an integrated multimodal tariff.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will comprise two components:  
 
(A) Infrastructure and Equipment: to acquire Thirty trains (Electrical Multiple Units-
EMUs) of four cars each for SuperVia. This component accounts for about 97% of the 
total project cost of US$220.3 million.  
 
Page  2
(B) Institutional and Policy Development: to help in (i) consolidating the Regional 
Transport Coordination Commission (AMTU-RJ) for the RJMR; (ii) updating the 
integrated Transport Policy, Land Use and Air Quality Management strategy (PDTU) for 
the RJMR to meet both transport and air quality targets and to introduce sound cost-
recovery, tariff, regulatory and subsidy policies; (iii) supporting the adoption of some 
type of  Integrated Modal Tariffs through studies and technical assistance; and (iv) 
project management and supervision  including acquisition and reception of the trains. 
This component represents about 3% of the total project cost.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The original Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit project and the additional financing to the same 
project is a Category B project. Independent consultants were hired to verify whether 
there was potential resettlement and concluded that no involuntary resettlement or 
expropriation are required as a result of this project. The main aspects to be monitored 
and mitigated are related to “dengue” and other disease prevention and control program 
that SuperVia is implemented on the right-of-the-way of the rail tracks. Another 
important aspect is the reduction of work related accidents and educational campaign.  
 
Clauses have been introduced in the bidding documents to ensure that contractors 
working in the railway facilities would properly manage environmental aspects and 
properly dispose of waste.  
 
The award of the concession to SuperVia was preceded by an independent 
environmental audit required by the State and based on terms of reference provided by 
the Bank. As result of the audit, the concessionaire (SuperVia) prepared a waste 
minimization and mitigation plan (oil, grease, sewage), disinfect the vegetation to prevent 
the spreading of dengue along the tracks, and developed a work related accident 
preventions awareness program. The reports prepared by SuperVia are continuously 
monitored and have found to be effective in addressing the different issues.  The main 
result have been proper separation and disposal of waste streams, much cleaner right-of-
ways that used to be littered with trash and a notable reduction in work accidents since 
the concessionaire took over the operations in 1998.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit 2 project does not trigger any new safeguard 
policies. There is no resettlement involved because the loan does not involve any new 
construction.  The project team will ensure the continuation of the environmental plan 
agreed by SuperVia that includes the separation and disposal of different waste streams 
(oil, grease, sewage), the continued implementation of the dengue prevention program, 
and work accident awareness and prevention program.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given that the project will switch passengers from road to rail-based electric traction 
systems, the impact on the environment will be highly beneficial with reduction of 
emissions.  The use of regenerative braking in the new trains will also have a significant 
impact in CO2 emission reduction.  SuperVia has committed to implementing a voluntary 
energy efficiency program and has agreed to explore the possibility of CDM support for 
its program.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
technical evaluation was undertaken to compare the acquisition of new trains with 
other alternatives such as do-nothing, rehabilitation and/or modernization of trains, 
acquisition of second hand trains, and leasing of trains.   The acquisition of new trains in 
this case was judged as the most cost-effective alternative either because the others were 
not feasible or there are no available immobilized trains to be rehabilitated.  Specialized 
consultants examined the options rejected and agreed that the proposed alternatives are 
the most suitable for SuperVia.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Team reviewed the documentation prepared by SuperVia describing its 
compliance with environmental practices recommended when the concession was 
awarded, including education, waste and pest management, and safety.  The team also 
reviewed Supe
rVia’s environmental management system and policies to reduce and 
mitigate environmental impacts at the car maintenance and other facilities. They were 
found to be satisfactory and will continue to be strengthened during project 
implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The concessionaire has consulted with users and implemented environmental education 
programs for users, employees and contractors, school children, and residents adjacent to 
rail facilities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The concessionaire SuperVia hired a IBAMA-registered firm, Rodagro, which sprays the 
right-of-way twice a year for vegetation and pest control. More spraying is done if a 
specific focus of dengue is identified. The pesticides used are Gliz 480 N A- # 3608/95 
and Arsenal N A -#715/93, a bio-degradable product licensed by FEEMA.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
12/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
12/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
12/29/2008 
Comments:   
