Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I. Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated: 
06/03
/2008 
Report No.
44054:
 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P105389 
Project Name: BR Novagerar CDM Solid Waste Program II 
Task Team Leader: Paul Procee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 6/10/2008 
Estimated Board Date: 06/15/2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: 
Carbon Finance
 
Sector: Climate Change (P); Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
Theme: Carbon Finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$): 
 
IDA Amount (US$): 
 
GEF Amount (US$): 
 
PCF Amount (
EUR): 12
,000,000  
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
 
1.  The main objective of the Novagerar Landfill Gas Project is to mitigate greenhouse gas 
emissions and reduce environmental and social impacts of solid waste disposal. This would 
be accomplished by improving final treatment and disposal of solid waste and capturing 
landfill gases. The project includes the installation of landfill gas capturing and flaring 
systems at old dumpsites, new sanitary landfills, and the exploration of alternative waste 
treatment options, such as composting, to reduce carbon emissions. Depending upon the 
quality/quantity of gas collected, some projects might generate electricity from the landfill 
gas captured. 
 
3. Project Description 
 
2. 
The Novagerar Carbon Finance and Solid Waste Management Project II intends to extend the 
successful business model developed for the first Novagerar project in Nova Iguaçu, and to 
develop an umbrella of Landfill Gas Capture projects in Brazil. The project comprises several 
distinct subprojects aimed at capturing landfill gas from new sanitary landfills and old 
dumpsites. Given project feasibility and sufficient landfill gas volume, a gas-to-energy plant 
could be included among these sub-projects. A pilot composting site is also being considered 
at one of the landfill sites. The captured methane would then be either flared or used to 
generate electricity, to be sold to the grid if the potential is deemed significant. An LOI 
encompassing the whole umbrella was signed with Novagerar on February 14, 2007, and 
each sub-project would have its own individual PIN, PID and ISDS. The proposed project 
Page  2
2
2
comprises of individual sub-projects at different stages of preparation. A preliminary 
assessment has identified 5 initial sub-projects, from which carbon emission reductions 
would be purchased, with more to be added as they are identified: 
 
3. 
Sub-project 1
:
Operation of the existing landfill of São Gonçalo (850 tons/day), a.k.a Itaoca. 
The landfill has already been contracted in the form of a municipal concession and will be 
closed in 2008. About 200 waste-pickers are living on the project site and have been 
organized into a cooperative since the beginning of São Gonçalo’s rehabilitation process from 
dumpsite into proper landfill. 
 
4. Sub-project 
2: 
Novagerar is developing an entirely privately operated landfill in Muribeca, 
part of the Municipality of Jaboatao dos Guararapes, close to the city of Recife, a.k.a CTR 
Candeias. The site is already operating and waiting for nearby municipalities to begin 
bringing their solid wastes. It currently recieves an estimated 900 tons/day of municipal 
waste, and the addition of Recife would bring its potential up to 2,700 tons/day.
 
5. Sub-project 3: 
As part of the concession for the rehabilitation and closing of the old São 
Gonçalo dumpsite, the contract with the municipality also includes the opening of a new 
sanitary landfill in the municipality, with an estimated disposal of around 900 tons/day. A 
study of alternatives for the new site identification has been completed and Novagerar has 
submitted the findings to the municipality and public attorney for review and approval.
 
6. 
Sub-project 4: 
Novagerar has identified a site for a new landfill in the southern part of the 
metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro (Santa Rosa), and is currently seeking the requisite 
environmental license. The potential amount of solid waste to be disposed is high (between 3 
to 5,000 tons/day), and there are also plans to use an existing railway link to transport the 
waste between the city of Rio de Janeiro and the landfill, thereby providing additional 
benefits. This sub-project is likely to be ready by next year. 
 
7. 
Sub-project 5
:
Novagerar is currently operating a landfill, but is planning construction of a 
composting plant in Petrolina, Bahia, which could receive waste from neighboring cities, 
including Juazeiro. The organic content of the waste is high, but no detailed studies have yet 
been undertaken to assess the project’s emission reduction potential. 
Page  3
3
3
4. Project siting and salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguards analysis 
 
The sub-projects are all located within or near major urban areas. The identification of new 
landfill sites ensures that none would be located within fragile habitats or adjacent to densely 
populated areas. Any doubts concern the existing dumpsite in São Gonçalo, which has already 
been partially rehabilitated by Novagerar, but is sitting in a mangrove area next to Guanabara 
Bay. There is an urgency to definitively close the dumpsite, finalize the rehabilitation process, 
and monitor impacts on the surrounding environment. Field visits and documentation provided by 
Novagerar show that the company has already made good progress and will continue to work on 
minimizing the landfill’s impacts 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Paul Procee
 
–
Environmental Specialist 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
  
X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50)  
X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The project triggers and addresses the following Bank safeguard policies: 
 
OP 4.01 
–
Environmental Assessment 
 
As mentioned, the project is focused on the implementation of gas capture and treatment systems 
on existing dumpsites and new landfills. These investments impose no significant impacts and 
actually offer a number of benefits, in terms of emissions and explosion risk reductions, as well as 
additional resources for environmental monitoring and social activities in and around the 
landfills. The project has thus been rated a Category B. 
 
As discrete investments are part of larger investments in the opening of new landfills and closing 
of existing dumpsites, the team has reviewed the overall environmental and social assessments 
and management plans prepared by Novagerar at the various sub-project sites, including specific 
investments in gas capture and treatment systems. 
 
Page  4
4
4
To ensure that the project identifies and mitigates all major environmental risks, Novagerar has 
prepared two social and environmental management frameworks; one specific to existing 
dumpsites, and the other for new sites, to be applied to individual sub-projects, depending on their 
operating status. The frameworks include procedures for the closing of open dumpsites, the 
construction and operation of new landfills, and mitigation measures for the economic 
displacement of waste pickers, as well as landfill-to-gas facilities. As each subproject is 
identified, the appropriate framework would be applied and a Social and Environmental 
Assessment and Management Plan (SEMP) prepared and shared with the Bank for no objection 
prior to the signing of any agreement for the purchase of ERs of sub-projects. 
 
Environmental Assessments have been conducted for the New Landfill of Candeias, Pernambuco 
State, and the Proposed Landfill of Santa Rosa, Rio de Janeiro. An Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP), based on the Environmental and Social Framework, has been 
prepared for the Itaoca Dumpsite in São Gonçalo, Rio de Janeiro. Based on these assessments, 
detailed management plans are being developed, including. among other things: (i) Social 
Consultation and Outreach Plans; (ii) Environmental Monitoring Plans; (iii) Waste Picker Social 
Integration Plans; (iv) Environmental Monitoring Program for Landfill Gas Recovery and 
Flaring; and (v) Environmental Monitoring of the Project.
 
4.04 
–
Natural Habitats 
 
Procedures for the siting of new landfills include criteria to avoid environmentally sensitive areas, 
wetlands, and significant protected areas and natural habitats. Unfortunately, existing dumpsites 
often are located in river valleys, swamps and natural habitats: for example, the existing Itaoca 
Landfill is located in a sensitive mangrove area. In this case, the team has worked to ensure that 
Novagerar implements appropriate measures to reduce and minimize impacts, that carbon finance 
revenues are provided to fund dumpsites closings, that appropriate remediation measures are 
implemented and that adequate environmental monitoring is done in and around the landfill to 
ensure impacts are controlled and minimized. 
Page  5
5
5
OP 4.12 
–
Involuntary Resettlement 
 
The Itaoca sub-project triggers the Bank OP/BP 4.12, due to the presence of waste-pickers on the 
site, as the closing of the existing dumpsite and installation of landfill gas recovery systems 
would require the relocation of waste-pickers currently working there. While no actual physical 
relocation of the waste-pickers is necessary to address this issue, OP/BP 4.12 is triggered, due to 
their "economic displacement” (specifically, impacts on access to resources). These impacts are 
being addressed through a a comprehensive waste picker integration strategy already developed 
and currently being implemented by Novagerar, in coordination with the municipality, and aimed 
at helping waste-pickers to engage in alternative income-producing activities, which includes: (i) 
a
census and registration of waste pickers and their families; (ii) creation of a safer and cleaner 
working environment for recycling and support in the wholesaling of materials; (iii) the offering 
of viable income generation alternatives at the new landfill site or the municipality; and (iv) the 
providing of improved access to health care and education, especially for children. Some of these 
measures are already being implemented by Novagerar at some sites, and the Bank would support 
their further implementation. 
The ESMF already developed includes a comprehensive framework for addressing these issues, 
and each new sub-project in which waste pickers are involved would develop a specific plan, 
based upon that framework (the Itaoca ESMP has already been written and applied). In Itaoca, a 
social analysis, consultation and accompaniment process has already resulted in the formation of 
a
waste pickers’ recycling cooperative, the construction of a covered sorting facility, and other 
measures to improve the livelihoods and working conditions of waste pickers. 
 
Novagerar is also implementing public consultation and outreach programs in all of its sub-
project areas to improve public understanding of the need for a landfills and their basic principles 
of operation. This process also allow neighboring communities to express their concerns and 
promote community supported measures to compensate for impacts generated by the landfill and 
to increased traffic in the immediate vicinity. Novagerar has extensive experience in the design 
and implementation of such plans in other landfills and has already demonstrated great 
effectiveness in involving local communities. 
 
This project is further linked to a series of initiatives aimed at strengthening social inclusion in 
solid waste management in Brazil (specifically, the Integrated Solid Waste Management and 
Carbon Finance Project, the PPIAF-supported Private Participation in Municipal SWM Projects 
in Brazil, and the JSDF-supported Waste Picker Inclusion Initiative), would allow it to benefit 
from the advances of those other projects, as well as extra support. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Positive Impacts 
 
The proposed project is expected to have highly positive environmental impacts, as it would 
enable environmental improvements in solid waste practices and the landfill gas recovery system 
would reduce both global emissions and local air pollution. The closing and rehabilitation of 
existing dumpsites would greatly reduce direct impacts of improper waste disposal on the 
surrounding environment and communities. ER revenues would assist the financing of these 
strategies and long-term environmental monitoring. 
 
Page  6
6
6
Negative impacts 
 
The proposed project is focused on the implementation of landfill gas capture and recovery 
systems, which have limited local environmental impacts, mostly related to the construction 
phase. Overall final disposal operations have the following impacts that must be properly 
addressed by Novagerar to avoid posing environmental or public health risks: 
(i) 
Air
:
emissions of methane (CH4), air pollutants (CO, SO
2
,
NO
x
,
NMVOC, CO
2
,
N
2
O), 
heavy metals (Pb, Zn, Cu, As), dust, dioxins and odors; 
(ii) 
Water:
 leaching of salts, heavy metals, and biodegradable and persistent organics to surface 
water and groundwater; 
(iii) 
Soil
:
accumulation of hazardous substances in the soil; 
(iv) 
Landscape
:
visual intrusion, restriction for other users; 
(v) 
Ecosystem
:
contamination and accumulation of toxic substances in the food chain; and 
(vi) 
Human health
:
exposure to hazardous substances, spread of vector diseases, nuisance from 
odors, and increased traffic in surrounding communities. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
All sub-projects will improve overall conditions of waste disposal and reduce impacts on 
communities and environment. In the specific case of the Itaoca dumpsite, the alternative 
of not having the project would almost certainly worsen the situation and result in 
increasing impacts of the existing dumpsite on surrounding communities, deteriorating 
working conditions for the waste-pickers and growing pollution of Guanabara Bay and  
the very sensitive and scarce mangrove areas in the metropolitan region. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
The Novagerar Eco Energia Ltda has an excellent track-record in developing sanitary landfills 
and addressing environmental impacts from waste disposal sites. The company has a team of 
highly qualified consultants to address environmental impacts from solid waste operations and a 
team of social assistants to supervise and implement social programs in and around the landfill. 
Previous projects have demonstrated Novagerar’s commitment to environmental and social 
causes, and have led to substantial improvements in local environment and quality of life. The 
project team has worked closely with Novagerar in project preparation to develop a 
comprehensive environmental and social framework to prevent, minimize, mitigate and/or 
compensate any environmental and social impacts of investments, through the use carbon 
revenues. 
 
In the specific case of Itaoca, carbon revenues would support the preparation and implementation 
of a social development plan addressing waste-pickers formerly living on the dumpsite. The 
project would strengthen the segregation process, and the stocking and selling of recycled 
materials in a cooperative form, through support for cooperatives, the providing of social 
assistance, and the providing of training, and improvements in infrastructure and equipment in 
order to improve waste pickers’ quality of life and increase their average income. The project 
would also help build municipal capacity to address environmental and social issues (which 
might possibly be financed from carbon revenues as well). 
 
Page  7
7
7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include: 
ƒ
Novagerar 
ƒ
Municipalities 
ƒ
Waste pickers (at old dumpsites) 
 
In accordance with the Bank Information Disclosure Policy (BP 17.50), a process of disclosure 
and public consultation was completed for Itaoca, Candeias and Santa Rosa, as part of the 
Environmental Assessment. Novagerar has also agreed to a consultation process that would 
continue under the implementation of the project. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
5/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/20/2008
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
4/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
5/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
5/07/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and 
approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical 
natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to 
the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse 
 
Page  8
8
8
impacts on cultural property? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager 
review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) 
been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been 
made for public awareness and training? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been 
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of 
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and 
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Paul Procee 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Paul Procee 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Peter Cohen
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:  
Sector Manager: 
Guang Zhe Chen 
 
Comments:  
