Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3697 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P108443 
Project Name: BR-SP Sustainable Rural Development 
Task Team Leader: Laurent Debroux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (5%);Agro-industry (5%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural markets (S);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
52.00
52.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to help increase the competitiveness of family agriculture 
in priority areas of the SoSP while improving its environmental sustainability.  
 
This would be achieved by assisting small-scale farmers to:  
 
-increase the productivity of their land and labor, and improve the quality of their products 
through enhanced production techniques;  
 
-engage more actively in supply/value chains, where there is a comparative advantage, by 
undertaking basic processing and marketing techniques and/or strengthening partnerships with 
larger private operators in these areas;  
 
-strengthen the organizational and managerial capacity of producers associations, as well as 
promote the emergence of new associations/cooperatives;  
 
-mainstream improved land and water management practices tested under the previous 
operations for more competitive production systems.  
Page  2
Ultimately, the project would aim to increase sales volumes (unit value x quantity) and incomes 
for participating small producers’ associations.  
 
The project would also improve the public physical and institutional infrastructures to the 
extent needed to support the project development objective (i.e., policy framework and economic 
monitoring, extension services, environmental management, and rural roads).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan of US$78 million over a five-
year period. The total project cost is estimated to be US$130 million, including US$52 million of 
counterpart funding from the SoSP.  
 
Component 1: Supporting Small Farmers’ Business Initiatives. This component would provide 
support to small farmers’ business initiatives through the following sub-components:  
 
(1.1) Implementing Small Business Investments. This sub-component would finance selected 
business initiatives, submitted by producers’ associations, aimed at increasing their 
competitiveness for products with demonstrated market viability. Direct beneficiaries and 
contractual partners of the project would be small producers associations based on geography or 
products (cooperatives, micro-catchment committees, other forms of associations).  Criteria of 
eligibility would be used to signal the focus on competitiveness and environmental sustainability. 
Eligible proposals would have to demonstrate market viability, and preference would be given to 
initiatives using improved land management techniques (restoring soil fertility, reducing 
pollution).  The project would assist potential beneficiaries to develop their business initiatives 
(see sub-component 1.2). The selection would be done through a transparent and technical 
process involving representatives of SAA/CATI, SMA, agri-business practitioners, academics, 
and municipalities. The project would continue to provide technical assistance to beneficiaries 
(governance and organizational issues, financial management, technical, etc.) during the 
implementation phase, and it would carry out evaluations to monitor progress and performance.  
 
Examples of activities that would receive support include: improved production techniques (e.g. 
use of plastic greenhouses in horticulture); standardization, storage, and marketing of products 
(e.g. milk and butter); strengthening supply agreements with agri-businesses (poultry, pork 
production); branding/marketing and processing of local products (e.g. acerola); certification of 
quality (e.g. green label for fruits and vegetables); agricultural and non-agricultural 
diversification (e.g. fish-farming, rural tourism, handicraft); support for the formation of new 
associations (aimed at joint purchasing, sharing of equipment, and/or joint commercialization). 
This sub-component would also include a window dedicated to supporting business initiatives 
developed by women and youth enterprises, indigenous communities, and other vulnerable 
groups. It would also help improve living conditions (sanitation, housing) of extremely poor 
families as a starting point for them to gradually engage in competitive agriculture.  
 
This sub-component would disburse through the existing State Agri-business Expansion Fund 
(a legal entity under the Secretary of Agriculture following national procedures) or through the 
Page  3
more common project-based disbursement system following Bank procedures. Financial support 
from the project would be distributed as grants.  
 
(1.2) Strengthening Producers’ Associations. This sub-component would help strengthen the 
capacity of producers’ associations with regards to organizational management and marketing. In 
particular, it would assist interested associations in the preparation of business proposals for 
funding under sub-component 1.1 (i.e. identify business opportunities, carry out feasibility 
assessments and financial and technical analysis, assist in negotiations with partners, etc.). It 
would also finance broader information and training programs on agricultural competitiveness in 
targeted municipalities and micro-catchments across the State in order to stimulate the 
emergence of business ideas from potential beneficiaries. Furthermore, through the exchange of 
information, the project would assist small farmers to identify more profitable opportunities in 
specific productive chains and/or end-markets. It would help small producers identify their 
comparative advantages on specific products and market niches. This training and assistance 
would be delivered by CATI (the state’s rural extension agency) or by other qualifiedservice 
providers contracted by the project.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Institutional and Physical Infrastructure. This component would 
support a set of public functions and investments that are critical to increasing the 
competitiveness and sustainability of small farming.  
 
(2.1) Policy Frameworks and Market Monitoring. This sub-component would help mainstream 
competitive small-scale agriculture within the policy, regulatory, and planning frameworks at 
state and municipal levels. Specifically, the sub-component would finance studies and 
workshops to improve regulation and incentives systems (i.e. quality certification and labeling 
systems). It would also carry out studies and assessments relevant to state-level agricultural 
competitiveness (i.e. analysis of specific supply-chains, market studies) and set up an online agri-
business information center. This sub-component would help identify opportunities in productive 
chains and end-markets, and adjust the project strategy on a regular basis.  
 
(2.2) Technical Assistance Services. This sub-component would strengthen the capacity of 
CATI to advise small farmers on production technologies, marketing, management, association 
planning, and in other areas critical to competitiveness. This sub-component would also support 
an institutional assessment of CATI’s professional capacity, and advise on staffing strategy. It 
would also support applied research in partnership with local research centers.  
 
(2.3) Environmental Management. This sub-component would support the implementation the 
State’s environmental licensing system, as well as a series of planning, awareness-raising, and 
oversight activities aimed at preserving or restoring soils, water, and forests in areas of high 
environmental degradation. It would also help pilot innovative mechanisms aimed at rewarding 
small farmers for off-site environmental benefits (e.g. quality of water, storage of carbon) 
resulting from better agricultural practices, hence making environmental services a new source 
of income for small farmers.  This sub-component would help define measurement and 
monitoring methodologies, and set up financial and legal/contractual instruments.  
 
Page  4
(2.4) Roads and other Rural Infrastructure. This sub-component would aim to facilitate small 
farmers’ access to markets. It would do so through financing the rehabilitation and maintenance 
of unpaved rural roads in priority municipalities, as identified in regional roads management 
plans.  It would also finance other rural investments identified in municipal or regional 
development plans that complement those investments undertaken by small farmers.  
 
Component 3: Project Management. This component would finance the institutional structures, 
equipment, and personnel required to manage the project activities. It would support the 
executive, deliberative, and consultative functions involved in project implementation at the 
central and municipal levels, including workshops and other events for coordination and 
dissemination. It would ensure the fiduciary functions (procurement, accounting, financial 
management), as well as the technical planning and monitoring and evaluation of the project, 
including the implementation of the social and environmental safeguards instruments.  It would 
disseminate project results and implement a pro-active communication strategy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project activities would be concentrated in 550 municipalities of SoSP (out of a total 645) and 
would target an estimated 1,500 microcatchments covering approximately 4.5 million hectares 
(or 18% of total state area). The SoSP comprises two of the four Brazilian bio-geographical 
biomes: the Atlantic Forest, which originally covered about 81% of the state area, and the 
Cerrado Savannahs, which originally encompassed about 14% of the state area.  
 
The target population consists of an estimated 108,000 small farming families, primarily 
congregated in the western part of the SoSP.  The project would reach these families through 
their own producers’ associations. It would also benefit public institutions such as CATI,  SMA,  
and municipalities to the extent that is needed to support the overall objective of sustainable 
competitiveness.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is relatively goodat the state level, 
but tends to be uneven and mostly weak at the municipal level. The State Secretariat of 
Agriculture and Supply (SAA) would manage the project at the central level. Implementation 
responsibilities would be carried out through CATI, where the Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU) would be located, and the SMA would act as co-manager and provide support where 
appropriate. These institutional arrangements have substantial experience in working with 
safeguard policies through their implementation of the SÃ£o Paul Land Management Project 
(SPLM Project) and the ongoing Ecosystem Restoration of Riparian Forests GEF Project (GEF 
Project). To strengthen safeguard capacity at the municipal level, specific capacity-building 
activities would be carried out, especially with respect to working with indigenous populations 
since there is little experience in working with these populations. In addition, a cooperation 
agreement would be signed with the national Indian agency (FUNAI), and collaborative linkages 
would be sought with other state, federal, and non-governmental organizations already working 
with indigenous peoples in the SoSP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Based on the assessment of potential impacts, a Category B designation is proposed for the 
project. Despite the largely positive or neutral project impacts anticipated, some small-scale 
investments supported under Component 1 could potentially have adverse environmental 
impacts. Those small-scale investments relate to: (i) the adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices (i.e., product diversification, conservation agriculture, promotion of value added 
products, and product certification); (ii) the adoption of non-agricultural activities (i.e., eco-
tourism and traditional crafts); (iii) the rehabilitation of tertiary rural roads; and (iv) 
improvements to community infrastructure (i.e., water and sanitation and telecommunication) 
and housing conditions. In any case, environmental impacts are expected to be localized and 
preventable through responsive mitigation measures. Environmental screening and evaluation 
procedures, as well as proposed mitigation measures, would be built into the management of the 
financial mechanism to be adopted under Component 1.  
 
Given that the exact location and nature of potential small investments to be financed under 
Component 1 has not yet been determined (these would be decided on a demand-driven basis 
through a process of formulating local plans under Component 2), specific environmental 
impacts cannot be ascertained at this time. Therefore, an Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) would be prepared as part of the Environmental Assessment (EA) during 
project preparation. These processes would ensure conformity with Bank safeguard policies, as 
small investments would be subject to an adequate EA process to avoid adverse impacts on the 
local environment, and appropriate mitigation measures would also be included in their designs.  
Approval by the Bank of the draft EA and EMF would be a condition for appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project would not support or lead to the conversion of natural habitats. In fact, it would 
help rehabilitate, restore, and protect degraded riparian forests which are important to preserve 
local biodiversity and the quality of water resources. Riparian areas and vegetation, including 
forests, are legally protected under Brazilian legislation (Federal Law 4771/65) as areas under 
permanent conservation. The project would also promote more sustainable agriculture and land 
management practices, including the rehabilitation of degraded soils and more rational use of 
natural resources. Despite the positive impacts foreseen through the implementation of these 
activities, the EMF would include clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural 
habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project overlap with those of OP 4.04. The project 
would support activities that generate positive environmental impacts by promoting the 
rehabilitation and conservation of degraded native riparian forests, as well as by contributing to 
the restoration and maintenance of ecological functions in those areas. The project would also 
test models of sustainable, non-timber use of such areas in small rural properties. Importantly, 
this would be carried out in accordance with addendum 2166-67 to Federal Law 4771/65, which 
allows for sustainable agro-forestry activities in small rural properties as long as they do not 
change the overall character of the forest cover and do not alter ecosystem functions in the area. 
Despite the positive impacts 
foreseen through the implementation of these activities, the EMF 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
would include clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on native forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project would not finance the procurement of any pesticides or other chemical 
amendments that would trigger the OP 4.09. Nevertheless, small amounts of pesticides would 
probably continue to be used by a small portion of farmers in targeted microcatchments for 
which disposal containers may be requested by communities to reduce health and environmental 
risks associated with pesticide use. The project would encourage and support TA for the 
adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically, and environmentally-sustainable 
Integrated Pest and Plant Management (IPPM). This approach would be designed to increase 
farm productivity (yields) while simultaneously reducing input costs and human health risk, as 
well as adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of pesticide use. The 
IPPM approach would further improve the sustainability of agro-ecosystems by focusing on 
improving the knowledge and skills of farmers to better enable the management of resources. 
Notwithstanding this approach, the EMF would include a section on pest management following 
the guidance of OP 4.09 for the safe handling, storage, use, and disposal of pesticides, as well as 
guidelines for IPPM.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is not expected that project implementation would have any negative impact on physical 
cult
ural resources. However, “chance findings” during implementation activities could be 
possible, and to handle such findings, Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative 
framework, which is under the oversight of the National Institute for Protection of Historical and 
Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Additionally, the SAA and the SMA have proven experience and 
appropriate procedures to recover “chance findings” in line with these procedures and rules, 
whichwould be in all bidding documents and contracts for civil works.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The client has decided to specifically target and include indigenous peoples in the proposed 
operation even though CATI has had minimal experience in working with indigenous peoples in 
the past. As a result, this project would build on the relative success and lessons learned in a 
similar Bank-financed operation in Santa Catarina (the Natural Resources Management and 
Poverty Reduction Project, P043869) where the agricultural extension agency also targeted 
indigenous peoples. The total indigenous peoples population in the SoSP is estimated to be 
approximately 5,000, which includes the following ethnicities: Guaranni Kaiowa, Guarani 
M’Bya, Guarani Nhandeva, Kaingang, Krenak, Pankararu, and Terena. To comply withOP 4.10, 
a
screening was carried out by the client, and the drafting of a Social Assessment and an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) are well underway. Upon its completion, the 
IPPF would incorporate the findings of the indigenous peoples to demonstrate that potential 
indigenous participants were engaged by project authorities in a process of free, prior, and 
informed consultation during preparation, and would further document their broad support of the 
economic, environmental, social, and training activities proposed under the operation. The Social 
Assessment and the IPPF would be expected to be completed by October 2008, and their 
approval would be a condition for appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While it is highly unlikely that the project would cause physical resettlement or nonphysical 
displacement, subcomponent 1.1 includes financing for the rehabilitation of tertiary rural roads 
and TA to develop municipal road management plans. Regarding the implementation o
f
any 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
roads maintenance works, the client has issued its preference to do so only where there is the full 
agreement of all potentially affected parties. Nonetheless, some potential right-of-way issues 
may arise, so the client has agreed to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
approval of the RPF would be a condition for appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/06/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Start: September 2008 
 
Conclusion: November 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Debroux 
10/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
10/06/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
