Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3553 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P108654 
Project Name: BR Pernambuco Sustainable Water 
Task Team Leader: Marcos T. Abicalil 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (40%);Sewerage (40%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Water resource management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
127.00
127.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to improve water resources management and 
water supply and wastewater service delivery in the State of Pernambuco. It will also support a 
move towards a long term, innovative approach to sector wide efficiency and financial 
improvements. This will be achieved through: (i) improvements to the institutional, regulatory 
and operational framework of the sector, (ii) improvements in COMPESA’s operational 
efficiency and improved reliability in water service delivery and (iii) improving access to WSS 
services to those not yet connected.  
 
The expected specific results of the project are: (a) an improved and integrated WRM/WSS 
policy, (b) reduced water losses in the RMR, (c) increased wastewater collection and treatment in 
selected municipalities, and (d) tested management models for sustainable WSS delivery in rural 
areas and small towns.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would be supported by a Sector Investment Loan (SIL). While the institutional and 
policy objectives will pertain to the state as a whole, Bank-financed investments will be targeted 
to the geographical area of the RMR and selected municipalities of the Capibaribe river basin.  
Page  2
The proposed project comprises four components as follows:  
 
1.
Water Resources Management 
–
to consolidate and improve water resource management 
and policy through institutional strengthening and improved planning, regulation and financing 
instruments and implementation of studies on priority river basins.  
 
2.
Water Supply Efficiency – to increase the operational, commercial and economic 
efficiency of WSS service provision, focusing on physical and non-physical water loss reduction 
in the RMR, and introduction of results-based disbursements by financing performance outputs 
rather than inputs (works).  
 
3.
Expansion of Water Supply and Sewerage Services – wastewater collection and treatment 
in selected urban areas of municipalities in the Capibaribe River basin, and increase water supply 
in the RMR.  
 
4.
Rural/Small Towns Water Supply and Sanitation – to develop a state policy, appropriate 
service models, and financing mechanisms for sustainable rural and small towns WSS, through 
studies and implementation of demonstration projects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
State of Pernambuco, Brazil. Components 1 and 4 will cover the whole state, while Components 
2
and 3 will focus on the Recife Metropolitan Region and on the Capibaribe River Basin.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The state has an adequate capacity to implement safeguards policies, as proven by the 
satisfactory implementing of safeguards policies in other Bank financed projects, such as 
Prometropole, within SEPLAG/State Secretariat of Planning and Management, and Proagua, 
within SRH/State Secretariat of Water Resources.  
 
Thus, it is expected that the Borrower builds upon any existing instruments to address 
safeguards policies under this operation and also consider further institutional strengthening, 
which will be assessed and detailed during project preparation activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Soraya Simao Melgaco (LCSSD) 
Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to have a very positive environmental impact overall, by (i) 
consolidating and improving water resources management in the state; (ii) connecting people to 
sewage collection and treatment systems in the selected municipalities in the Capibaribe River 
Basin, thereby protecting water sources of supply to Metropolitan and Agreste Regions, (iii) 
increasing the efficiency of the water supply services in the Metropolitan Region, by reducing 
water losses. Local construction impacts will be controlled through detailed environmental 
guidelines that will be incorporated into bidding documents. An Environmental Assessment will 
be undertaken during the project preparation to identify the potential impacts associated with the 
types of activities envisioned under this project and which appropriate mitigation measures 
should be implemented to offset those impacts. That Environmental Assessment will (a) review 
the institutional and legal context of the water sector in regard to environmental assessment; (b) 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental analysis of water supply and sanitation; and, (c) an environmental assessment of 
selected investments which will be financed by this Project.  
 
Consistent with ongoing practice in Bank-supported operations in Brazil and in the State of 
Pernambuco, financing of investment will be subject to the environmental and social screening, 
assessment, monitoring and supervision procedures utilizing a series of frameworks which will 
be set forth in the Project PAD and made public in Brazil, Pernambuco and in the Bank Infoshop 
and which will include: (a) environmental and social screening of activities; (b) definition of 
required environmental work; (c) development of guidelines for good environmental and social 
practices; (d) implementation of required environmental work; and (e) project monitoring.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Impacts on physical cultural resources from specific investments supported by the proposed 
project will be identified as part of the EA process and any adverse impacts identified will be 
addressed through mitigation measures to be included in the EMP. The project will entail 
construction and excavation to expand and replace infrastructure, therefore the State will include 
screening for any known cultural property in the project area and incorporate "chance find" 
procedures in the event that culturally significant resources are discovered.  
 
Furthermore Brazil has a well developed Physical Cultural Reources legal and institutional 
framework, based on the Decree of Law #25 of November 30, 1937, which created IPHAN, the 
National Institute of Cultural Inheritage, and on other legislation on urban, architectural, cultural, 
artisitic, archeological and imaterial inheritage.  
 
The State of Pernambuco also has institutional and legal framework to protect cultural 
resources, under the responsibility of FUNDARPE, the State Foundation for Protection of 
Artistic and Cultural Inheritage, under the State Law # 7970 of September 18, 1979.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will need to be prepared prior to appraisal in order to 
provide the overall approach and strategy for displaced groups in multiple works. In addition, 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) should be developed for any investments identified for project 
financing during project preparation.  
 
The basic infrastructure services financed by the project are focused on the improvement of 
the water system and the expansion and connection of existing households to sewerage networks. 
These investments are not expected to cause physical displacement of people. However, in the 
event that activities undertaken in the project lead to a need for resettlement, it should be noted 
that the GoPE developed a procedure for involuntary resettlement for the Prometropole Project, 
and is also implementing state component of the federal Proagua Project, which has been 
deemed satisfactory to the Bank. This framework will apply under the Sustainable Water Project. 
In the event that a need for involuntary resettlement is identified, the GoPE will follow these 
principles, entitlements and eligibility criteria, arrangements for monitoring and evaluation, and 
framework for participation. Eventual resettlement plans will be submitted to the Bank for 
review and approval prior to the Bank providing the no-objection for the works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The project will implement the expansion and improvement of the formal water supply 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
distribution networks within the Recife Metropolitan Region. However the proposed system 
expansions will not need to increase water production from the existing systems, which draw on 
water from a network of existing dams and which mixes these different sources within the RMR 
water distribution system.  
 
The reservoir dams do not have any major operational or maintenance problems during their 
respective lifetimes. COMPESA, the State Water Company is responsible for the O&M of the 
dams.  
 
Nonetheless, the environmental assessment checklist will include this issue, and relevant 
Bank policies would be applied to any investment identified during the preparation which might 
trigger this policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/30/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
SAT believes that the project is likely to warrant a category A environmental classification 
based on the information provided in the PCN Package. SAT therefore request a meeting 
with the task team before QER, once major specific investments have being identified, in 
order to reach agreement on the appropriate environmental classification.  
 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
An Environmental Assessment will be undertaken during the project preparation to identify 
the potential impacts associated with the types of activities envisioned under this project and 
which appropriate mitigation measures should be implemented to offset those impacts.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcos T. Abicalil 
05/15/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
05/14/2008 
Comments:   
