Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2008 
Report No.:  AC3115
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P094233 
Project Name:  Espirito Santo  Biodiversity and Watershed Conservation and Restoration 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gunars H. Platais 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.69 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
2.53 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
2.78
8.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to support the adoption of sustainable land use 
practices in two key Atlantic Forest watersheds in Espirito Santo, thereby contributing to 
higher income for farmers and improved water supplies.  This objective will be met 
through an increase in area under sustainable land use practices which will be 
accomplished in part through the establishment and implementation of payment 
mechanisms for watershed conservation; and an increase in areas that adopt Sustainable 
Land Management (SLM) practices through the implementation of Payment for 
Environmental Services mechanisms and the participation and capacity building of local 
actors.  
 
The primary target groups are the farmers in the watersheds, IEMA, CESAN, and other 
government agencies to be strengthened, and the Watershed Committee.  The entire 
population and industries of Vitorias metropolitan area dependent on reliable water 
supplies would also benefit, complementing the activities of the Aguas Limpas Project  
Page  2
The global objective is to reduce threats to globally important biodiversity (for example, 
the endangered Muriqui monkey) from agricultural production systems and increase 
habitat for species in two key rainforest watersheds of the Atlantic Forest.  These 
objectives can be met through the restoration and/or protection from encroachment of 
areas of critical habitat and through the implementation of sustainable market-based 
mechanisms to finance Protected Areas (PA) management and conservation of 
biodiversity in agricultural landscapes.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1. Strengthening the policy and regulatory framework in the watershed: 
Improving biodiversity conservation and watershed conservation in the Jucu and Santa 
Maria de Jetiba watersheds requires strengthening the participatory institutions 
responsible for planning and implementing NRM strategies in the watersheds, including 
technical agencies capable of monitoring conditions and developing responses to 
problems and governance mechanisms that bring stakeholders together in participatory 
ways to agree on appropriate responses.  
 
Component 2. Targeted biodiversity protection and Protected Area management: This 
component will undertake targeted intervention to restore and enhance the protection of 
critical areas for biodiversity conservation, and support the PAs in the watersheds, 
including the elaboration of management plans, and assisting land owners in the creation 
of private nature reserves.  
 
Component 3. Integrating biodiversity in production landscapes: Sustainable 
management of landscape mosaics requires a two-pronged approach: (a) measures to 
remove obstacles to the adoption of land use practices that would be beneficial both to 
farmers and the environment, such as lack of knowledge or non-availability of inputs; this 
sub-component will seek to remove these barriers; and (b) measures to induce the 
adoption of practices that generate positive externalities, particularly in biodiversity 
conservation and water services protection, but are unattractive to individual land users; 
this sub-component will seek to address these tradeoffs by fostering a range of markets 
for biodiversity goods and services, and in particular by developing payment for 
environmental services (PES) mechanisms in collaboration with water users (such as 
CESAN and small HEPs), mechanisms that will also contribute to PA support.  
 
Component 4. Monitoring and Evaluation: The project will establish monitoring and 
evaluation mechanisms at two distinct levels: a) a project-level Monitoring and 
Evaluation Framework for the activities covered in the project which will track progress 
in implementation, measure intermediate outcomes, and evaluate project impacts; and b) 
a
regional-level Information System covering the two basins intervened by the project 
and which will support the creation of an environmental information system that will 
allow for the tracking of key variables across various institutions. A communication and 
dissemination strategy will also be developed and implemented under this component.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project focuses on two critical, high-biodiversity watersheds in south-central Espirito 
Santo: the watersheds of the Jucu and the Santa Maria da Vitoria Rivers, comprising 
401,000 ha, or 9 percent of the State’s territory.  Of particular interest are the 
mountainous upper parts of the two catchments, which were settled more than a century 
ago by European immigrants and are still primarily held by smallholder agricultural 
families.  Farming consists of corn, beans, tubers, horticulture, coffee, bananas, fruit 
trees, planted forest, cattle, and poultry.  Farming has led to a reduction of forest cover 
and fragmentation, encroachment of steep slopes and protected riparian forest, soil 
erosion, water pollution, silting of rivers, and pasture degradation.  In recent decades, 
agricultural use of steeper hillsides has decreased, allowing the gradual recovery of many 
areas (secondary forests). Still, habitat loss and degradation from farming remain 
significant threats to biodiversity and to the ecological functions of this ecosystem.  
Riparian corridors are particularly threatened due to their higher suitability for irrigation 
and their greater accessibility.  
 
These two watersheds are unique in the State, and in the Atlantic Forest biome, because 
they retain more than 40 percent of their original forest cover and represent more than a 
third of the remaining rainforests in the State. The degree of forest cover is even higher in 
the upper parts of the watersheds, where smallholder agriculture prevails.  The 
watersheds include four public Protected Areas (PAs) (a state park, a biological reserve, 
and two less strictly protected Areas of Environmental Conservation [APAs]). Despite 
human pressure, the area still harbors extremely high levels of biodiversity across all 
categories, and has been identified as containing priority areas for biodiversity 
conservation within the Central Ecological Corridor of the Atlantic Forest.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
With its planned interventions, the project touches on several safeguards, as listed above.  
The project intends to primarily support the recovery of major environmental functions of 
the forests, that of maintaining its inherent biodiversity, soil conservation, and 
hydrological and climate regulation.  The project area has been impacted by more than a 
century of traditional human use.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will ensure that any tree planting will be with native species appropriate to 
the locale, and will avoid the use of pesticide- and herbicide-intensive techniques.  The 
project will support an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach, and pesticide use 
will neither be stimulated nor increased under any new farming model; rather it will be 
reduced.  It is, however, possible that in some cases, even if temporarily, the use of some 
products of low toxicity and low residual staying power could be used during the first 
year in which forest species are being introduced.  When these circumstances present 
themselves, the guidelines presented in the Project Operations Manual will be strictly 
followed.  The project does not need a specific chapter on pest management because 
there are no known issues, and no significant quantities of pesticides are expected to be 
procured.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment was prepared and made public through the Environmental 
Agencies website (http://www.iema.es.gov.br/). The implementing agency is the State 
Environmental Agency (IEMA) who is fully capable of addressing safeguard policy 
issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key public sector stakeholders of the project are the State Secretariat for 
Environment (SEAMA); its executing agency and project implementing agency the State 
Institute for Environment and Water Resources (IEMA); the State Secretariat of Planning 
and Development (SEDES); the State Secretariat for Agriculture (SEAG) and its 
extension and research arm INCAPER, the State water utility, CESAN; and the State 
Finance Secretariat.  
 
Page  5
The key Civil Society Organizations (CSO) are the watershed management committees 
from both watersheds and the environmental and agricultural offices of the municipalities 
within the watersheds.  
 
There are a few non-governmental organizations (NGO) that are active in the field and 
have participated in project preparation and will continue to be tapped for project 
implementation.  
 
Through the watershed committees and the NGOs a wide consultative process has been 
put in place with ample discussions of the project having taken place. Feedback from 
these meetings are reflected in project design.  
 
These meetings have corroborated that people potentially affected by the project would 
be in a positive way and therefore there are no concerns about negative impacts on 
livelihoods through activities supported by the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
05/01/2008 
Comments:   
