Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/13/2009 
Report No.:  49478
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P091827 
Project Name:  Sustainable Cerrado Initiative 
Task Team Leader:  Garo J. Batmanian 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (29%);Environmental policies and institutions (29%);Land 
administration and management (28%);Other environment and natural resources 
management (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
29.69
29.69 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Program development objective is to promote the 
increase of biodiversity conservation and improve the environmental and natural resource 
management of the Cerrado biome through support for appropriate policies and practices. 
The Sustainable Cerrado Initiative aims to achieve two specific goals:  
 
-
Action Plan of the National Program for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of the 
Cerrado Biome and, at least two public policies  are adopted by state or federal agencies 
and contributing to biodiversity conservation in over 20% of the Cerrado biome; and  
 
-
Biodiversity conservation increased in four priority regions  of the Cerrado.  
 
The GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative will help strengthen the sustainability of the 
protected areas systems (SP1) and bolster the integration of biodiversity conservation into 
production systems (SP2) as expressed by the increase in:  
 
-
Brazil's concrete improvement in the effective management of its protected area 
systems;  
 
-
The percentage of supported protected areas effectively preserved;  
Page  2
-
The number of pilot activities reported and verified that apply incentive measures and 
instruments;  
 
-
The number of sector policies and plans that include measures which promote 
sustainable use or conservation of biodiversity; and,   
 
-
Production systems that contribute to conservation or sustainable use of biodiversity.  
 
Each of the two phases of the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative will have its own set of 
targets for the same indicators and will contribute to the same goals presented above.   
 
3. Project Description 
The rationale of the GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative design is to balance two sets of 
actions: (i) to get the policy framework and coordination in place, thereby helping to 
guide future investments from both public and private sectors towards a more sustainable 
use of the agricultural landscape; and, (ii) to facilitate the implementation of immediate 
actions that will decrease or halt the loss of biodiversity through support to protected 
areas and the sustainable management of the productive landscape. The four projects 
under the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Program target results which combined will 
fulfill the overall goal of the Program.  
 
Each individual project contributes significantly to the targets, and the entire set of 
projects should achieve the overall goals set forth for the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative 
Program. This Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Program has four components that closely 
follow the key thematic and cross-cutting activities proposed under the National Cerrado 
Program and are consistent with GEF Strategic Objectives.  
 
Component 1: Conservation of the Cerrado Biodiversity aims at increasing biodiversity 
conservation in the Cerrado region by strengthening the mosaic of legally protected areas 
(PAs) of unique biodiversity. This component has the following result indicators:  
 
-
An additional 2.0 million hectares of the Cerrado biome protected through the 
creation/expansion of Protected Areas (PAs).  
 
-
30%
of
the Cerrado PAs targeted by the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative with their basic 
protection measures in place.  
 
Component 2: Sustainable Use of the Cerrado's Natural Resources aims at promoting 
the management of the rural productive landscape including the adoption of sustainable 
agricultural practices by medium and large farmers and the sustainable use of native 
species by small farmers and local communities, so as to improve the use of available 
resources and biodiversity conservation while reducing environmental impacts. This 
component has the following result indicators:  
 
-
Twelve initiatives of traditional know-how and current best practices for the 
sustainable management of the Cerrado's natural resources documented and 
disseminated. The focus will be on practices that significantly contribute to conserving 
key biodiversity and their habitats.  
 
-
An increase of 10% of rural properties  in project-supported areas regularly using some 
form of natural resource, land or agricultural management or biodiversity conservation 
practice, and/or "sustainable management" production  (e.g., protection of the riparian 
forests, managing fires, location of the Legal Reserve, management of species).  
 
-
Fifteen initiatives for adding value and improving the commercialization of native 
products originating from sustainably managed production developed. These initiatives 
Page  3
will be carried out directly by the local communities or will have their strong 
involvement in order to ensure adequate access and benefit sharing, in accordance with 
the Bonn Guidelines.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Public Policies aims at formulating new 
public policies for the conservation and sustainable use of the Cerrado, and strengthening 
government agencies to manage natural resources.  It also intends to enable the private 
sector, civil society organizations and local communities to actively participate in 
environmental management and formulation of new public policies related to the 
conservation and sustainable use of the Cerrado's natural resources. This component has 
the following result indicators:  
 
-
Formulation of Action Plan of the National Program for the Conservation and 
Sustainable Use of the Cerrado Biome concluded, publicly launched and under 
implementation.  
 
-
Four new public policies (state or federal), related to the conservation and sustainable 
use of the Cerrado's natural resources developed.  
 
-
Geo-referenced systems for environmental monitoring, licensing of rural properties, 
and enforcement, developed at federal and state levels.  
 
-
Six selected institutions working on matters related to the use of natural resources 
strengthened through staff training in specific environmental management processes and 
associated tools.  
 
-
Three civil society networks and/or organizations  strengthened to keep their affiliates 
informed about public policies and to communicate and represent civil society's opinions 
and aspirations in the national arena.  
 
Component 4: Coordination and Monitoring of the Biome aims at ensuring the effective 
and efficient implementation of this GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Program. It also 
intends to support the implementation of a publicly accessible database containing 
current geo-referenced, social and environmental information on the Cerrado biome. This 
component has the following result indicators:  
 
-
All the projects of the GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative being coordinated, 
monitored, and annually evaluated, with the results fully publicized.  
 
-
Information on biodiversity, vegetation cover, and land use of the Cerrado biome 
updated periodically and made freely available.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The overall Initiative will contribute to the conservation of the Cerrado biome.  The 
biome covers some areas of the States of Maranhão, Piauí, Bahia, Tocantins, Goiás, 
Minas Gerais, São Paulo, Paraná, Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul, and the Federal 
District. The subprojects will implement activities in some of these states and the MMA 
will monitor the Cerrado cover of the overall biome.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss (LCSSO) 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The analysis based on the components of the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative and the 
typical social and environmental situation in the Cerrado, and later confirmed by the 
specific components of the projects, indicates that several safeguard policies could be 
triggered by each project. The list below indicates those safeguards triggered for the 
entire Sustainable Cerrado Initiative (i.e., whole set of projects).  
 
Separate environmental assessments were prepared for each project. The Goiás and 
Tocantins projects build on the full Environmental Assessment prepared for the IBRD 
loans which will collaborate with the respective state projects. The MMA and ICMBio 
projects build on the several Bank-implemented GEF projects which have been 
successfully executed by MMA and IBAMA, most notably ARPA.  
 
Environmental Analysis. The draft EA and EMP were submitted to the Bank on May 8, 
2007. The final EA/EMP report was disseminated in Brazil through the MMA website 
(http://www.mma.gov.br), and contains a more detailed description of possible positive 
and negative environmental impacts of Sustainable Cerrado Initiative-supported 
activities, as well as a framework of identified preventive/corrective measures as a 
guideline for project EAs and EMPs. The document was also sent to the representatives 
of government and non-governmental organizations and civil society, who participated in 
the consultations during preparation of the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative, and addressed 
all comments received.  
 
Overall Environmental Assessment. The Sustainable Cerrado Initiative is notably a 
conservation project, and has been classified by the World Bank as a Category B 
proposal. The rationale of the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative is to achieve positive 
environmental outcomes on a biome-wide basis though direct measures - the 
establishment and consolidation of protected areas and the identification and facilitation 
of sustainable use strategies - and indirectly through engaging productive sector 
stakeholders whose activities as currently undertaken may result in biodiversity loss, 
Page  5
through mainstreaming biodiversity conservation and sustainable use concerns into 
productive landscape policy and planning issues in the Cerrado.  
 
Given the framework character of the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative and the fact that 
activities will be undertaken by means of projects, the necessary environmental analysis 
should be built into the procedures for developing each project proposal according to the 
Sustainable Cerrado Initiative EA framework and its subsequent review by the 
Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Committee and the MMA, and according to the World 
Bank environmental safeguard policies.  
 
Direct, positive environmental impacts stemming from the Sustainable Cerrado 
Initiative implementation will likely include: (i) reduction of the rate of biodiversity loss; 
(ii) support for the development/testing and dissemination of sustainable use practices, 
resulting in decreased soil erosion, riparian forest recovery, and conservation of 
biodiversity; (iii) diversification of agricultural production favoring native species to 
substitute monocultures; (iv) creation and strengthening of protected areas to ensure 
effective environmental conservation; (v) the creation of mosaics of natural habitats 
through strategic distribution of Sustainable Cerrado Initiative actions and recuperation of 
natural habitats; (vi) development and implementation of public policies directed at the 
Cerrado conservation and sustainable use, promoting the engagement of the productive 
sector; and, (vii) improved capacity of government institutions and civil society to 
participate in decision-making and implement public policies that support the sustainable 
use and conservation of the Cerrado, fostering better management and control of the 
threats that lead to the degradation of the region's biodiversity and resources.  
 
Environmental Management Plan. The Sustainable Cerrado Initiative is a framework for 
the facilitation and coordination of actions to establish and consolidate protected areas, 
promote the conservation and sustainable use of the biodiversity of the Cerrado, develop 
public policy, build the capacity of stakeholders and collect and disseminate relevant 
socio-environmental data.  
 
The keys to identifying, preventing or mitigating adverse environmental impacts and 
enhancing positive impacts are to be found, firstly, at the level of the procedures for 
development, approval, implementation and monitoring of the projects and, secondly, in 
the procedures to be adopted for coordinating, monitoring and evaluating the projects. 
The Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Program lists obligatory "qualifying" criteria and 
additional preferential criteria for assessing project proposals (see Annex 17), and the 
EMP lists additional criteria for assessing project proposals. The Sustainable Cerrado 
Initiative will not fund any activity that may lead to significant environmental impact, 
such as clear-cutting of forests or unsustainable exploitation of natural resources.  
 
Natural Habitats. Activities under some Sustainable Cerrado Initiative components 
should lead to positive impacts on natural habitats, such as their conservation and 
recuperation. Nevertheless, OP 4.04 is triggered and therefore all projects' planning 
activities that may affect natural habitats must follow World Bank policies, identifying 
monitoring and management activities to prevent or mitigate any possible negative 
impact. Local and national legislation concerning natural habitats must be followed and 
habitat recuperation and sustainable use activities should give priority to the use of 
appropriate combinations of native species.  
Page  6
Pest Management. The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be indicated in each 
project, as well as the measures for Integrated Pest Management (IPM) to be adopted. 
When the use of pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis of potential negative 
impacts resulting from the use of these chemicals and the risks associated with the 
inappropriate handling or storing of their containers should be conducted. The projects 
should also include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance with Law No. 7802/89 
and OP4.09.  
 
The Operating Manual determines that for all projects provisions should be made for the 
appropriate handling and storing and, the use of these substances, whenever needed, 
should be limited to low toxicity products according to Class IV of Decree 98816/90, 
which correspond to Class "U" products in the World Health Organization's 
classification. Or, if appropriate Class "U" products are not available, the PCU may 
authorize the use of WHO Class III products.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources. Under Brazilian legislation provisions for the protection of 
cultural property are part of the environmental licensing procedures. The National 
Institute for Historical and Cultural Heritage (IPHAN) is the Brazilian institution 
responsible for handling archeological and cultural property issues. Whenever "chance 
findings" occur it is mandatory, under federal and state law, for Brazilian government 
agencies to seek IPHAN's support to address "chance finding" issues. At the Sustainable 
Cerrado Initiative's appraisal, only the Goiás Sustainable Cerrado Project triggered this 
safeguard due to the proposed works of the Goiás Highway Management Program, to 
which it contributes. However, these chance finding procedures are included in the DER-
GO Environmental Management System and the Program also has a Cultural Property 
Framework to deal with these issues.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement. The creation of new and the consolidation of existing 
protected areas will be consistent with (i) the Brazilian legislation on protected areas 
(SNUC - Law 9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and Decree 5758/06); (ii) the CBD Work 
Programme on Protected Areas; (iii) the list of priority areas for conservation, sustainable 
use and benefit-sharing in the Cerrado biome, as approved by CONABIO in December 
2006 and amended by MMA Administrative Ruling n. 9 of January 23, 2007; and, (iv) 
the principle of avoiding the need for resettlement as a result of the creation of protected 
areas as successfully adopted in other Bank- implemented GEF projects in Brazil (i.e., 
ARPA). Under this principle, if local communities exist in areas identified as important 
for the establishment of protected areas, those community areas would be created as 
RESEXs. However, when unavoidable, involuntary resettlement must conform to 
Brazilian legislation, World Bank#s OP4.12 and the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative 
Resettlement Framework, and will involve extensive public consultation for all areas. An 
updated Resettlement Framework was prepared and filed to better describe the principle 
and ensuing procedures of avoiding involuntary resettlement as a result of creating new 
protected areas. 
 
Indigenous Peoples. Many indigenous peoples live in the Cerrado region and this 
Program will not create any protected area on Indigenous Lands. While no activity under 
Page  7
the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative may negatively impact indigenous lands or cultural 
properties, indigenous communities that express an interest in participating in project 
activities should be welcome to do so.  
 
An Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF) was developed for the Sustainable 
Cerrado Initiative, containing criteria for the development and disclosure of an 
Indigenous Peoples Plan by any project involving indigenous communities. An updated 
Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework was prepared and filed, to better describe the 
Indigenous People of the region and the process to avoid overlap between protected areas 
and indigenous land.  
 
Forests. Typical activities should support mainly conservation and restoration activities, 
and sustainable forestry activities (mainly non-timber), traditional communities and 
small-scale rural producers, and should be planned and executed in such a way to 
minimize or prevent negative impacts on forest areas. Activities resulting in deforestation 
and loss of native vegetation cover will not be allowed. No large-scale timber activities 
will be supported by the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative. The management of any non-
timber or timber (in limited scope) products will follow management plans approved by 
the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative and fully compatible with the World Bank's OP4.36.  
 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
There will not be any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with 
this Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the proposed project's investments no long term social or 
environmental negative indirect impacts are expected to occur.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental assessment and related safeguard frameworks were prepared by the 
Borrower for the Initiative. The assessment and frameworks were reviewed by the Bank 
and considered satisfactory. Each subproject carried out its specific safeguard assessment 
which complies with the overall Initiative safeguard framework.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Initiative was prepared in consultation with the Sustainable Cerrado Program 
National Committee (CONACER), which convenes government, academia and civil 
society representatives. The environmental assessment was disclosed to the general 
public at CONACER's website http://www.mma.gov.br/ in April 2007.   
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/13/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/13/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The documents related to the Initiative will be disclosed as usual. The subprojects will 
also have their documents disclosed in accordance with Bank practices.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
No 
Page  9
critical natural habitats? 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  10
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian 
04/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian 
04/29/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss 
04/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
06/04/2008 
Comments:  I confirm that the framework for potential env and social impacts is satisfatory. 
