Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/20/2009 
Report No.:  AC3302
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P086341 
Project Name:  BR GEF Rio Grande do Sul Biodiversity 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (67%);Land administration and management (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.10
6.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's Global Environment Objective (GEO) is to incresae the conservation and 
restoration of biodiversity in the grassland ecosystem of Rio Grande do Sul, integrating 
biodiversity conservation within the forestry, agriculture and livestock productive 
landscapes.  The project GEO will be achieved through:  
 
-
Promoting actions that assist farmers to restore and maintain priority areas for 
biodiversity conservation, where ecosystem fragility and threats to biodiversity occur;  
 
-
Conserving biodiversity by strengthening the implementation of public policies that 
enhance the development of improved management systems and production practices, 
including creating awareness and building institutional capacity; and,  
 
-
Securing the functions, dynamics and evolution of threatened ecosystems and endemic 
species while consolidating the network of protected areas within the biome.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would help the State government to advance towards sustainable 
development in the rural landscape and conserve globally significant biodiversity while 
maintaining farmers# social, economic and cultural livelihoods and working with the 
productive sector (livestock and forestry) to provide sound conservation practices for 
Page  2
accompanying the development of the pampas. While the proposed project would 
promote the conservation of grasslands on private properties, government resources 
would match investments within protected areas of the biome. The project would seek to 
remove critical knowledge barriers for landholders to integrate biodiversity conservation 
in their production practices and to internalize biodiversity aspects into the development 
planned for the State. This would be done by promoting new and effective partnerships 
with the private sector which could be replicated in similar areas of the country and 
neighboring countries (Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay) where the grassland is located 
and shared as a trans-boundary area. Furthermore, the project would strengthen the 
capacity of the State agency responsible for technical assistance and agricultural 
extension to mainstream biodiversity into the rural landscape (EMATER) through 
promotion of innovative agro-ecological practices for farmers within priority areas. It 
would also reinforce the capacity of other state agencies to promote the sustainable use 
and conservation of biodiversity, while establishing incentives for biodiversity 
conservation and assisting the productive sector to adopt more biodiversity-friendly 
practices. By the end of the project, it is expected that through demonstration, 
dissemination, and technical assistance, a significant number of landowners in priority 
areas of the grasslands would have adopted biodiversity conservation practices. It is also 
expected that government institutions would have developed an improved policy 
framework conducive to biodiversity conservation co-existing with sound economic 
development of the grasslands. While this project would seek to conserve areas of the 
Southern Grasslands outside protected areas with GEF-funding, government will match 
GEF investments through the existing Biodiversity Conservation Fund (medidas 
compensatorias) consolidating the protected areas system in the biome. The Biodiversity 
Conservation Fund is another innovative mechanism of the State of RS to generate 
incomes through the process of licensing  to be applied in conservation units of the 
Pampas. Decree No. 4.320 of August 2002 rules Federal Law No. 9.985 about the 
Biodiversity Conservation Fund and in Article 33 therein, defines the priorities for 
financial resource application for land tenure and land demarcation, management plans, 
goods and services for the operation of the conservation units and research.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project will function within priority areas relevant for biodiversity outside 
current Conservation Units with GEF-funding and inside Conservation Units with 
counterpart funding.  These would include some areas where the RS Rural project 
worked and indicated would be priority areas for this project. A participatory process 
which incorporated recommendations from the Federal Government established priority 
areas in a finer scale to maximize financial resources and search effective outputs for the 
project. Priority areas were defined according to particular criteria, a) areas of extreme 
importance for biodiversity conservation according the Brazilian Ministry of the 
Environment, b) occurrence of threatened ecosystems or species, c) existence of 
opportunities with potential incremental activities, d) occurrence of areas legally 
protected. The four priority areas selected for this project are (and in the broad sense they 
are defined by the boundaries of the municipal districts): Area 1 # Quarta Colonia; Area 2 
#
Campos da Campanha; Area 3 # Escudo Sul-rio-grandense; and Area 4 # Litoral 
Page  3
Medio. These four priority sites involves 33 municipalities (6.7% of RS Municipalities), 
11.8 % of their population (1,253,118), and 22.5% of their territory (63,428.80 km2). 
These areas are composed of different land tenure aspects with small, medium, and large-
sized properties.  
 
This project does not involve any dams, international waterways or disputed areas.  No 
conversion of critical natural habitats will be either promoted or permitted under new 
initiatives in this project. All sub-projects and demonstration units in Component 1 (On-
farm Biodiversity Mainstreaming) will ensure that proposed actions are consistent with 
the policy and specifically address the issue of natural habitats, and be used to guide the 
final project design in the use of activities of Component 1. While working at the farm 
level, the use of biological or environmental control methods may be promoted and the 
project will not consider the use of synthetic chemical pesticides. This project will 
consider the IPM if found to be needed for the biological control, cultural practices, and 
the development and use of crop varieties that are resistant or tolerant to the pest, if it is 
thought appropriate. The Operational Manual will include the necessary checklists to 
screen and highlight such subprojects and will include detailed provision of the steps 
such subprojects would need to go through in order to ensure compliance with the 
Bank#s safeguards.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky (LCSEN) 
Ms Marisa Miodosky (LCSSO) 
Ms Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSRF) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There will not be any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts 
associated with this project.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There will not be any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The institutions from the government of RS involved in this project are the same 
institutions in charge of environmental and biodiversity management for the State. 
Brazilian laws and the State laws regarding the environmental management are sound and 
practices in the State have been acceptable as experienced from RS Rural has 
demonstrated. Regarding the State#s environmental procedures, all activities need to gain 
official environmental licensing which is awarded by the Secretariat of the Environment 
(SEMA # Secretaria Estadual do Meio Ambiente) throughFEPAM (State Foundation for 
Environmental Protection) in cooperation with DEFAP (State Department of Forests and 
Protected Areas) and DRH (Department of Water Resources). Both SEMA and FEPAM 
are implementing partners of this project. A full evaluation of FEPAM#s licensing 
process has been carried out and it was concluded that FEPAM provides adequate initial 
screening for the Bank#s environmental requirements.  
 
The Secretary of the Environment (SEMA) is an integral part of the project 
implementation team.  Activities especially in Component 1 to be implemented by 
EMATER in rural properties will be supported by the SEMA. SEMA has proposed to 
create a special agreement for environmental licensing of project activities when working 
with natural resources.  Each demand-driven sub-project financed by this project#s 
Component 1 would first receive support from DEFAP and EMATER in terms of its 
potential environmental impact. Proposals with environmental risk will be submitted 
directly to FEPAM who will conduct the further assessment needed prior to licensing 
according to their current legal framework. Subprojects assessed as having potential 
negative environmental impacts will not be financially supported by this project. The 
Operational Manual would build upon the above process. Evaluations will be carried out 
two times per year, as this innovative program may require improvements in its 
mechanism of implementation. The half-yearly evaluations will assess the effectiveness 
of this process. The Operational Manual will include the necessary checklists to screen 
and highlight such subprojects and will include detailed provision of the steps such 
subprojects would need to go through in order to ensure compliance with the Bank's 
safeguards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for the project, related to safeguards policies compliance, are the 
Secretariat of the Environment (SEMA # Secretaria Estadual do Meio Ambiente) and 
Page  5
FEPAM (State Foundation for Environmental Protection).  The project undertook an 
extensive consultation process to prepare and review the Project Document, 
Environmental Assessment  and Social Assessment (including and Indigenous Peoples 
Framework), which included participants from a broad range of categories from research, 
academia, NGOs, and producer organizations. About 150 people have attended to the 
Workshop for Project Documents Revision, carried out in Porto Alegre on April 18, 
2006. A report with participants list and main topic discussed summary has been sent to 
the Bank and is in the project files.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/07/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/07/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  6
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange 
11/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky 
11/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss 
11/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan C. Belausteguigoitia 
05/19/2009 
Comments:   
