Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3379
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P106663 
Project Name:  Sao Paulo Feeder Roads Project 
Task Team Leader:  Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 11, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
167.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve transport contribution to regional 
de
velopment, and strengthen the state’s capacity in managing investment programs. The 
key indicators include: a) reduction of economic costs to users on improved municipal 
paved road sections; b) change in employment level in roads’ area of influence; and c) % 
of indicators achieved annually under the State Investment Program (Programa de 
Investimentos do Estado).   
 
3. Project Description 
The physical component of the project will support the government’s municipal paved 
road rehabilitation program – the Pro-Vicinais Program, consists of technical assistance 
programs to municipalities on road management techniques and rehabilitation works 
financed by the state, to restore the condition of about 7,600 km of the paved municipal 
road networks extension (at a cost estimated at US$1 billion) over the next 4-5 years.  
 
So far, works under the Program’s first phase (2,000 km, for an estimated cost of 
US$252 million) are underway, bidding for civil works under the Program’s second 
phase (2,500 km, for an estimated cost of US$341 million) are underway, and bidding for 
Page  2
the preparation of engineering designs under the Program’s third phase (3,000 km, for an 
estimated cost of US$480 million).  All works are expected to be completed by end 2010.  
 
The feeder roads rehabilitation component will finance the rehabilitation of 
approximately 1,200 km of municipal paved roads, as well as the cost of engineering 
designs and the cost of consolidating DER’s capacity to manage its road investment 
programs, including the Program.  The civil works will mainly include: (i) rehabilitation 
of existing road base and surface, as well as of bridges; (ii) rehabilitation and/or surfacing 
of shoulders; (iii) upgrading of drainage systems, and signalization: and (iv) road safety 
improvements, including, localized curve realignments, and critical spots elimination. 
The project physical component will also include a US$10 million allocation, to 
undertake, about 100 km of rehabilitation works on the state paved roads ensuring the 
adequate connection of rehabilitated municipal paved roads to the state or federal road 
network.  
 
The technical assistance component, through provision of equipment, training and 
consulting services, will help strengthening the state capacity in planning, financing, 
execution and environmental licensing of investment programs, with support to:  
 
•structuring and management of the state investment program to improve state capacity 
in providing incentives for accelerating the realization of priority investments;  
 
•modernization of the state’s environmental management system related to 
environmental licensing, legislation, information systems and monitoring of economic 
activities;  
 
•consolidation of planning and logistics capacity in the transport sector in order to 
improve efficiencies in each transport mode as well as to gradually rebalance the 
transport modes’ matrix; and  
 
•improved public sector execution capacity in the road, through institutional support to 
DER-SP in the areas of road network management, technical, operational and 
environmental management capacity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Sao Paulo is today one of, if not the, most densely populated and intensively used 
territory in Brazil. With a land area of 248,146 square kilometers, and a population of 
almost 39 million, Sao Paulo’s land use is be characterized by its vast agricultural area, 
covering (74 % of the state’s area) dominated by pasture and cash-crops and by important 
conurbations (e.g. Sao Paulo, Campinas and Baixada Santista). The works under the 
Program will be carried out mostly in the rural or peri-urban areas where the main natural 
features of the landscape have already being modified by economic activity.  
 
The rehabilitation and maintenance works are related to the existing platform of the 
feeder roads, mostly to the pavement, and eventually to the rights-of-way (ROW). The 
Page  3
civil works would include: (i) rehabilitation of existing pavement; (ii) surfacing of 
connecting segments on essentially paved itineraries and localized realignments; (iii) 
rehabilitation of shoulders; (v) rehabilitation of bridges, and punctually, critical points 
elimination; (vi) upgrade of drainage systems; and (vii) signalization. The works will be 
carried out within the roads’ existing ROW.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Flavio Chaves (LCSTR) 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not entail any potentially large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts. Most of the Project’s impacts would be site specific and would not significantly 
affect human populations or alter environmentally fragile areas. Additionally, it should be 
emphasized that few, if any of likely impacts are irreversible. Mitigation measures are 
well known and can be readily designed and implemented. Additional reassurance is 
given by experience gained with about 140 federal and state road maintenance and 
rehabilitation contracts in Brazil under various Bank-financed operations over the last 10 
years: no significant environmental and social impact has been observed during or 
following execution of these contracts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is not expected that the Program will generate indirect and cumulative impacts as 
inducing land cover land use changes at the roads environs or increasing water runoff and 
carriage of sediments to water bodies. In Sao Paulo the natural ecosystems that once 
stood in and along the ROW and sites associated with civil works have already been 
modified by colonization (which begun the 16th century) and by development following 
road construction, which occurred mostly in the 1950s to 1960s. It is not expected that 
the improvements in road conditions will significantly affect land cover land use changes 
Page  4
at the roads environs as these improvements will not significantly affect accessibility to 
lands. Moreover, the proposed improvements in drainage slopes, retaining walls and 
other structures are expected to generate positive impacts in regard to the prevention of 
erosive processes and sediment carriage to water resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address the safeguard policy issues triggered or potentially triggered by the Project, 
the Borrower has prepared and Environmental Assessment and Involuntary Resettlement 
Framework.  
 
The Environmental Assessment provides a description of DER-SP environmental 
management system and describes in the detail the procedures to identify, prevent and 
mitigate road works environmental impacts. Moreover the report includes: i) a 
description of the legal and institutional framework for the projects social and 
environmental management; and iv) details of the environmental monitoring procedures 
to be used by DER in the project. It should be highlighted that the projects implementing 
agency, DER-SP has a comprehensive environmental management system which 
comprises norms, procedures and standards which are considered as meeting the Bank 
safeguard requirements for identification and mitigation of environmental impacts. 
Finally, the report outlines the activities targeted on strengthening which would include 
improvements in the aforementioned procedures and standards, their review, streamlining 
and capacity building for their widespread 
use in DER’s decentralized units.  
 
Although neither land acquisition nor displacement of people are expected to occur 
given the type of project intervention (mostly limited to ROW) the Borrower has agreed 
to prepare an Involuntary Resettlement Framework and to implement the policy 
principles above stated for the activities financed under the Program. Thus, should a few, 
localized land acquisitions become necessary in order to proceed with localized road 
realignment and elimination of accident-prone points, DER-SP would follow the 
principles and procedures stated in the Involuntary Resettlement Framework   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key project stakeholders are the municipalities and population benefiting from the 
proposed road improvement. The project safeguard documents were disclosed in DER-SP 
website on 04/16/2008. Additionally, in order to promote social control and disclosure of 
relevant project information, the Borrower agreed that at the inception of each work a 
consultation will be held at the municipality. During this consultation DER-SP and the 
constructor will inform the population about the project (objective, foreseen works and 
activities and schedules) and about the existing communication mechanisms (Ouvidoria) 
with DER in case of questions and complaints about project implementation.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
Yes 
Page  6
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
04/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Flavio Chaves 
04/29/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss 
04/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
