Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4370
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P113540 
Project Name:  AIDS-SUS (National AIDS Program - National Health Service) 
Task Team Leader:  Joana Godinho 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  HIV/AIDS (29%);Health system performance (29%);Managing for development 
results (28%);Decentralization (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
67.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
133.00
133.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objectives (PDOs) are the following:  
 
(i) 
Increase  access and utilization of prevention, care and treatment services by 
groups most at risk of HIV/AIDS and STI; and  
 
(ii) 
Improve the national HIV/AIDS and STI program performance through 
decentralization, improved governance and results-based management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project comprises two components (i) Component 1 - Improve surveillance, 
prevention and control of STI and HIV/AIDS; and (ii) Component 2 - Build decentralized 
governance capacity and innovation. The program is financed by three budget lines: (i) 
Surveillance, Prevention and Control of HIV/AIDS and STIs; (ii) Federal Financial 
Transfers to States, Municipalities and the Federal District for Prevention and Care of 
HIV/AIDS and other STIs; and (iii) Federal Financing of Anti-Retroviral Drugs. 
Component 1 would finance EEPs (i) and (ii), focusing on results, strengthening local 
implementation capacity, and dissemination of benefits to the entire program.  It would 
follow a SWAp approach disbursing against actual expenditures in Eligible Expenditure 
Page  2
Programs (EEPs) and disbursement-linked indicators (DLI). Component 2 would finance 
training and other activities to support implementation of Component 1, and it would 
disburse against unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs).  
 
The program would reach out to groups most at risk in their networks and communities, 
and improve governance at all levels. The project would contribute to the development of 
relevant policies, guidelines and technical regulations for the health care network; and 
providing incentives to the health system at federal, state and municipal level, and to 
CSOs, to better serve the needs of groups most at risk. Transparency, accountability and 
social control would be improved by promoting performance-based management, and 
organization of services involving relevant networks. Monitoring and evaluation of 
HIV/AIDS and STIs would continue to be promoted throughout the program to induce 
the establishment at all levels of an evidence and results-based culture.  
 
Component 1. Improve surveillance, prevention and control of STI and HIV/AIDS 
(US$190 million total cost; US$59 million Bank financing). This component would 
contribute to improving STI and HIV/AIDS surveillance,  prevention and control among 
groups most at risk, by supporting critical policies, management, financing, institutional 
arrangements, and results attainment at the three levels of Government and in CSOs.  
 
Component 2. Build decentralized governance and innovation capacity (US$10 million 
total cost; US$ 8 million Bank financing).  This component would finance specific 
support and training for expanding prevention and care for groups most at risk, and 
improving the program's governance and innovation capacity.  Resources are included for 
training in strategic planning, definition of indicators and M&E for staff at the three 
levels of Government and in CSOs.  Among other activities, the Component assigns 
resources to (i) map the epidemic and interventions involving groups most at risk by 
region; (ii) foster M&E and results-based activities; (iii) carry out technical and fiduciary 
capacity building at decentralized level; (iv) hire an independent technical audit; (v) 
training in results-based management at the three levels of Government, and CSOs; and 
(v) conduct impact evaluations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project would be implemented nation-wide, reaching out to the 27 federal units, with 
the North, Northeast, and Center-East regions as a priority. It includes 34 Indigenous 
Sanitary Districts, where AIDS and STI services are provided by the Distritos Sanitários 
Especiais Indígenas - DSEI.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 is not triggered. The project would not present any potential impacts that would 
be of environmental concern, and would not involve any resettlement. Given that this is a 
follow on project, with no new construction envisaged, no new environmental assessment 
would be required. Project activities would not result in increased waste, and the project 
would monitor the proper disposal of health care waste by health care providers. Under 
the project, the Department of Surveillance, Prevention and Control of  STI and AIDS 
Program (DST/AIDS) would develop (i) a communication strategy for proper disposal of 
non biodegradable condoms (mainly feminine condoms); and (ii) a system of payment for 
environmental services to protect the forest and its biodiversity with the objective of 
attaining reduced emissions through international financial mechanisms and national 
funds such as the recently created Amazon Fund. This would provide an added stimulus 
to rubber tappers and their families to increase latex production thereby contributing to 
the financial and environmental sustainability of the extraction of non-timber forest 
products.  
 
OP 4.10 is triggered, as the project will focus on regions where Indigenous groups live. 
The DST/AIDS together with the National Foundation of Health (FUNASA) prepared the 
project's Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF). The proposed AIDS-SUS 
targets the most vulnerable populations, including those who are most affected by the 
epidemic such as sex workers, gay and other MSM, transvestites and drug users. 
Indigenous communities are also considered vulnerable populations, and the current 
Indigenous health strategy takes into account the epidemiological issues in their 
communities. It focuses on the strengthening of prevention and assistance programs 
within DSEI and preparation of indigenous health worker teams to deal with issues of 
sexual orientation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse project impacts are expected.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No adverse project impacts are expected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment 
 
Given that the project will support expanding the provision and quality of services in the 
areas of prevention and diagnosis and treatment of STIs and HIV/AIDS, the project will 
assist the Borrower in developing a training program of healthcare workers and all new 
participating entities on handling of biomedical waste with an emphasis on blood by-
products and delivering health care to STI and HIV/AIDS patients. The MOH has a long 
tradition of providing training and building capacity within its own ranks. The Project 
will support the Borrower in this effort.  
 
Social 
 
Under Component 2, Build Decentralized Governance Capacity and Innovation, the 
project will provide technical assistance to State and Municipal Health Secretariats to 
support DSEI improving STI and HIV/AIDS prevention, diagnosis and treatment for 
indigenous populations.  
 
An Indigenous Action Plan for HIV/AIDS and STI interventions in Indigenous 
Communities of the 34 Sanitary Districts DSEI was prepared by the DDSTD/AIDS team 
and FUNASA. The Plan will be supported by the AIDS/SUS and the VIGISUS projects. 
Some of the activities included in the plan are: (1) Improve the system of notification and 
surveillance of HIV/AIDS and STI in indigenous populations; (2) Improve monitoring 
and evaluation; (3) Strengthen the mobilization of indigenous communities; (4) Improve 
prevention of HIV/AIDS and STI in indigenous populations living in urban areas, 
including the promotion of safe sex practices and provision of condoms in a culturally 
appropriate manner; (5) Improve prevention of HIV/AIDS and STI among indigenous 
populations living in villages, including the promotion of safe sex practices and provision 
of condoms in a culturally appropriate manner; (6) Prevent vertical transmission of HIV/ 
hepatitis and congenital syphilis; (7) Expand access to testing and diagnosis of HIV and 
syphilis; (8) Improve adoption of the STI syndromic approach.  
 
The Plan includes a budget and an indicator (Proportion of DSEI with an operating 
program for HIV/AIDS and STIs) that is being monitored under the HIV/AIDS program 
in the 34 DSEIs since 2007. The 4-prong indicator includes: (i) distribution of condoms; 
(ii) syndromic control of STIs; (iii) supply of diagnosis of HIV and syphilis; and (iv) 
Prevention of vertical transmission of HIV and syphilis. Besides monitoring of the latter 
indicator, the project will carry out (i) a review and dissemination of the findings of the 
2009 evaluation; and (ii) a second evaluation of the program implementation in 2011.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
For the environmental issues, the key stakeholders are indigenous groups, rubber tappers, 
the DST/AIDS. Indigenous groups have been consulted by the DST/AIDS as described in 
the IPPF; and rubber tappers have been consulted by the DST/AIDS, including through a 
Bank mission on May 2009.  
 
For the IPPF, consultation results were drawn by DST/AIDS and FUNASA from the 
2008 social control consultations carried out nationwide, which also included the 34 
DSEI where most of the indigenous are assisted. Social Control is a mechanism of 
permanent consultations organized by/from the community level, to the municipal, to the 
district and state levels, and back to the communities. An important aspect is the 
community participatory approach and emphasis on respect for traditional practices and 
knowledge.  
 
The responsibilities for the surveillance and supply of services to indigenous peoples are 
divided as follows:  
 
-
DDSTD/AIDS  
 
o
Develops surveillance, M&E, and management of HIV/AIDS and STI 
interventions in indigenous communities; and prevention activities for urban indigenous 
groups, who are not covered by the DSEI.  
 
o
Develops protocols, and provide condoms, rapid HIV tests and ART to 
indigenous populations;  
 
o
In partnership with the University of Brasilia (UNB), is evaluating the STI and 
HIV/AIDS programs implemented by the DSEI.  
 
o
These activities have been co-financed by the AIDS Projects.  
 
-
FUNASA  
 
o
Delivers health care services to Indigenous Populations.  
 
o
Trains indigenous groups, CSOs working with indigenous groups, and health staff 
working in Indigenous Health Districts on HIV/AIDS and other STIs.  
 
o
Activities are implemented by indigenous organizations, CSOs and universities 
working with indigenous populations, states, and municipalities.  
 
o
These activities have been co-financed by the VIGISUS Projects.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/15/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Joana Godinho 
06/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
06/19/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
07/06/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Jane Galvao 
06/19/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
07/15/2009 
Comments:   
