Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/15/2009 
Report No.:  AC3978
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P101508 
Project Name:  Rio de Janeiro Sustainable Rural Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alvaro J. Soler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Other social services 
(20%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
39.52 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
39.52
39.52 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase the adoption of integrated and 
sustainable farming systems approaches in the State of Rio de Janeiro (SoRJ). While the 
Project will contribute to all three of the pillars as outlined in the 2008-2011 Brazil 
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), the main focus will be on promoting the third pillar, 
a
Competitive Brazil, through activities that will contribute to the increasing small-scale 
farming productivity and competitiveness in specific areas of the SoRJ.  
 
The key impact indicators at the beneficiary level will measure increases in: (i) small 
farmers transitioned towards more productive farming systems; (ii) product quality; (iii) 
farmers included in (or with improved links to) at least one value chain; (iv) agricultural 
lands under improved production systems; and (v) tertiary roads restored and maintained. 
Indicators will be measured in beneficiaries participating in project-supported activities 
versus control groups according to baseline studies carried out before and after the 
implementation of all activities.  
 
Page  2
The target population consists of approximately 37,000 small-farming families (some 
150,000 people in total) in the SoRJ. This corresponds to roughly 30% of the total rural 
population in the state.  
 
Project components have been designed to address, either separately or in synergy with 
one another, each of the key agricultural sector challenges in the SoRJ (as outlined earlier 
in Section I A and detailed in PAD Annex 1). Specifically, the Project will support:  
 
a) 
productive planning, training and capacity building (1.1), as well as investments 
in agro-ecological and natural resource management activities (1.2), to strengthen the 
longer-term impact on sustained productivity at a larger scale;  
 
b)
financial incentives (subcomponent 1.2) and extension and adaptive research 
activities (1.1 and 2.3) to improve small farmer productivity;  
 
c) 
the promotion of value added and development of new value chains  (1.2), the 
unblocking of rural roads infrastructure and logistical bottlenecks (1.2), and better 
insertion of small farms in existing value chains, as well as the coordination and 
alignment of public policies in support of territorial development  (2.1), to enhance 
market linkages;  
 
d)
rural sector institutional changes (2.1), the creation of a long-term financing 
mechanism for SRD activities (2.2), and a state-wide participatory research network to 
improve the ability of public institutions to adapt to the evolving demands of the rural 
sector.  
 
A
Participatory and Negotiated Territorial Development (PNTD) approach will be used 
(and adapted whenever required) to improve regional dialogue and management to 
unleash the agricultural production potential and competitiveness in targeted regions of 
the SoRJ while promoting sustainable practices and improving the socioeconomic 
conditions of small farming communities. This approach is predicated on comprehensive 
diagnostic and planning exercises across different levels (i.e., local, municipal, and 
regional) with a wider scope beyond project activities. Because decentralization of 
planning and decision-making responsibilities is fundamental to the PNTD approach, the 
Project will build on the strategy currently being implemented by the Rio GEF Project, 
which is characterized by a participative municipal and microcatchment-level planning 
model, as well as the full involvement, empowerment, and self-management of 
community-based organizations (which includes the active participation of women and 
youth). The Project will therefore continue to consolidate these processes. It will also 
promote complementary strategies focused on promoting productivity, value added, and 
increased market access for small farmers, as well as on strengthening institutional 
capacity and networking to more effectively and efficiently respond to the arising, better 
articulated, and integrated demands at the local level.  
 
The operational strategy is as follows. First, the Project will establish an institutional 
framework in support of PNTD and environmental awareness, and promote decentralized 
and multi-sectoral interventions to increase the organization and capacity of local 
farmers. Second, the Project will support, based on the above, the transition to more 
efficient production systems, the sustainable use and conservation of the natural resources 
Page  3
base, and social development through financing different categories of investment 
proposals and facilitating multi-sectoral coordination and interventions. Lastly, the 
Project will promote the replication of this methodology throughout the SoRJ by 
intervening in areas outside of the targeted priority regions (i.e., the NNWF and Serrana 
regions) with the aim of mainstreaming public policies in support of SRD.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will be implemented over a period of six years and will have the following 
three components to achieve its objectives: (1) Support to Small-farmer Production and 
Competitiveness, (2) Institutional Frameworks, and (3) Project Coordination and 
Information Management.  
 
Component 1: Support to Small Farmer Production and Competitiveness (US$66.1 
million). The objective of this component is to support changes in small farmer 
production processes within a framework of market-driven agricultural development 
focused on sustainable and increased productivity, value added, and market linkages. To 
do so, this component will begin by working with community groups across local, 
municipal, and regional levels to increase local organization and participation for project 
implementation via capacity-building and planning activities. As part of this process, 
individuals and groups will identify and diagnose, based on their initial status, key 
production challenges to transition towards more profitable and sustainable farming 
systems and develop proposals to overcome those with the support of project 
extensionists. Once the proposals are approved, eligible beneficiaries will receive grants 
to implement demand-driven investments. Activities under Component 1 will be carried 
out through two subcomponents: (1.1) Pre-Investment and (1.2) Investments.  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Pre-Investment will strengthen organization and capacity for 
agricultural productivity-focused and market-driven development across community, 
municipal, and regional levels, thus serving as the basic building block for investments 
supported under subcomponent 1.2. Specifically, this subcomponent will prepare 
beneficiaries and project staff for the implementation of the projectís technical strategy 
through training and planning activities. The strategy builds on existing institutional 
structures and activities being carried out in the 24 municipalities in the NNWF that are 
participating in the Rio GEF Project. All activities will be demand-driven and articulated 
by different stakeholder committees with a focus on promoting the adoption of 
agricultural activities aimed at increasing productivity, value added, and market insertion. 
Whereas specific training activities will be directed towards project managers, project 
technicians, strategic stakeholders, and beneficiaries, specific planning activities will 
involve the establishing and/or strengthening of different stakeholder committees, which 
will ultimately serve to identify and elaborate investment proposals with special emphasis 
on production and competitiveness-related themes. Various gender-related activities of 
training and capacity building were incorporated in this subcomponent to support 
improved local governance and networking and promote womenís employability 
(particularly young women).  
 
Page  4
Subcomponent 1.2: Investments will implement demand-driven investments identified 
and developed in the context of different planning activities under subcomponent 1.1. 
Through the use of grants, investments will be financed to directly support improvements 
in farming systems and production processes within a framework of market-driven 
agricultural development. In most cases, the Project will finance a maximum of 80% of 
investments, as beneficiaries will be eligible to apply for project resources based on 
beneficiary typology and activity to be supported. Participation of women is one of the 
key criteria for selection and prioritization of group investments. Three types of 
individual and group subprojects will be eligible for support: (i) productive, which 
includes activities to increase sustainable productivity (on-farm focus), promote value 
added, and develop value chains (off-farm focus); (ii) environmental conditioning of 
productive units, which includes complying with environmental laws and adopting 
environmentally-sound and agro-ecological practices; and (iii) rural roads-related 
logistical bottlenecks, which includes erosion control, rehabilitation, and maintenance 
works to improve input/output flows via year-round transitability of key stretches of rural 
roads.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Frameworks (US$5.2 million). The objective of this 
component is to improve the medium to long-term policy and institutional frameworks 
supporting market-driven agricultural development in the SoRJ. Specifically, Component 
2
seeks to: enhance the ability of rural development-related institutions and their staff to 
adapt to the evolving paradigm of market, environmental, and social interactions; 
contribute to multi-sectoral coordination and consultation mechanisms for territorial 
development promoted by the GoB through the MDA; promote improved access to long-
term financing mechanisms for small farmer activities; and establish a new, more 
efficient and proactive operational approach to conduct agri-food systems-related 
research.. These will be carried out through three subcomponents: (2.1) Strengthening 
Rural Institutions and Coordination Mechanisms, (2.2) Improving Public and Private 
Financial Support Mechanisms, and (2.3) Participatory Research.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening Rural Institutions and Coordination Mechanisms 
seeks to strengthen the capacity of the State Secretariat of Agriculture, Fisheries, and 
Rural Development (SEAPPA) and its agencies to more quickly and effectively respond 
to rural sector demands through improved services provision and better coordination of 
activities with other public and private sector stakeholders. Through the development of 
an Institutional Sustainability Plan (ISP), SEAPPA will align its organizational and 
budget structures with its institutional priorities, missions and objectives, and assess and 
address the efficiency of its methods in order to achieve the desired results.  The project 
will support the implementation of specific activities identified through an Institutional 
Sustainability Plan (ISP) and implemented through subprojects based on the ISP, 
including improvements to internal management instruments and staff skills, which 
promote increased efficiency of internal processes and effectiveness of service delivery.  
 
In addition, this subcomponent will contribute to the implementation of a national 
policy in support of territorial development, promoted by the National Ministry of 
Page  5
Agr
arian Developmentís (MDA) Sustainable Development of Rural TerritoriesProgram 
(PRONAT). This is a new policy instrument that is predicated on elaborating Rural 
Territorial Development Plans in regions that are dominated by small farmers.  This 
subcomponent will complement PRONAT by feeding beneficiary diagnosis and planning 
activities into Rural Territorial Development Plans, and by promoting synergy, 
coherence, and complementarity of actions between different state government sectors 
and actors that intersect in the rural ambient. Through these partnerships, this 
subcomponent would also support activities aimed at strengthening womenís capacity 
and the enabling environment for rural entrepreneurship,involving digital inclusion, 
education and support to insert rural youth and women in local productive alliances.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Improving Public and Private Financial Support Mechanisms will 
facilitate linkages between the supply and demand of financial resources for SRD 
activities through the development of an Economic Sustainability System (ESS). The 
objective of the ESS is to: promote awareness of (and access to) the existing supply of 
public and private financial support resources by small-farmers; promote a better flow of 
this supply of financial resources in support of small-farmers activities; and; facilitate the 
exchange of information between the parties involved to gradually induce a shift towards 
more receptive financial support arrangements for small-farming demands. By doing so, 
this subcomponent will promote sustained support to SRD activities beyond the life of 
the Project.  
 
The ESS will be based on facilitating access by small farmers to resources from four 
funding areas: (i) multi-sectoral initiatives (i.e., public resources and budgets, and grant 
programs); (ii) PES, which includes resources to compensate individuals/groups that 
ìprovideî environmental services; (iii) agricultural credits (public and private); and (iv) 
private initiatives (i.e., social-environmental responsibility programs). Moreover, the ESS 
will consist of advisory and operational bodies to guide the design and development of 
the ESS; an external entity to analyze potential opportunities, bring relevant actors 
together, and catalyze resources for SRD investments; and the PIU, which will oversee 
the FM of loan resources mobilized through the ESS, carry out viability studies, and 
monitor investments supported through the ESS.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3: Participatory Research will establish a new, more practical and 
effective operational system to conduct agriculture-related research and induce 
innovation, that more efficiently fills key information and communication gaps by 
promoting the interaction of different research bodies and stakeholders in the 
identification, discussion, and prioritization of key issues in the agri-food sector in the 
SoRJ. This will be achieved by establishing a state-wide Innovation, Technology, and 
Sustainable Services Research Network System (RNS) involving key research 
institutions and extension agencies. Ultimately, the RNS will support the 
development/adaptation of effective technical changes that improve production chains 
and processes. The RNS will also be responsible for systemizing technologies in a 
Technical Manual to be used by project technicians for investment planning and 
implementation activities supported under Component 1. Once topics are defined through 
a
participatory process involving the different territorial levels of the Project, the RNS 
Page  6
will support 37 short-term and five medium to longer-term adaptive research activities, 
the former to improve the types of investments supported under subcomponent 1.2 and 
the latter to overcome bottlenecks in key value chains in the SoRJ.  
 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Information Management (US$7.7 million). 
This component will support overall project management and coordination, the M&E of 
project activities, outputs, and outcomes, and the dissemination of key SRD information. 
Specifically, it will: promote the effective management of the Project by expanding the 
existing organization and operation structures of the Rio GEF Project to meet the 
demands required by the new and expanded activities under the Project; expand the 
decentralized and participatory management model established by the ongoing Rio GEF 
Project across different territorial levels to guarantee the achievement of the projectís 
objectives; develop and implement a Management Information System (MIS) that 
ensures widespread access and adequate information flows to impact stakeholder decision 
making in support of SRD; and promote the use of digital and other ICT tools among 
project beneficiaries. Related activities will be carried out through two subcomponents: 
(4.1) Project Management and (4.2) Information Management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The target population consists of approximately 37,000 small-farming families (some 
150,000 people in total) in the SoRJ. This corresponds to roughly 30% of the total rural 
population in the state. The target population primarily resides in two main territories that 
include the North and Northwestern Fluminense (NNWF) and Serrana administrative 
regions,  which represent a total area of about 23,000 square kilometers (53% of the total 
area of the state). Replication activities will also be carried out in clusters of 
municipalities located in other administrative regions of the SoRJ, which include: 
Metropolitan, Coastal Floodplains, South, and Para√≠ba River Middle Valley. Overall, 
interventions will concentrate in nine municipalities in the North, 13 municipalities in the 
Northwest, and 14 municipalities in the Serrana; replication activities will be carried out 
in 23 municipalities located across the four other administrative regions. As a result, the 
Project will impact a total of 59 municipalities (out of 92 in the SoRJ). The selection and 
prioritization of municipalities, as well as participating communities within those 
municipalities, will be based on production potential, poverty, and environmental criteria.  
 
While the proposed project area will include the entire SoRJ, interventions will mainly 
concentrate in the NNWF and Serrana administrative regions. With approximately 2.0 
million inhabitants, an estimated 46,800 families  in the NNWF in Serrana regions are 
classified as rural whose main occupation and source of income is agriculture. 
Historically, this sector has been characterized by the use of simple technology and low 
productivity cattle farming, as well as sugarcane and coffee production dominated by 
ìboom and bustî cycles. These traditional land use patterns have contributed to severe 
environmental pressure on the NNWFís natural resources base (see Environmental Issues 
Section below). Combined with low organizational levels among farmers and limited 
technical assistance, poverty has become one of the most pressing issues for rural 
Page  7
households. This directly affects an estimated 125,000 people in the NNWF and Serrana 
regions, of which approximately 32% live in conditions of extreme poverty.  
 
The landscapes of the North Fluminense administrative region are notable for extensive 
flooding associated with the river-
delta plain of the Para√≠ba do Sul andthe lower 
reaches of the Imb√©, Prata, and Macubu Rivers. These areas are characterized by a 
complex mosaic of river, lagoon, and marine environments. Further inland, well-drained 
lands can be found in the form of large tablelands and low-lying hills where most of the 
regionís agriculture occurs (these are defined by gentle slopes with low to moderate 
susceptibility to erosion). These lowlands extend to the Serra do Mar, a mountainous area 
characterized by steep slopes that is highly vulnerable to mass movements and falling 
boulders; large portions of the steep Serra do Mar are covered and protected by the 
Desengano State Park.  
 
In contrast to the North Fluminense, the Northwest Fluminense administrative region is 
distinguished by the predominance of dry and low hills interspaced by staggered 
mountain ranges. This region suffers from widespread environmental degradation, 
including deforestation, which extends up to and into much of the mountainous zone. The 
situation is aggravated by an irregular and insufficient rainy season that contributes to 
frequent water deficits.  
 
The project area in the other six administrative regions includes ecosystems and 
climates typical to coastal and inland Atlantic forests. Forests are located through the 
Para√≠ba River Middle Valley, which crosses the state from the southern border with 
S√£o Paulo to the NNWF. Large extents of these inland Atlantic forests have been 
removed in the past for agricultural use, with a significant portion characterized by 
unsustainable practices and degraded soils. However, the other administrative regions 
have lower grades of environmental degradation compared to those in the North 
Fluminense. Project interventions in the administrative regions outside of the NNWF will 
be focused in areas that share similar socio-economic and environmental characteristics 
to those in the NNWF.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
 
Page  8
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
detailed Bank review of potential project impacts, in terms of their identification, 
measurement, interpretation, information, and dissemination, was conducted during two 
recent Bank missions (in August and October 2008), which concurred with the final steps 
of the projectís Environmental Assessment (EA) preparation. Based on the findings of 
this mission, the Project is expected to produce highly positive environmental impacts. 
No large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen. However, certain 
subprojects supported (i.e., on-farm or off-farm investments) could generate small 
negative impacts at the local level. Regarding specific project-supported activities, the 
potential impacts as they relate to each of the safeguard issues are described in the 
following.  
 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Activities carried out in subprojects supported 
under Component 1 could generate small negative impacts. These subprojects will 
involve productive investments, small-scale agro-processing, small infrastructure works 
for road rehabilitation and maintenance, and community sanitation improvements. As 
these subprojects and their location cannot be identified a priori, based on the demand-
driven nature of the Project, specific impacts cannot be anticipated. However, the impacts 
of any misdirected support for these investments could include soil erosion and water 
pollution (i.e., sediments, use of fertilizers, or eventually from pesticide use even if not 
directly procured by the Project).  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The Project will support natural habitat conservation since 
increased agricultural productivity will be a result of integrated agro-ecosystem 
management practices, such as those being currently tested and adopted by farmers 
participating in the ongoing Rio GEF Project. Moreover, the Project will support 
conservation practices and improved land use planning and management, which is 
expected to lead to sustainable use of agricultural lands, conservation of natural habitats, 
and the rehabilitation of degraded natural habitats. This includes the restoration and 
Page  9
protection of degraded riparian forests, which are critical to preserving local biodiversity 
and the quality of water resources.  
 
OP 4.36 Forests. The Project will support reforestation with native species, natural 
forest regeneration, and environmentally-friendly production practices, hence promoting 
the transition away from degrading and unproductive agricultural practices while 
supporting biodiversity conservation and reducing carbon emissions. Examples of 
activities/practices that could be supported under Component 1 that are related to forests 
include: safeguarding degraded lands (i.e., environmental licensing and legalizing private 
reserves), protecting springs, rehabilitating riparian forests, forest fire prevention, 
planting native trees, and protecting internal roads and corridors.  
 
OP 4.09 Pest Management. Although the Project will not finance the procurement of 
any pesticides or other chemical amendments, small amounts of pesticides will probably 
continue to be used by a small portion of farmers receiving project support.  
 
OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The Project will finance small-scale works in 
already established agricultural zones where the likelihood of disturbing archaeological, 
paleontological, or other culturally significant sites is small. As a result, the Project is not 
expected to have negative impacts on cultural property, including movable or immovable 
objects, sites, structures, groups of structures, or natural features or landscapes with 
archeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other 
cultural significance.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Road maintenance activities supported under 
Component 1 could result in the acquisition of new land.  
 
OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. All of the 59 targeted municipalities have undergone a 
screening that confirmed that indigenous peoples are not present in the project area.  
 
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams. NA  
 
OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways. NA  
 
OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas. NA   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant indirect or long-term or cumulative impacts are foreseen under the Project. 
Subprojects under Component 1 will be subjected to a rigorous screening process to 
ensure that maximum socioeconomic and environmental benefits are accrued and that 
any unintended negative environmental impacts are avoided or minimized, including 
those eventually associated to secondary or indirect and long-term effects. The EA/EMF 
recommends that a cumulative impact assessment be carried out during the mid-term 
review to take into account eventual indirect and/or long-term and cumulative positive 
and adverse impacts.   
Page  10
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrowerís institutional capacity to plan and implement safeguard measures is 
considered adequate. The implementation agency (SEAPPA) has already developed and 
implemented an EMF for the ongoing Rio GEF Project as part of the EA. The procedures 
for environmental screening have been incorporated in the Operational Manual (OM), 
which also includes procedures for the evaluation, approval, and monitoring of 
subprojects seeking to be financed under the investment component. Training of key staff 
from the implementing agency has been provided under the Rio GEF Project, and 
technical training (to both small farmers and extension staff) is foreseen in related areas, 
including integrated production and pest management practices, organic agriculture, and 
zero-tillage.   
 
The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are 
described in the following.  
 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The Project is classified as Category B, which is 
the appropriate classification for a project whose potential adverse environmental impacts 
on human populations or environmentally important areas are site-specific, reversible, 
and can be readily mitigated (OP 4.01, paragraph 8). In accordance, an EA and EMF 
were prepared and a final version submitted to the Bank on December 10, 2008, and 
subsequently reviewed by the Bank. The EA/EMF specifies the criteria and procedures 
(including operating rules) that will be used during implementation to avoid or minimize 
adverse environmental impacts. Some of the key aspects regarding Bankís safeguards 
taken into consideration in the EA/EMF are included in the descriptions of the safeguard 
policies below.  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The EMF explicitly forbids any project activities in areas 
supporting critical natural habitats or inducing conversion. It also ensures that any 
activity in the buffer zone of a protected area will be designed to help reduce pressure on 
the protected area itself. Furthermore, the EMF: includes criteria for screening 
subprojects to ensure that they will not cause any negative impacts on protected areas; 
establishes clear guidelines regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural habitats; 
includes measures in the monitoring plans to supervise habitat conversion or degradation; 
and provides a strategy to ensure close coordination with other activities aimed at 
conserving the Mata Atl√¢ntica in the SoRJ.  
 
OP 4.36 Forests. The EMF provides guidance measures to implement forest-related 
practices and includes specifications to comply with the two national laws that protect 
forests (riparian forests 20% of private rural lands and forests on slopes steeper than 45 
degrees). The EMF also stresses the use of microcatchment, municipal, and territorial 
Page  11
development plans as tools to identify, map, and exclude natural reserves from 
production activities (although degraded lands will be rehabilitated with native species in 
the permanent preservation areas).  
 
OP 4.09 Pest Management. A section on pest management has been included in the 
EA/EMF (and also included in the OM) to provide guidance on how to minimize 
potential negative environmental impacts, as well as on training (under Component 3) in 
safe pesticide use, handling, storage, and disposal. The Project will also support technical 
assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically, and 
environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest and Plant Management (IPPM). This 
approach is designed to reduce input costs and human health risks, and to minimize 
adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of pesticide use without 
significantly affecting yields. The IPPM approach will further improve the sustainability 
of agro-ecosystems by focusing on improving the knowledge and skills of farmers for 
sound resource management. The EMF also includes screening procedures against the 
World Health Organiz
ationís list ofapproved products.  
 
OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The EMF includes a framework for screening 
project activities in relation to potential negative impacts of cultural property. In any 
case, such impacts will be avoided through the application of subproject eligibility 
criteria and the safeguards screening system, based on Brazilís well-developed legislative 
and normative framework, which is under the oversight of the National Institute for 
Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). The EMF defines that ìchance 
findî procedures will be included in the contracts for any subproject involving works, as 
well as in the Operational Manual, in order to comply with this safeguard and with 
national legislation on cultural property.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The client has prepared a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) that addresses any potential loss of assets issues that might occur 
during project implementation. A satisfactory first draft of the RPF was delivered to the 
Bank on October 23, 2008. It will be further evaluated during appraisal after which a 
final draft will be submitted to the Bank for a ìno objection.î Subsequently, the RPF will 
be publicly disseminated by the Client and the Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
There will be an array of national and beneficiary stakeholders in the Project. National 
stakeholders will include: federal institutions (EMBRAPA, Ministries of Environment 
and Agrarian Development, and universities); state institutions (Agriculture, 
Environment, Water Resources, Education, Health, Public Defense, and various 
universities); municipal organizations (the State SRD Council, Municipal Secretariats of 
Agriculture and Environment, and Municipal Development Committees); national and 
local NGOs; and the private sector. Beneficiary stakeholders will include small-scale 
farmers and their families, rural women and youth, school teachers, and community 
leaders.  
 
Page  12
The mechanism for consultations of civil society organizations and stakeholders are 
mainly workshops, seminars and focus groups organized usually at the regional level. All 
safeguard documents (EA/EMF report, SA report and Resettlement Policy Framework) 
are available at the home page of the State Secretariat of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Rural 
Development (SEAPPA) http://www.agricultura.rj.gov.br/links/riorural.asp . These 
documents were also subjected to a virtual public consultation process with key 
stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/04/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/04/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  13
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  14
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
01/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
01/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
