Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3235 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P101508 
Project Name: Rio de Janeiro Sustainable Rural Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Alvaro J. Soler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
39.52 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
36.50
36.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PDO is to increase small-scale farming productivity and competitiveness in specific 
territories of the SoRJ through the promotion of environmentally-sustainable practices and socio-
economic improvements in farming communities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project, which would be implemented over a six-year period, would have an 
estimated overall cost of US$73.0 million. The proposed lending instrument is a Specific 
Investment Loan (SIL) of US$36.5 million.  
 
Activities would concentrate in one main territory that includes the NNWF and Serrana 
administrative regions, representing a total area of roughly 23,112 square kilometers (53% of the 
total area of the state). However, replication activities would also be carried out in two other 
territories, which include the Para√≠baRiver Middle Valley and Metropolitan administrative 
regions, and the Coastal Floodplains administrative region. Overall, the project would impact a 
total of 59 municipalities (out of a total of 92 in the state). The selection and prioritization of 
municipalities at the regional level, as well as participating communities within those 
Page  2
municipalities at the local level, would be based on production potential, poverty, and 
environmental criteria.  
 
A
Participatory and Negotiated Territorial Development (PNTD) approach would be used to 
diagnose and organize territorial management to unleash the agricultural production potential of 
the SoRJ in the targeted regions while promoting sustainable practices and improving the socio-
economic conditions of small-scale farming communities. This would be achieved by: (i) 
establishing an institutional framework in support of PNTD and environmental awareness, as 
well as by promoting decentralized interventions to increase the capacity and organization of 
local farmers; (ii) supporting, based on the above, the transition to more efficient production 
systems and the sustainable use and conservation of the resources base and social development 
through financing different categories of competitiveness-related investment proposals and 
facilitating multi-sectoral coordination and interventions; and (iii) replicating this methodology 
in other heavily agriculture-oriented regions throughout the SoRJ outside of the priority areas 
(the NNWF and Serrana regions).  
 
The PNTD approach of the proposed project is predicated on comprehensive diagnostic and 
planning exercises across different levels (i.e., regional, municipal, and microcatchment) with a 
wider scope beyond project activities. To support the decentralization of planning and decision-
making responsibilities, the project would thus strengthen local institutional capacity to more 
effectively and efficiently respond to the arising, better articulated, and integrated demands at the 
local level. The PNTD approach would build on the strategy currently being implemented by the 
ongoing Rio de Janeiro Sustainable Integrated Ecosystem Management in Production 
Landscapes of the NNWF GEF Project (GEF). This is characterized by a participative planning 
model, as well as the full involvement, empowerment, and self-management of community-
based organizations, which includes the active participation of women and youth. To help 
consolidate these processes, a complementary strategy would focus on promoting value added 
and increased market access for small farmers through a territorial development approach.  
 
To achieve the PDO, the proposed project would finance four components: (1) Small-farmer 
Production Incentives; (2) Policy and Institutional Frameworks for Territorial Development; (3) 
Capacity Building for Territorial Development; and (4) Project Coordination and Information 
Management. The preliminary descriptions are described in the following.  
 
Component 1: Small-farmer Production Incentives (estimated US$49.0 million, 68.0% of total 
project cost)  
 
The objective of this component is to support the transition to more efficient and competitive 
production systems while promoting the sustainable use of natural resources and social 
development through an integrated SRD approach. To do so, the proposed project would finance 
three categories of investment proposals divided into three subcomponents.  
 
The first subcomponent, (1.1) Development of Value Chains and Markets, would support 
integrated investments that address value added and market-related issues identified in targeted 
areas. Building on local planning exercises, as well as training and adaptive research efforts 
provided under Component 2, this subcomponent would finance individual and group 
Page  3
investments, including sustainable production (on-farm focus), value chain development (off-
farm focus), and natural resources conservation.  
 
The second subcomponent, (1.2) Increasing Market Access, would create an institutional 
framework for sustainable road maintenance to improve small farmersí access to markets. It 
would do so by supporting the development of Municipal Road Maintenance Consortia and 
supplying them with the training and equipment needed to carry out pilot road works for 
increased erosion control and transitability along rural roads (i.e., strengthening on-farm and off-
farm gullies, simple grading and re-gravelling, improving drainage systems and intersections, 
and constructing small culverts and soakage pits). Ultimately, this subcomponent would improve 
tertiary roads by preventing the generation of erosive run-off onto farmersí fields, enhance 
overall road accessibility to small farming communities, and lower operation and maintenance 
costs.  
 
The third subcomponent, (1.3) Healthy Productive Environment, would finance investment 
proposals that improve the basic infrastructure of rural populations to enhance the overall living 
and work environment. At the individual level, this would include habitation and sanitation 
improvements. Examples at the community level would include improvements to existing 
community centers and water supply and sanitation systems, as well as supporting 
telecommunication and information centers.  
 
Main outcome: Farm-level, community, and municipal/regional investment proposals financed.  
 
Component 2: Policy and Institutional Frameworks for Territorial Development (estimated 
US$7.0 million, 9.0% of total project cost)   
 
The objective of this component is to improve governance for SRD in the SoRJ by: (i) 
promoting the restructuring of public institutions in the rural sector; (ii) improving multi-sectoral 
coordination and consultation mechanisms; and (iii) expanding and formalizing public-private 
partnerships and promoting beneficiary awareness of existing incentives to ensure continued 
financial support to sustainable productive activities. In doing so, this component would establish 
or strengthen partnership mechanisms to create a conducive enabling environment for SRD at all 
levels, as well as increase the mobilization of different partners in a coalition to: advocate a 
common vision of SRD; share analyses; improve coordination across all levels; set the 
foundation for strengthening and harmonizing policy dialogues and strategies (and facilitate their 
implementation); and more effectively implement SRD projects. This would be carried out 
through three subcomponents.  
 
The first subcomponent, (2.1) Strengthening Rural Institutions, would support the establishment 
of institutional arrangements and processes within SEAPPA and its partner organizations to 
promote collaborative and permanent SRD strategies at municipal and regional levels, as well as 
with agricultural entities operating in the SoRJ.  
 
The second subcomponent, (2.2) Improving Multi-sectoral Coordination Mechanisms, would 
support advocacy for SRD and coalition development to strengthen existing and establish new 
multi-sectoral activities and programs. This would assure synergy, coherence, and the 
Page  4
complementarity of actions between different government sectors and actors that intersect in the 
rural ambient (i.e., agriculture, education, health, environment, and rural infrastructure).  
 
The third subcomponent, (2.3) Supporting a Public-Private Partnership System, would 
encourage the expansion and formalization of public-private partnerships through developing a 
system that promotes beneficiary awareness of existing incentives and ensures continued support 
to sustainable productive and conservation activities beyond the life of the project. This system 
would be based on four elements: (i) PES, which includes the development of the operational 
base for the PES mechanism currently being designed under the GEF; (ii) mainstreaming SRD 
activities within existing rural credit schemes; (iii) reviewing current investment programs and 
public expenditure frameworks to identify constraints and entry points for SRD to increase the 
predictability of financial flows; and (iv) public-private partnerships to support new agri-
business and implement Brazilís relevant social responsibility policies and regulations.  
 
Main outcomes: Policies, incentive frameworks, and institutional structures and capacities at 
state and decentralized levels promoting the implementation of SRD throughout the SoRJ.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building for Territorial Development (estimated US$10.0 million, 
14.0% of total project cost)  
 
The objective of this component is to increase the capacities of actors in key rural areas to 
promote increased agricultural-focused economic activity and balanced development in those 
areas, by inducing organization, planning and behavioural changes at different levels. Related 
activities would serve as a vehicle for sustained efforts in stimulating local potential and quality 
of life by overcoming competitiveness constraints and effectively managing pressing socio-
economic and environmental issues. This would be carried out through five subcomponents.  
 
The first subcomponent, (3.1) Training for Territorial Development, would finance the 
preparation of beneficiaries and project staff for the implementation of the projectís technical 
strategy. This subcomponent would serve as the building block for actions that would contribute 
to the gradual development of more sustainable landscapes on a larger scale, hence comprising a 
major input to sustainable territorial development. Related activities could include: production of 
didactic materials and dissemination of information for beneficiaries, training of 
technicians/agents in territorial development, organization-strengthening activities in territorial 
development, and environmental programs and projects in schools.  
 
The second subcomponent, (3.2) Local and Territorial Planning, would build on progress 
achieved by the GEF to form the backbone of the proposed projectís capacity-building strategy. 
Relying mostly on rural extension services, this subcomponent would promote the project among 
rural communities by, inter alia: providing information; assisting group formation; creating 
opportunities for legitimized, committed, and informed leadership; helping beneficiaries to 
diagnose and prioritize needs through planning both at individual and group levels; strengthening 
local organizations in conceptual, socio-political, financial, and entrepreneurial issues; 
transferring knowledge on available legal and institutional resources to local actors, 
governments, and technical agencies; and supporting the technical administration of state and 
local governments. This subcomponent would also facilitate the provision and coordination of 
Page  5
services to small-farmers and rural communities to improve the efficiency of service delivery, 
which is expected to increase the demand for agricultural inputs (i.e., equipment, tools, seeds, 
seedlings, and materials) through existing commercial channels. Moreover, this subcomponent 
would include policy studies and workshops to support territorial development.  
 
The third subcomponent, (3.3) Rural Citizenship Networks, would increase awareness about 
peopleís rights, responsibilities, obligations, and limitations, as well as reinforce networking and 
mutual trust. More specifically, this subcomponent would support the participatory organization 
of beneficiaries in local decision-making structures (including the strengthening of community 
organization and self-governance) and the creation or strengthening of existing sustainable 
development networks (i.e., fair trade, farmer, fishery, and agro-ecological). It would also 
support the establishment, strengthening, and integration of rural citizenship networks through 
such activities as regional meetings, exchanges, and forums. In addition, this subcomponent 
would finance policy studies, consultations, and coalition-building activities to develop 
alternative sustainable funding options for selected public services.  
 
The fourth subcomponent, (3.4) Environmental Education, would support the implementation 
of local Agenda 21  to boost stakeholder awareness regarding the need for and commitment to 
addressing environmental problems to improve rural livelihoods. This would be implemented at 
both the municipal and microcatchment level.  
 
The fifth subcomponent, (3.5) Adaptive Research, would fill key information gaps and address 
production, procedural, environmental, and marketing issues to underpin technical and social 
change among targeted areas. Technical and socioeconomic research topics (to be undertaken by 
public research institutions, universities, etc.) would respond directly to the needs arising from 
demand-led development plans. This would also include technical and economic feasibility 
studies (i.e., bioenergey competitiveness at state and local levels, and carbon sequestration). In 
addition, this subcomponent would support studies to identify a list of potential ìnewî crops that 
could be grown in the project area in response to climate change (this is particularly relevant to 
areas of the NNWF that are affected by droughts). Examples of studies include: additional water 
demand needed to offset the yield effects of recent droughts; potential climate change impacts 
and response priorities; and farm-level adaptation options.  
 
Main outcomes: Small-scale farmers and other local populations trained and planning and 
implementing development plans and investment proposals for SRD supported by rural 
extension, research, and strengthened networks.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Information Management (estimated US$7.0 million, 
9.0% of total project cost)  
 
The objectives of this component include: overall project management; the design and 
implementation of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system; and the establishment of a SRD 
information system. This would be carried out through two subcomponents.  
 
The first subcomponent, (4.1) Project Management, would build on the existing GEF 
Implementation Unit (PIU).  Procurement, financial management, and reporting areas would be 
Page  6
scaled-up for the administration of loan resources and oversight of loan-funded activities. 
Accordingly, the SEAPPA, where the PIU is located, would continue to be responsible for 
overall project coordination, management, and implementation. It would count on the support of 
the State Secretariats of Environment (SEA),  Health (SESDC), and Education (SEE). Within 
SEAPPA, the State Extension (EMATER) and Research (PESAGRO) agencies would be key on-
the-ground project implementers. Municipal governments and a broad cross-section of civil 
society would also play an active role in project-supported activities. The PIU would sign 
working agreements with agencies and institutions that have a strong presence in the region for 
extension as well as for research, monitoring, and other implementation activities that warrant 
support.  
 
The second subcomponent, (4.2) Information Management, would build on the existing M&E 
information systems and data banks for the ongoing GEF. A Management Information System 
(MIS) would be developed to: monitor and assess project implementation in relation to overall 
objectives, baseline situation, inputs, and outputs; promote accountability for resource use 
against objectives; provide and receive stakeholder feedback; systematically document the 
demonstration effect; and produce inputs for dissemination of project results and lessons learned. 
In the process, the MIS would generate a comprehensive set of procedures and tools to address 
information management on natural resources degradation and sustainable land management 
across different levels (from local farmers and land users to state-level decision makers). 
Importantly, the MIS would also validate the demonstration effect by documenting non-project 
supported replication activities across the state.  
 
The MIS would provide the various stakeholders with a comprehensive framework for 
participatory M&E. This would empower them to, inter alia: understand the current state of the 
natural resources base; identify areas and priorities for interventions; identify and implement 
cost-efficient targeted interventions; monitor positive or negative changes in the natural 
resources base (either associated to natural processes or human interventions); understand and 
promote best practices; recognize information and capacity building gaps; and obtain the 
necessary solutions to effectively use information needed for poverty alleviation and improved 
natural resources management.  
 
Main outcomes: Project management structure established within SEAPPA; Relevant units of 
SEAPPA adequately organized to manage effectively, efficiently, and autonomously the 
financial aspects of the project; Established, functioning, and effective M&E of project activities; 
SRD information produced in a timely fashion by MIS to meet stakeholder needs and impact 
decision making.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The target population consists of an estimated 36,704 small-farming families and rural residents 
(some 150,000 people in total) in the SoRJ. This corresponds to approximately 30% of the total 
rural population in the state and represents a total area of roughly 33,439 square kilometers 
(more than 75% of the total area of the state). The target population primarily resides in one 
territory that includes the NNWF and Serrana administrative regions. However, replication 
activities would also be carried out in two other territories, which include the Para√≠baRiver 
Middle Valley and Metropolitan administrative regions, and the Coastal Floodplains 
Page  7
administrative region. Overall, activities would be concentrated in 22 municipalities in the 
NNWF regions and 14 municipalities in the Serrana region, and replication activities would be 
carried out in 23 municipalities located across the three other administrative regions. Thus, the 
project would impact a total of 59 municipalities (out of a total of 92 in the state). The selection 
and prioritization of municipalities at the regional level, as well as participating microcatchments 
within those municipalities at the local level, would be based on production potential, poverty, 
and environmental criteria.  
 
NNWF Overview. While the proposed project area would include the entire SoRJ, interventions 
would mainly concentrate in the NNWF and Serrana administrative regions. With approximately 
2.0 million inhabitants, an estimated 46,800 families  in the NNWF in Serrana regions are 
classified as rural whose main occupation and source of income is agriculture. Historically, this 
sector has been characterized by the use of simple technology and low productivity cattle 
farming, as well as sugarcane and coffee production dominated by ìboom and bustî cycles. 
These traditional land use patterns have contributed to severe environmental pressure on the 
NNWFís natural resources base (see Environmental Issues Section below). Combined with low 
organizational levels among farmers and limited technical assistance (TA), poverty has become 
one of the most pressing issues for rural households. This directly affects an estimated 125,000 
people in the NNWF and Serrana regions, of which approximately 32 percent live in conditions 
of extreme poverty.  
 
The landscapes of the North Fluminense administrative region are notable for extensive 
flooding associated with the river-delta plain of the Para√≠ba do Sul andthe lower reaches of the 
Imb√©, Prata, and Macubu Rivers. These areas are characterized by a complex mosaic of river, 
lagoon, and marine environments. Further inland, well-drained lands can be found in the form of 
large tablelands and low-lying hills where most of the regionís agriculture occurs (these are 
defined by gentle slopes with low to moderate susceptibility to erosion). These lowlands extend 
to the Serra do Mar, a mountainous area characterized by steep slopes that is highly vulnerable to 
mass movements and falling boulders; large portions of the steep Serra do Mar are covered and 
protected by the Desengano State Park.  
 
In contrast to the North Fluminense, the Northwest Fluminense administrative region is 
distinguished by the predominance of dry and low hills interspaced by staggered mountain 
ranges. This region suffers from widespread environmental degradation, including deforestation, 
which extends up to and into much of the mountainous zone. The situation is aggravated by an 
irregular and insufficient rainy season that contributes to frequent water deficits.  
 
Overview of other Administrative Regions. The project area in the other six administrative 
regions includes ecosystems and climates typical to coastal and inland Atlantic forests. Forests 
are located through the Para√≠ba River Middle Valley, which crosses the state from the southern 
border with S√£o Paulo to the NNWF. Large extents of these inland Atlantic forests have been 
removed in the past for agricultural use, with a significant portion characterized by unsustainable 
practices and degraded soils. However, the other administrative regions have lower grades of 
environmental degradation compared to those in the North Fluminense. Project interventions in 
the administrative regions outside of the NNWF would be focused in areas that share similar 
Page  8
socio-economic and environmental characteristics to those in the NNWF (see Targeting Section 
below).  
 
Environmental Issues. As evinced by the aforementioned description of the project area, 
environmental degradation is a critical challenge facing the SoRJ. Home to an extremely diverse 
and unique mix of vegetation and forest types, the state has the highest percentage of the Atlantic 
Forest (Mata Atl√¢ntica) with respect to total area among all of Brazilís states. The SoRJ also 
supports much of theSerra do Mar Corridor, which is considered one of the richest biodiversity 
areas in the Atlantic Forest. In addition, the SoRJ hosts four major ecosystems, which include: (i) 
floodplain forests; (ii) tropical semi-deciduous forests; (iii) tropical moist broadleaf forests; and 
(iv) coastal ecosystems.  
 
Despite their global importance, these important natural resources have been losing habitat for 
hundreds of years. The Atlantic Forest continues to be under severe pressure primarily as a result 
of de-forestation (related to land conversion and charcoal production) and soil erosion (caused by 
deforestation, overgrazing, and inappropriate agricultural practices). While some forest tracts are 
being conserved in protected areas, most are not. Indeed, the SoRJ had the highest rate of 
deforestation (16.7 percent) of all the Brazilian states covered by the Atlantic Forest from 1990-
2000. In addition to unsuitable land and water management associated with the aforementioned 
agricultural practices, recurrent droughts and some preliminary evidence of climate change are 
also considered relevant causes of land degradation in the SoRJ. These patterns are particularly 
relevant to the NNWF, which has the largest remaining stands of the Atlantic Forest in the SoRJ.  
 
Regarding environmental impacts, it is expected that the proposed project would produce 
highly positive effects, as environmental sustainability is a basic project objective. This would be 
especially relevant to the improved management and conservation of natural resources and the 
reversal and control of land degradation processes. Some examples of positive impacts expected 
in the project area include: improved soil fertility; improved water quality (both surface and 
ground water); and greater biodiversity within riparian zones. The project would also support 
environmental education activities and improved inter-institutional coordination, which are both 
expected to generate substantial environmental benefits.  
 
However, some of the proposed activities have the potential for small negative impacts on the 
environment. This mostly applies to the demand-driven investments that could be financed under 
Component 1 of the project. Activities under this component would be developed and 
implemented across different levels, including individual, group, microcatchment, municipal, 
and territorial. Component 1 would build on the procedures of the investment subcomponent of 
the GEF. It would therefore incorporate strict environmental evaluation and licensing 
procedures, as well as mitigation measures, to minimize any potential adverse impacts. The 
M&E system to be designed during preparation (building on the existing M&E system for the 
GEF) would also incorporate specific processes to measure and mitigate any negative 
environmental impacts.  
 
Social Issues. The projectís social assessment (SA) is underway and should be completed by 
September 2008.  It builds on the SA previously carried out for the preparation of GEF.  The SA 
being carried out for the preparation of this operation has a broader (geographically) and deeper 
Page  9
foci, including a more in-depth analysis of the socio-economic characteristics and dynamics of 
the target populations, issues of social differentiation and social risks and their implications for 
project design, as well as significant attention to stakeholdersí concerns andinput for the project.  
To date, meetings and interviews have been carried out in 22 municipalities, and further work 
will be carried out in a sample of additional target municipalities.  
 
Targeting Criteria and Landscape-level Approach. The targeting of project municipalities and 
microcatchments would be based on the application of criteria that combines social and 
environmental considerations. Five socio-economic criteria and one environmental index have 
been used for the selection of municipalities. Microcatchment selection criteria adopted by the 
GEF would be used by the new operation, which includes the following factors: concentration of 
small producers; existing level of community organization; prevalence of biodiversity; presence 
of springs or other sources of surface or ground water; and prevailing land use and soil 
management practices.  
 
Fifty-nine municipalities have been pre-selected to participate in the project. Although all of the 
50 microcatchments covered by the GEF would be participate in the new operation, the other 220 
would be prioritized by existing Municipal Development Councils during PY1. As in the GEF, a 
community-level approach for the planning and implementing of investments would be adopted. 
In the 50 GEF-supported microcatchments, and on a demand-driven basis, the loan would 
complement on-going activities with additional investments not covered by the GEF. This would 
include, inter alia: small scale post-harvest food processing; marketing support; household 
improvements; and small investments related to the full development of value chains.   
 
E.  Borrowerís Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrowerís institutional capacity for safeguard policies is considered adequate. The 
implementation agency (SEAPPA) has already developed and implemented an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) for the on-going GEF as part of the Environmental Assessment 
(EA). The procedures for environmental screening have been incorporated in the projectís 
Operational Manual, which also includes procedures for the evaluation, approval, and monitoring 
of subprojects seeking to be financed under the investment component. Training of key staff 
from the implementing agency has been provided under the GEF, and technical training (to 
farmers and extension staff) is foreseen in areas such as integrated production and pest 
management (IPPM) practices, organic agriculture, and zero-tillage.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Based on the assessment of potential impacts presented above, a Category B designation is 
proposed for the project. It is being designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of the 
Bank umbrella policy on EA (OP 4.01). Despite the largely positive or neutral project impacts 
anticipated, submission of an EA and an EMF is considered prudent to ensure conformity with 
this Bank policy. The Borrower would submit a first draft EA by July 2008. The approval of this 
Page  10
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
draft EA would be a condition for appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The proposed project would support natural habitat conservation and improved land use 
planning and management by integrating into existing national and regional rural development 
programs the conservation of natural habitats and the rehabilitation of degraded natural habitats. 
Project activities would not significantly modify or degrade natural habitats. In terms of policy 
dialogue, the project would assist the GoRJ in strengthening state and local institutions in the 
rural and environmental sectors, providing them with enhanced capacity to guide and monitor the 
conservation and sustainable use of natural resources.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The proposed project would support the adoption of conservation measures, such as 
reforestati
on, natural forest regeneration, and sustainable production systems. The projectís 
M&E system would track compliance for monitoring project implementation. This would also 
apply to investments in forestry-related activities that may require attention to forestry 
management standards.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project would not finance the procurement of any pesticides or other chemical 
amendments that would trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, it should be noted that minor amounts of 
pesticides would probably continue to be used by a small portion of microcatchment farmers. In 
instances of pesticide use, disposal containers may be requested by communities to reduce 
associated health and environmental risks. In addition, the project would support TA for the 
adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically, and environmentally sustainable 
IPPM. This approach is designed to increase farmer productivity (yields), reduce input costs and 
human health risk, and minimize adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination 
of pesticide use. The IPPM approach further improves the sustainability of agro-ecosystems by 
focusing on improving the knowledge and skills of farmers to better enable resource 
management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is not expected that project implementation would have any negative impact on physical 
cultural resources. However, ìchance findingsî during implementation activities are possible. To 
handle such findings, Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative framework, which is 
under the oversight of the National Institute for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites 
(IPHAN). Additionally, SEAPPA has proven experience and adequate procedures to recover 
ìchance findingsî in line with existing rules. These procedures would be incorporated intothe 
Operational Manual during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project was screened for the presence of indigenous people in the targeted areas.  
Indigenous people are not present in the 59 targeted municipalities of this operation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project will not cause physical resettlement nor nonphysical displacement.However, 
there is a question with respect to potential compensation issues with respect to activities under 
Subcomponent 1.2 that would include the development of Municipal Road Maintenance 
Consortia and the carrying out of pilot road works for increased erosion control and transitability 
along rural roads.  The client has informed to date that no maintenance would be carried out 
without the full agreement of potentially affected parties.  Nonetheless, the team intends to 
Page  11
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
further clarify the scope and procedures of the pilot road works, and if necessarily, will assist the 
client in preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework to deal with any potential loss of assets 
issues that might occur.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
NA   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
NA   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
NA   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The first drafts of the EA and EMF should be completed by early October 2008.  
 
The first draft of the SA should be completed by early October.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
08/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
08/18/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  12
