Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4636 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P116170 
Project Name: Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 Project 
Task Team Leader: Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 15, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (67%);Climate change (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
650.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,353.80 
 Inter-American 
Development 
Bank 
481.40
1,835.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the mobility of public transport users 
in the Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin corridor in a cost-efficient and 
environmentally-friendly manner.   This objective will be achieved by extending the existing 
Metro (subway) Line 5 by 11.7 km from Largo Treze to Chácara Klabin, and by integrating it 
both physically and tariff-wise with the rest of the subway, commuter rail and bus network, 
thereby improving the accessibility of major employment, commercial, health, recreation, and 
educational facilities located in the expanded central area of the city to its users. Finally, by 
shifting passengers from road to rail-based modes, the project is expected to improve the current 
trajectory of road accidents and carbon dioxide emissions in the corridor.  Among the proposed 
outcome indicators will be the change in the quality of public transport services on the corridor 
(intermodal travel times plus average wait times), level of bus integration at Line 5 stations, and 
the number of passenger boardings at Line 5 stations.  As an indicator of cost-efficiency, the 
working ratio for Line 5 will also be considered.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project will extend the initial operating segment of Line 5 by 11.7 km from the 
southwest of the city to the expanded center by 2012.  The State of São Paulo will finance all 
civil works and infrastructure, comprising about 45% of the total project cost of US$2,458.18 
million, as presented in Annex 4.  All other components are proposed to be financed by the 
World Bank (US$650 million) and IDB (US$481 million).  The World Bank lending operation 
would comprise three components:  
 
(a) Systems and Equipment required for the 11 new stations, including an electrical substation, 
auxiliary systems, platform doors, ticketing and fare gates, escalators, elevators, ventilation, 
telecommunications, signaling and control.  This component comprises about 35% of the total 
project cost and would be financed by both IBRD and BID.  IBRD#s proposed share would be 
roughly US$164 million.  
 
(b) Trains to operate the extended Line 5 at improved levels of service, including 26 new train 
sets with CBTC signaling system and the rehabilitation of 8 existing trains.  This component 
comprises about 19% of the total project cost and would be financed by both IBRD and BID.  
IBRD#s proposed share would be roughly US$485 million.  
 
(c)  Institutional Development to support project management and supervision, as well as 
studies to assess the impact of Line 5 on the trajectory of road accidents and carbon dioxide 
emissions in the corridor.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The 11.7 km metrorail line extension will be entirely underground in the City of São Paulo, 
capital of the State of São Paulo, Brazil, extending from Largo Treze Station (current terminus of 
the initial 8 km metrorail segment in operation) in southwest part of the city to the expanded city 
center at Chácara Klabin Station.  The project will include 11 stations providing access to some 
of the most important employment, educational, recreational, and health centers in SPMR, such 
as: Largo Treze, Av. Santo Amaro, Av. José Diniz, Av. Roque Petroni, Av. Morumbi, Moema, 
Ibirapuera, Vila Clementino, Vila Mariana, numerous universities, and seven hospitals (Santa 
Casa de Santo Amaro, Evaldo Foz, Gastroclínica, Servidor, A.A.C.D., São Paulo, and Santa 
Cruz).  The project will also interconnect with existing Metro Line 1 at Santa Cruz and Line 2 at 
Chácara Klabin facilitating access to other sectors and employment centers of SPMR.  It will 
also support improved pedestrian and universal accessibility features in and around stations, the 
rationalization of bus lines to feed the Metro stations and integration with complementary 
investments, such as a planned busway between Morumbi and Diadema, and a planned LRT 
serving Congonhas Airport.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower (State of São Paulo) has had experience with Metro Line 4 (Phases 1 and 2) 
successfully managing a Category A Project that required Environmental Assessment and 
Involuntary Resettlement policies consistent with Bank policies. The São Paulo Metropolitan 
Company (Metro) has built and currently operates a subway system that moves over 2.6 million 
passengers per day, making it one of the busiest systems in the world. As a public authority, 
Metro works closely with the State Environmental Agency, CETESB, and its own staff to 
Page  3
monitor the environmental and social impact of its operations, particularly during the planning 
and construction phases.  
 
As an example, the Metro Line 4 Phase 1 Project had a full environmental assessment which 
was approved by local authorities and the Board prior to its appraisal. Subsequent to an accident 
at the future Pinheiros station on January 12, 2007 that caused seven deaths, the Bank required a 
detailed social assessment and periodic monitoring of those affected by the accident, in addition 
to an environmental impact of the accident, both of which were disclosed in Infoshop.  Metro has 
been successful in preventing and mitigating direct environmental and social impacts from the 
accident and in improving its overall technical capacity for safeguards issues.  The procedures 
and supervision given to the Line 4 were adequate and several aspects were improved, including: 
(i) data quality control for effluent monitoring, (ii) improved noise management plan, (iii) 
environmental data reporting and benchmarking (including providing the Bank with periodic 
reports on vibration, dust, noise, wastewater, etc.), and (iv) action on non-compliance and 
enforcement systems.  For Line 5, the Bank has suggested further strengthening of Metro#s 
environmental management plan and system, particularly for operations.  
 
Metro has presented the proposed Project in several public meetings, most recently on August 
6, 2008 and May 7, 2009 as open hearings in general area of the proposed Project.  The main 
comments received during the last public meeting related to (i) improving the timing and form of 
communications with the project affected people, (ii) the criteria used to select the project 
alignment and design, and (iii) potential local and cultural resources of concern to the 
community.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (ECSSD) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
Mr Flavio Chaves (LCSTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The extent and nature of the civil work to be undertaken for Line 5 (over 11 km of tunneling 
and 11 new stations), although not financed by the Bank, will trigger the environmental 
assessment policy to include the careful evaluation of noise, vibration, dust and traffic 
management.  A draft Environmental Assessment (EA) for Line 5, including all civil works 
(underground and aboveground) and road access, has been undertaken by independent 
specialized consultants and has been shared with the Bank.  A revised EA is expected by the end 
of August 2009 and will be disclosed as required.  Metro has applied for a preliminary 
environmental license (Licença Prévia) from CETESB for Line 5 between Adolfo Pinheiro and 
Chácara Klabin Stations, including Guido Caloi Yard.   Metro has already received a preliminary 
license for the short segment between Largo Treze and Adolfo Pinheiro Station.  A detailed 
Environmental Management Plan will be prepared for the installation license (Licença de 
Instalação) and will be reviewed by the Bank.  This Plan will benefit from the previous 
experiences and detail all environmental management measures, monitoring schedules, staffing, 
roles
-
and
-
responsibilities, and budget necessary to ensure that construction impacts are properly 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
mitigated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The Borrower is completing a census of the occupants and properties (both residential and 
commercial) that will be displaced in order to determine the need for special services.  The 
survey seeks to identify persons and families with special needs such as elderly and infirm 
residents, small marginal business, businesses highly dependent on a local clientele, etc.  The 
Borrower will also survey the area to ascertain whether any historic structures or monuments are 
affected by the project.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The civil works for the proposed Line 5 project will be financed and executed by the 
Borrower and will involve the expropriation and resettlement of roughly 400 properties, 
triggering the involuntary resettlement policy and physical cultural resources policy. As 
presented in the table below, about 90% of these properties are commercial buildings and 
roughly 146 properties are near the proposed Adolfo Pinheiro station.  Metro has made 
adjustments in the project design in order to minimize the amount of displacement it would 
cause.  This includes a change requested by members of the public with the support of local 
authorities to avoid displacing some 75 small businesses in the Galeria Borba Gato, a collection 
of small businesses.  For the underground segments between stations, the basic perimeter of the 
affected areas has been defined and field survey of the properties is ongoing. 
 
A
draft Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in accordance with the 
requirements of OP/BP 4.12 and Metro will conduct meetings with the affected people to discuss 
the proposed plans.  The primary entitlement afforded to displaced residents and businesses will 
be cash compensation for the fair market value of replacement housing and business places.  
Special provisions will be made for renters and businesses that may be eligible for compensation 
for foregone profits.  All affected occupants will receive assistance with moving expenses.  The 
RAP will be prepared and sent to the Infoshop in accordance with the Bank#s disclosure policy.  
The RAP will be made available through Metro#s website prior to appraisal.  A draft RAP is 
expected by the end of August 2009.  The World Bank and the Inter-American Development 
Bank are collaborating to provide comments on all relevant safeguards documentation and to 
hire independent specialized consultants to ensure that the EA and RAP meet all requirements 
and policies.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Completion of EA and submission to the Bank for review -  October 2009  
 
Completion of Resettlement Plan - October 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
09/01/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/01/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
09/01/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
