Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/04/2009 
Report No.:  AC4496
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P106390 
Project Name:  SÃO PAULO METRO LINE 4 (PHASE 2) 
Task Team Leader:  Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
130.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan Bank for Internaitonal Cooperation (JBIC) 
130.00
260.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the São Paulo Metro Line 4 (Phase 2) 
Project is to improve the quality of service provided to the urban transport users in the 
area of influence of the new Line 4 stations (São Paulo-Morumbi, Fradique Coutinho, 
Oscar Freire, Higienópolis-Mackenzie and Vila Sonia) and facilitate the integration 
between metro and bus at those stations.   The PDO is in line with those approved for the 
Sao Paulo Metro Line 4 project (Phase 1), namely: a) to improve the quality and long-
term sustainability of urban transport in the Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR) by 
interconnecting the existing subway, commuter rail and bus networks through the 
construction of Metro Line 4; b) to improve the accessibility of the low-income 
population of the areas served by Line 4 to employment centers and health and education 
facilities; c) to seek private sector participation in the development of Line 4.  
 
The PDO will be achieved by reducing travel times between origins and destinations 
within the area of influence of those stations and by guaranteeing a smooth integration 
between metro and other modes, particularly bus, in all of them. To enable this 
improvement in quality of service to the urban transport users, the project will be 
completing the civil works and equipment for access and operation of the five stations 
Page  2
and providing the rolling stock required to carry the additional demand generated by 
those stations.  The key indicators will include the change in travel times between select 
stations, the percentage of bus routes integrated with the new Line 4 stations, and the 
number of annual passengers boarding and alighting at those stations.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would comprise two components:  
 
(a) Infrastructure and Equipment to complete four stations of Line 4 initiated during 
Phase 1 (Sao Paulo-Morumbi, Fradique Coutinho, Oscar Freire and Higienopolis-
Mackenzie), build one new station (Vila Sonia) and its access tunnel (1.5 km), build 
additional facilities at the Vila Sonia yard, and acquire and install the necessary systems 
to operationalize these stations. The trains will be provided by the private sector 
concessionaire (Via Quatro), which has already ordered the trains for Phase 1 with an 
option for 15 more trains for Phase 2. This component represents 97% of the project 
costs.  
 
b)  Technical Assistance component to support project management oversight and 
project supervision of the works of Phase 2, as well as specific studies or assessments 
required during the execution of Phase 2, including a study for estimating carbon 
emissions reduction due to the implementation of Line 4.  This component represents 
about 3% of the total project cost.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located within the city of Sao Paulo.  Metro Line 4 is 14.3 km long and 
contains 11 underground stations in all. The line will link the downtown district of Luz 
(Bairro da Luz) to Vila Sônia in the western area of the city of Sao Paulo.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSDE) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The most substantial negative environmental impacts will occur during the construction 
phase and are temporary. They affect the local physical environment around 5 future 
underground stations and one new 1.5 km tunnel, in particular creating an increase in 
emissions, effluent, noise and vibration levels, and can also compromise buildings 
located in the immediately surrounding area. The disturbance caused by excavation and 
pumping works on the tunnels, shafts and underground station facilities could 
significantly impact neighboring buildings.  
 
Vila Sonia is an underground station and will require a passenger access site, ventilation 
shafts and access to a bus terminal adjacent to the station.  The proposed project will 
require expropriation of 47 properties, of which 16 are residential and 31 non-residential, 
all of which are located at the Vila Sonia station site.  The potential social impact on both 
the expropriated and remaining population includes heightened insecurity, ruptured 
neighborhood ties, and possible economic and other losses to residents of the areas, local 
commercial establishments, and workers directly affected by the expropriation and 
compulsory resettlement process.  The plan calls for the compensation of the families and 
businesses that will be displaced by the works. Compensation will be based on 
professional appraisals of the market value of dwellings and businesses.  Businesses may 
be eligible for additional compensation for foregone profits.  Special assistance will be 
given to the poor and vulnerable families affected by the works.  The plan includes a 
grievance procedure.  These will be monitored during implementation and there will be 
an ex-post evaluation approximately one year after resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Overall and in the long-term, the project is expected to have a positive impact on the 
environment. Congestion and air pollution are currently some of the most important 
environmental problems facing the metropolitan region. Providing a high quality and safe 
transport alternative, especially for long trips, will help contain the rapid increase in 
motorized trips and related environmental impacts. The project will help quantify these 
long-term environmental impacts in terms of modal #retention# or shift and the 
associated emission benefits.  
 
The project will also have a positive long-term impact on the quality of life of users of 
the Metro system, most of who are classified as poor. The project would increase the 
quality and availability of mass transport within the SPMR and provide the commuting 
public with alternatives to private automobiles, buses and vans.  Direct impacts of the 
new stations include increasing the accessibility of public transport to employment 
centers, health, education, and leisure facilities.  Improving metrorail services in general 
increases access for the low-income population to employment centers and facilitates 
their transfer between rail, municipal and intermunicipal bus networks.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
At the time Line 4 was originally designed, alternative scenarios were analyzed to assess 
whether the projected demand between the proposed stations could be adequately served 
by surface bus corridors but were rejected in favor of an underground metro line. 
Subsequent to selecting an alignment, Metro has ensured that the project design and 
implementation minimizes the number of expropriations in accordance with World Bank 
resettlement policies.  Based on the above considerations and field surveys, the properties 
located along the project alignment were identified and listed. This survey included 
descriptions of the condition of each building, as well as of the types of foundations and 
calculations of the depth of the subsoil under each building.  Surveys undertaken with the 
assistance of the concessionaire companies and other public agencies also revealed a 
number of large-scale installations likely to be affected by the works, such as man-made 
underground river conduits and viaduct foundations in the nearby areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed Metro Line 4 Phase 2 Project has received an Environmental Category A 
rating, as was the case with the Phase 1 project and in accordance with the corresponding 
safeguard policies of the World Bank. The interventions planned in the Project triggered 
the Bank's policies for Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP 4.12). The Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management 
Plan for Phase 1 also apply to this project but an addendum was required for a new 1.5-
km tunnel and the new Vila Sonia station not included in Phase 1.  Metro's staff prepared 
an Addendum Environmental Assessment for Phase 2 (Relatorio Ambiental Preliminar) 
that was reviewed by the relevant State environmental agencies (Secretaria do Meio 
Ambiente and CETESB) and received a #preliminary license# (Licença Previa) in 
February 2009.  The Project Team reviewed the environmental documentation prepared 
by Metro.  It was found to be satisfactory and the team will supervise the proper 
implementation of the proposed actions by Metro.  In 2007, Metro also prepared an 
addendum to the preexisting Environmental Management Plan, which incorporated the 
Bank's recommendations and strengthens the following aspects:  
 
-
Data quality control for effluent monitoring  
 
-
Improved noise management plan  
 
-
Environmental data presentation and benchmarking  
 
-
Action on non-compliance and enforcement systems  
 
To ensure compliance with OP 4.01, the full set of environmental documentation that 
apply to Phase 2, including assessed impacts and proposed measures, were disclosed to 
Infoshop in July 2009 as a single document.  The Line 4 Phase 1 project had a full 
environmental assessment which was approved by the Board prior to its appraisal. 
Subsequent to an accident at Pinheiros station on January 12, 2007 that caused seven 
deaths and as a prerequisite for the Additional Financing loan, the Bank required a 
detailed social assessment and periodic monitoring of those affected by the accident, and 
also an environmental impact of the accident. Both were disclosed in Infoshop. The 
Phase 1 project has been successful in preventing and mitigating direct environmental 
Page  5
and social impacts.  The environmental impacts of the accident were minor and are 
detailed in the Project Appraisal Document.  The procedures and supervision given to the 
Project during Phase 1 were adequate, and several aspects were improvement as 
described above.  Since the Bank had already requested an enhancement of the 
environmental monitoring of the project in the context of the approval of the Additional 
Financing (loan 7536-BR), Metro has been providing the Bank with periodic reports on 
vibration, dust, noise, wastewater and other aspects described in detail in the Project file.  
 
A
small number of expropriations will be necessary and an abbreviated resettlement 
plan for Phase 2 has been prepared by the Borrower, reviewed by the Bank and submitted 
to the Board.  Following the Pinheiros station accident, additional involuntary 
resettlement due to damage of homes and evacuation of other dwellings and businesses 
were carried out so their safety could be assured.  The project team reviewed the design 
and implementation of the accident-related resettlement and found it to be satisfactory.  
The resettlement and compensation of affected parties is now virtually complete, with 
only a few cases pending where the parties have decided to litigate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The environmental and resettlement plans call for a series of actions with the aim of 
providing information about the works and to clarify doubts for the different segments of 
the population involved in this process.  Key stakeholders include the resettled famillies 
and businesses, the population living in the vicinity of the project, the residents of the 
city, and future users of the system.  The following is a list of actions aimed at providing 
information  and getting feedback from the population at different stages of project 
preparation and implementation:  
 
a. 
Prior to commencement of works  
 
-
A
survey of the profile of the population (including preparation of a register) and 
economic activities in the area affected by the works;  
 
-
Communication with the affected population and responding to queries from 
members of public;  
 
-
Communication with the currently resident population and those engaged in 
economic activities in the area;  
 
-
Communication with the population of the wider city.  
 
b.
Construction phase (implementation and progress of works)  
 
-
Campaigns directed to the city population;  
 
-
Communication with commercial establishments affected negatively by the    
works;  
 
-
Technical follow-up;  
 
-
The Turma do Metro project;  
 
-
Readjustment of public services;  
 
c. 
Final stage of works execution  
 
-
Public and technical visits to the work sites  
 
-
Organized train rides for affected groups and other potential metro users   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/01/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/16/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/01/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
07/30/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
07/30/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
07/30/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
07/30/2009 
Comments:   
