Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3840 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P110617 
Project Name: Additional Financing for Bahia State Integrated Project: Rural Poverty 
Task Team Leader: Jorge A. Munoz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Power (10%);Water supply 
(10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00 
 Local 
Communities 
4.00
14.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would support the scaling-up of the ongoing Bahia 
State Integrated Project: Rural Poverty to improve well-being, employment and incomes of the 
rural poor, thus contributing to the Borrower’s objectiveof increasing the State of Bahia’s Human 
Development Index.  This would be achieved by: (1) improving access to basic social and 
economic infrastructure and services, and enhancing small farmers’ productive activities and 
their linkages with  national and international markets, using proven community-driven 
development (CDD) techniques; and (2) scaling up the impact of public investments on rural 
poverty by using the skills, social capital and experience of the project Municipal Councils 
(MCs) and Community Associations (CAs) to improve the relevance, efficiency, sustainability, 
targeting and outcomes of non-project State and Federal investments in rural Bahia.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The original loan for the Bahia State Integrated Project was for US$54.35 million; the proposed 
Additional Financing is for US$30.0 million.  As under the original loan, the Additional 
Financing would support the following three components:  
 
Component 1 - Community sub-projects will support demand-driven requests by rural CAs for 
matching grants for about 800 small-scale socio-economic infrastructure and productive 
investments benefiting an estimated 72,000 families (360,000 people) in 349 municipalities.  
Under the Additional Financing, the average cost of community sub-projects is expected to be 
higher than estimated during appraisal of the original Loan (US$26,784 at appraisal, vs. 
US$37,000 now), although still below the US$50,000 threshold per sub-project established at 
that time. This is mainly because of cost factors and sub-project mix rather than any change in 
the average size of sub-projects.  Specifically, this reflects the depreciation of the US$ in relation 
to the Brazilian Real, some increase in construction costs, the growing demand by beneficiaries 
for sanitation investments which are somewhat more costly than other infrastructure investments, 
and the larger proportion of productive sub-projects which also tend to cost more per beneficiary 
family. CAs, through their participatory MCs, will identify, prioritize, implement, operate and 
maintain sub-project investments, drawing on an information campaign conducted by the State to 
promote understanding of project objectives, eligibility and rules and on the project Operational 
Manual.  
 
Component 2 - Institutional Development will support (a) technical assistance and training to 
mobilize and strengthen community CAs in identifying, preparing, operating and maintaining 
sub-projects; (b) technical assistance and training for the project MCs on their responsibilities 
outlines in the project Operational Manual, including assessment and supervision of CAs, 
participatory planning, financial management and environmental management of community 
sub-projects; and (c) technical advice for the State Technical Unit (STU) for their expanding 
roles under the Additional Financing; and,  
 
Component 3 - Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation will support, 
inter alia, the costs (excluding salaries) of CAR’s administration/coordination, supervision and 
monitoring of project implementation, and an impact evaluation program.  
 
Types of activities under this community demand-driven operation will be very similar to the 
ongoing Project but with even greater emphasis on certain aspects:  
 
(a) Productive, income-generating investments to help increase employment, income and well-
being and to increase the State’s Human Development Index will receive even more focused 
attention. These inherently more complex sub-projects mandate tight screening processes 
including economic, social and environmental analysis and more systematic technical assistance, 
supervision and marketing support.Demand is expected to be strong based on experience under 
the ongoing Project which has financed some 450 productive sub-projects, 25% of total 
investments.  
 
(b)  The Project will intensify its approach to integration – already strongly established under 
the ongoing Project – and exploiting the accumulated social capital, skills and experience of CAs 
and MCs to leverage/allocate additional resources from other State and Federal programs for a 
range of complementary investments to deepen and accelerate development impact.  Further, 
CAR will also continue to strengthen partnerships with Federal, State and municipal authorities, 
Page  3
and other entities with capacity to provide training to the associations and councils.  Bahia has 
led the way among Northeast States in working with the Bank to train the MCs to assess the 
availability of resources from other, non-project rural programs.  
 
(c)  The Project would continue to give priority to ethnic groups (indigenous and Quilombola) 
and to women and youth through information dissemination and consultation in appropriate 
forms, mobilization and financing for eligible investments.  Although the original Project does 
not have specific targets for these groups, Indigenous and Quilombola communities are being 
reached in proportions higher than their representation in the total rural population (they 
represent about 0.9% of benecifiares, vs. 0.4% their share of the rural population).  With regard 
to gender, women are participating actively in Community Associations and Municipal Councils; 
a
broad number of sub-projects, while not exclusively directed to women are especially 
beneficial to them (e.g., reducing water carrying tasks which traditionally fall on women); and 
several important successful initiatives are being undertaken by groups in which women 
constitute the majority (the Bahia project received the World Bank Citizenship Prize two years in 
a
row for these initiatives).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The AF Loan will support sub-projects in 349 rural municipalities in the State of Bahia, already 
within the target area of the original Loan, and will continue to give priority to supporting the 
100 poorest municipalities and as noted above, to ethnic minorities, women and youth.  
 
Key Stakeholders:  
 
The primary stakeholders are poor rural families organized into CAs.  Particular attention is 
given to indigenous communities, Quilombola communities (African slave descendents) and 
female-headed households, generally among the very poorest families. Secondary stakeholders 
include State and local/municipal authorities and civil society linked to and integrated with the 
Project throughout its implementation cycle.  
 
Mechanisms for Consultation and Disclosure:  
 
Public consultation on all aspects of the ongoing Project, including the strategy for 
implementing the IPPF, and environmental standards and requirements, has been conducted in an 
effective manner through the participatory MCs, through statewide information dissemination 
activities, and through special State-sponsored consultative events and this will continue during 
implementation of the Additional Financing. The MCs provide open fora which meet regularly, 
have committed leaders and membership, include the participation of technical specialists, and 
are recognized as legitimate, inclusive bodies for knowledge dissemination and debate. The 
Project will promote special meetings of the MCs to discu
ss indigenous peoples’ participation 
and environmental aspects of specific types of sub-projects. As noted in Section II below, the 
Project methodology represents a continuous process of consultation revolving around the sub-
project cycle.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
CAR, the experienced State Technical Unit for the ongoing Project, has complied fully with 
applicable Bank Safeguards and project environmental rules under the ongoing Project.  
Page  4
Environmental considerations are built in throughout the sub-project cycle. Special activities to 
further improve environmental understanding and/or performance are organized when needed, 
and the standardized sub-project designs use the Environmental Checklist and have 
environmental features incorporated.  
 
To implement the Project, CAR has a structure decentralized to the level of its Regional Offices 
distributed strategically throughout the state and comprising a total technical team of 41 
professionals in the areas of Agricultural Science, Social Sciences, Economics, Civil 
Construction and Environment, in addition to administrative/financial personnel. At the State 
level (headquarters) CAR maintains a multi-disciplinary team with 30 technical professionals 
and 10 administrative staff.  This team has access to continuous training and has long experience 
with Bank projects and Bank environmental/Safeguards requirements. The CAR team is also 
supported by a cohort of contracted consultants in diverse specializations, e.g., environment, 
social sciences/indigenous peoples, rural infrastructure, water resource management, and 
productive sub-projects.  
 
CAR has a Technical Committee for Environmental Guarantees (CTGA) created under State 
environmental policy/law and responsible for ensuring implementation of the EMP for the 
ongoing Project and the proposed Additional Financing.  Responsibilities and activities include: 
incorporating the environmental perspective in all Project investment activities, analyzing sub-
projects and recommending mitigation measures; monitoring environmental activities and 
establishing institutional partnerships to support them; promoting beneficiary control of 
environmental aspects through studies and technical guidance; guiding municipal governments, 
MCs and CAs on environmental licensing, water rights and related aspects; and, assisting CAR 
to obtain and provide to appropriate institutions the licenses - and exemptions from licensing 
where relevant 
–
for certain types of water infrastructure.  
 
Importantly, for the analysis, monitoring, supervision and compliance of/with Federal and State 
laws and Bank Safeguards, CAR also has access to the entire environmental management 
structure of the State Government, e.g., SEMARH, CRA, SRH, in addition to NGOs such as 
Winrock International and the Environmental Group of Bahia (GAMBA), and to indigenous 
specialists in Federal and State agencies, academia, and the NGO community.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSAR) 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No major changes are being proposed from the ongoing project in design, approach, and 
implementation arrangements. The nature, size and geographical coverage of sub-project 
investments, and the targeted beneficiaries, are expected to remain the same for the scaled-up 
project activities.  There are no new safeguards issues applicable to the additional loan.  The 
environmental management framework, updated based on implementation lessons of the original 
project, will continue to be applied.  No potential, large scale, significant or irreversible impacts 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
are foreseen.  Risks identified for the original project remain relevant, as do proposed mitigation 
measures in project design, which have proved effective in practice.  
 
Environment (OP 4.01):  The ongoing project has a Category B environmental 
classification, and the same rating will apply to the activities supported by the AF. Neither the 
State, nor the Bank, through the project, will approve sub-projects which cause degradation of 
critical natural habitats. Despite the small scale of individual investments, CAR requires that 
they comply with all relevant Federal and State environmental laws. No sub-project agreement is 
signed or funds transferred until the environmental viability of the sub-project is determined. The 
sub-project agreements between the STU and CAs contain environmental compliance clauses.  
 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared by the STU for the ongoing 
Project, with inputs from the principal State environmental agencies, and was agreed with the 
Bank.  The EMP 
–
along with the project Operational Manual - describes the legal, institutional 
and operational context, requirements and procedures for ensuring that environmental issues are 
addressed throughout project implementation.  CAR has in place an advanced system for 
analysis of the environmental viability of sub-projects, as well as a large quantity of sub-project 
standard designs which include safeguards-compliant treatment of environmental aspects. During 
the Mid-term Review of the ongoing project in November 2007, the Bank’s safeguards specialist 
assessed as satisfactory the work of the STU’s Technical Commission for Environment (CTGA), 
in dealing with activities related to environmental aspects of the project. At the same time, some 
problems were encountered (e.g., training was insufficient, supervision of far-away projects was 
problematic) and improvements were suggested, discussed in more detail below, and these have 
been reflected in an updated EMP which has been posted on the State’s project website 
(www.car.ba.gov.br) and is being sent to the Bank’s Infoshop.  
 
Long-term impacts are expected to be neutral or positive for the anticipated activities.  The 
small-scale and dispersed nature of the vast majority of community investments, careful attention 
to environmental aspects throughout the sub-project cycle under well-established and upgraded 
procedures, CAR’s experience and access to the guidance and services of the state’s 
environmental institutions/apparatus, and systematic efforts to educate project beneficiaries from 
the outset on the importance of sound environmental practices, bode well for continued positive 
outcomes of the Project’s environmental management regime.  
 
Measures taken by the Borrower:  
 
All environmental instruments needed to ensure compliance with Federal and State 
environmental laws and Bank Safeguards are included in the Operational Manual. An ongoing 
training program for technical staff in CAR’s Regional Offices ensures their capacity to apply 
environmental management principles and procedures to sub-project evaluation, supervision and 
monitoring. CAR’s website provides a link to environmental questions, potential impacts and 
mitigation measures.  The cycle of environmental evaluation/oversight is as follows:  
 
Preparation: Initiation activities commence with a broad-based information campaign 
utilizing diverse media and reaching the target population, including indigenous and ethnic 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
groups in appropriate form.  CAR also provides standardized sub-project designs 
–
periodically 
reviewed and updated - which can be adapted to local conditions and include required 
environmental features/parameters. These features are also automatic for sub-projects for which 
there is no standard design/type.  
 
Analysis:  MCs are trained to guide CAs on environmental themes (Federal and State laws 
and Bank Safeguards) and provide preliminary indication of the merits of the initial sub-project 
proposals. At both the preparation and analysis phases and by all involved parties, an 
Environmental Checklist is used which includes Bank Safeguards. Approved sub-projects are 
then analyzed by CAR’s Regional Office technicians and by CAR Headquarters specialists. 
Depending on the nature of the sub-project, but especially those involving water resources, once 
technical and financial viability has been verified, they are examined for environmental viability 
including the need for licensing, water rights, and for potential aggregate/cumulative impact.  
Agreements are signed and funds transferred to CAs only when environmental viability is 
determined by the project technical unit at CAR. Agreements signed by CAs contain specific 
environmental clauses. The treatment of small dams, sub-projects in conservation units, sub-
projects liable for licensing/otherwise, is specified in the EMP.  
 
Implementation:  The MCs, community sub-project monitoring committees, regional offices 
of CAR and CAR headquarters all have monitoring, supervision and assistance roles throughout 
sub-project implementation to guarantee execution of specific mitigation measures incorporated 
for approval.  These include measures to guarantee quality, notably in the case of small-scale 
dams and water investments for human consumption.  The implementation phase includes 
environmental education campaigns  
 
Operation and maintenance:  Monitoring is used during the O&M phase to determine the 
need for supplementary training of beneficiaries and/or adjustments to the sub-project itself, 
including in environmental aspects.  
 
Impact Evaluation: CAR is responsible for systematic monitoring of project implementation 
and registering results in the Management Information System (MIS), as well as to prepare 
physical performance studies and ex-post evaluation of project impact, including environmental.  
 
Lessons learned: During the November 2007 MTR for the ongoing Project, the mission 
reviewed experience and lessons learned in implementation of the EMP.  Although performance 
to date has been satisfactory, the mission identified opportunities for improvement and the State 
has prepared an updated EMP incorporating these.  The lessons learned included, inter alia, the 
importance of continuous training for key actors, because of turnover and entry of new 
associations into the Project and because key messages need to be reinforced to deepen 
understanding.  The updated EMP therefore includes a program for further training for such key 
actors (members of MCs, CAs and CAR’s field staff).  Another lesson was that the best 
supervision of environmental aspects occurred in those cases where the work was carried out by 
CAR staff close to the sub-projects.  
 
Therefore, under the AF there will be greater decentralization of responsibility for 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental supervision by CAR’s field staff, which will also benefit from the aforementioned 
enhanced training.  Finally, although environmental aspects of sub-projects have been handled in 
a
satisfactory manner, there have not been many instances of sub-project proposals focused 
primarily on environmental protection (e.g., recuperation of degraded areas, provision of 
environmental services, production of seedlings for reforestation, etc.).  Therefore, the updated 
EMP discusses opportunities for sub-project investments of an environmental nature and CAR 
intends to disseminate this information actively during the period of the AF.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
N/A   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
N/A   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Regarding pesticides, the Project does not finance any such purchases. In cases where the 
sub-project could possibly lead as an unintended side effect to subsequent use of pesticides (e.g., 
financing of a community’s maniocprocessing facility to transform the manioc root into flour), 
the STU would provide training to CAs and MCs on integrated pest management and appropriate 
use of agrochemicals.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
N/A   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20/OP 4.10):  In compliance with OP 4.20, a framework for the 
participation of indigenous peoples was prepared for the ongoing Project. The effectiveness of 
this framework was reviewed during the November 2007 Mid-term evaluation of the project, and 
it was found to be working well.  Although this framework was prepared under the earlier OP 
4.20, given its highly participatory and consultative design, it complies in scope and substance 
with all requirements of the newer OP 4.10 as well, as discussed further below.  
 
Estimates of the indigenous population of Bahia vary with the most up to date estimates of 
FUNASA ranging from 24,009 to 29,407 divided among 15 ethnic groups occupying 21 areas - 
of which 11 are formally demarcated – spread over 26 municipalities.  Bank rural poverty 
projects in Bahia, and elsewhere in the Northeast, have worked closely with indigenous 
communities to ensure their participation.To date, the ongoing Loan has supported 34 sub-
projects benefiting about 3,407 indigenous individuals. Under the Additional Financing, 
indigenous groups are expected to execute another 30 sub-projects.  Lessons of experience from 
Bahia (and other participating Northeast states) show that indigenous communities are clearly 
capable of expressing and prioritizing needs and administering resources received, and that they 
respond favorably to the associative CDD project methodology, organizing themselves rapidly, 
participating in the MCs and operating/maintaining their investments communally.  
 
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared for the original project, 
and the same Framework will apply to the Additional Financing.  This IPPF was prepared under 
the earlier OP 4.20, but given its highly participatory and consultative characteristics, which in 
turn reflect the participatory CDD approach of the project itself, it is also consistent with the 
requirements of the newer OP 4.10.  The IPPF was based on a comprehensive social assessment 
carried out during preparation of the ongoing Project, which covered the universe of potential 
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
categories of beneficiaries including indigenous peoples.  An updated version of the IPPF 
broadens and deepens the original social assessment including a detailed analysis of social and 
economic conditions of each of the indigenous ethnic groups living in the State of Bahia.  
 
Consultation:  The Project involves a continuous process of consultation through its 
operational methodology for each sub-project activity. The indigenous communities themselves 
identify, prepare, implement, operate and maintain their sub-projects with appropriate support 
from CAR, relevant Federal and State agencies including FUNAI (National Indian Foundation) 
and FUNASA (National Health Foundation), specialized NGOs and the project Municipal 
Councils.  This process, and continuous improvements which have been introduced, ensure that 
indigenous communities have at minimum, the same access to Project benefits as do non-
indigenous communities. In practice, however, the ratio of sub-projects to indigenous 
beneficiaries shows participation under the Project at levels considerably higher than for the non-
indigenous cohort.  During preparation of the ongoing Project, indigenous communities were 
identified and consulted regarding their social situation and needs, and on the content and 
objectives of the project, by specialized NGOs and FUNAI representatives. Further, the source 
and legitimacy of sub-project demand is verified for every proposal received by CAR for 
analysis.  
 
Lessons Learned and Future Challenges:  As mentioned above, lessons of experience to date 
indicate that, given their strong sense of community, social organization and cultural traditions, 
indigenous groups have strong receptivity to the CDD design of the Project. The Project has 
benefitted indigenous communities with sub-projects that are coherent with the productive 
activities developed by each of them, and infrastructure sub-projects demanded by them (e.g., 
energy, water supply, means of communication) have also contributed in a significant way to 
improving their well-being.  During implementation of the ongoing Project, indigenous leaders 
and their representatives have actively participated in the meetings of Municipal Councils and 
have presented sub-
projects for their financing.  In spite of indigenous communities’ having 
access to the Project in greater proportion than their representation in the general rural population 
of Bahia, experience suggests that more of them could participate. Therefore, to encourage this, 
during the Mid-Term Review of November 2007, the mission discussed and analyzed key 
aspects of participation with indigenous leaders, and CAR subsequently also established contact 
with teams from APOINME (Association of Indigenous Peoples of the Northeast, Minas Gerais 
and EspÃ­rito Santo) and CIMI (Indigenous MissionaryCouncil).  
 
During the Additional Financing efforts will be made to: (i) reach additional indigenous 
ethnic groups, including newly-emergent groups in the process of officially vindicating their 
indigenous identity; (ii) promote integration of the Project with other public and private 
programs designed to support indigenous groups, thereby leveraging greater impact; and (iii) 
continue to broaden the range of partnerships with relevant NGOs including CEPAIA (State 
University of Bahia), CIMI (Indigenous Missionary Council), PINEB (Northeast Brazil 
Indigenous Peoples’Research Program/Federal University of Bahia) and ANAI (National 
Indigenous Association). Finally, (iv) the MTR mission developed and agreed with the State, in 
collaboration with indigenous leaders, measures to further deepen implementation of the IPPF 
under the Additional Financing including enhancing linkages to indigenous officials appointed 
Page  9
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
by the new State Government - as part of its policy of broadening communication to indigenous 
and special groups - in the State Secretariats of Justice, Social Inequality and Education, and 
with FUNAI and FUNASA.  
 
The participation of indigenous communities under the Additional Financing will continue 
to take place via the following:  
 
(i)  
Their presence, participation and voting in meetings of the MCs to review, 
validate and legitimize sub-project proposals. These meetings are widely publicized within the 
municipality and technical teams from CAR’s Regional Offices areresponsible for mobilizing 
indigenous leaders to engage with this consultative, deliberative process;  
 
(ii) 
Their taking charge of managing resources and of implementation of sub-projects 
which they selected as their priorities; and  
 
(iii) 
Participation in training activities to promote cultural heritage, environmental 
protection, productive development and well-being of indigenous communities.  
 
Mobilization and communications processes aim at facilitating indigenous communities’ 
access to information about the project and capable of building awarenessin culturally-
appropriate ways, of common needs and priorities.  The content, instruments and materials used 
are tailored to indigenous groups, prepared and tested in collaboration with indigenous leaders, 
as per established practices under the ongoing Project.  
 
In summary, based on a Social Assessment and consultation, an Indigenous Peoples’ 
Participation Framework (IPPF) was developed for the original Project and during its 
implementation a continuous process of consultation has taken place both at the level of 
individual communities and also at the level of participatory MCs where representatives of 
indigenous communities, relevant public agencies and programs, and NGOs have participated. 
The framework and operational methodologies developed for the original Project will be the 
same for the Additional Financing.  As discussed above, the State has prepared an updated 
version of the IPPF broadening some aspects based on lessons learned; this version has been 
posted on the State’s project website (www.car.ba.gov.br) and is being sent to the Bank’s 
Infoshop.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
N/A   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
N/A   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  10
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge A. Munoz 
08/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John D. Nash 
08/20/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  11
