Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2168 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P088716 
Project Name: QUALISUS-REDE Brazil Health Network Formation and Quality 
Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Gerard Martin La Forgia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
235.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
441.80
441.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Health System Quality Improvement Project (QUALISUS) is an 8-year Adaptable Program 
Loan (APL) in two phases. The total cost of the APL Program is US$1.4 billion with loan 
financing of US$500 million across the two phases.  The overall APL Program objectives are: (a) 
Improve the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of SUS-financed delivery system, with an 
emphasis on high and medium complexity health care providers integrated into a defined facility 
network; and (b) Contribute to a reduction in mortality and morbidity associated with conditions 
with the greatest impact on the country’s disease burden.  
 
The total cost of the first phase (4 years) is US$675 million, with loan financing of US$235 
million.  Consonant with these Program objectives, the objectives of the proposed first phase 
project are: (a) Improve the quality (e.g., structure, process, outcomes) and efficiency (e.g., 
allocative, productive and scale) of SUS-financed health services with an emphasis on 
secondary-level hospitals, specialty units and emergency centers providing medium complexity 
care; (b) Improve the overall effectiveness (e.g., production of health benefits at an affordable 
Page  2
cost) of the SUS-financed delivery system to prevent, detect and treat priority chronic and non-
communicable conditions in the project’s targeted populations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Health System Quality Improvement Project (QUALISUS) is an 8-year Adaptable Program 
Loan (APL) in two phases. The total cost of the Program is US$1.4 billion with loan financing of 
US$500 million.  In general, QUALISUS will support interventions at three levels: (i) system-
wide investments to establish the national infrastructure and strengthen technical capacity to 
systematically motivate, support, measure, monitor, and evaluate the performance of the SUS-
financed delivery system and the health care organizations that comprise it; these will 
implemented at the federal level; (ii) regional investments to encourage, develop and test 
formalized inter-organizational relationships in defined regions to facilitate coordinated and 
continuous care delivery across provider levels and municipalities; these will be implemented by 
states and municipalities; and (iii) facility-level investments to improve and sustain 
organizational performance.  Implemented by states and municipalities, the latter will entail 
providing incentives to reform organizational arrangements in public facilities, foster stronger 
governance in private hospitals and improve management practices in both.  
 
The project comprises two Components: Component A - Development of Health Care 
Networks and Strengthening of Health Care Facilities, and Component B - Systems development 
for performance enhancement.  
 
Component A (estimated total cost: US$608 million or 90 percent) supports upgrading, quality 
enhancement, organizational reform and strengthening of management practices in facilities 
providing medium complexity care within defined regions. All facilities benefiting from 
investments in the Component will form part of broader initiatives (and corresponding 
investments) to develop and implement coordinated care through health care network 
arrangements. All financing will be channeled to states and municipalities through a pooled 
funding (SWAp) approach. Implemented by participating states and municipalities, this 
component would finance works, goods, materials, training and technical assistance. The 
Component consists of two subcomponents as follows:  
 
Subcomponent A.1: Design and Implementation of Health Care Networks.   This subcomponent 
would develop and implement regional and organized arrangements for coordinated care, 
including health care networks (RHCN), using six priority conditions as a starting point.  These 
are: hypertension, diabetes mellitus, breast cancer, prostate cancer, cervical cancer and peri-natal 
causes.  The configuration of network relationships will be based on development and 
implementation of clinical guidelines  for the above-mentioned conditions. In addition to 
supporting the crafting and dissemination of clinical guidelines, the proposed project will support 
the development and implementation of health care network arrangements through investments 
in the following areas: (i) governance and management arrangements; (ii) network financing 
systems; (iii) information technologies; (iv) territorial (regional) demarcation, including 
definition of services and competencies of facilities comprising the network; (v) medical support 
systems (pharmaceutical, diagnostic and therapeutic services); (vi) logistic support systems 
(patient identification, appointment centers, emergency dispatch systems, and emergency and 
Page  3
non-emergency patient transport systems); and (vii) data collection, tracking and monitoring 
systems.  
 
Subcomponent A.2: Strengthening the performance of facilities within the networks. This 
subcomponent aims at increasing the performance of individual facilities  comprising health care 
network (under formation) through: (i) upgrading of plant and equipment; (ii) development and 
implementation of continuous quality improvement programs; (iii) strengthening of internal 
management practices (including cost accounting systems, materials management, human 
resources management); and (iii) implementation the organizational and governance 
arrangements that foster autonomy and accountability. The latter would involve the gradual 
conversion of public facilities under direct management to more autonomous arrangements. This 
subcomponent will also support the implementation of strategic purchasing arrangements 
between public purchasers and providers.  
 
Component B (estimated total costs: US$67 million or 10 percent) aims to support the 
implementation of recently enacted reforms and policies related to hospital reform, network 
creation, performance management and quality enhancement. It will also support the creation of 
an enabling institutional and information environment to support the investments financed in 
Component A. This Component will be implemented directly by the MoH, supporting the 
following interventions: (i) preparation of a national quality improvement strategy; (ii) 
preparation and implementation of a national agenda for research and development on quality 
and efficiency, (iii) assessment and strengthening of available performance data and databases; 
(iv) establishment of benchmarking and public reporting systems; (v) establishment of a national 
institution specializing in quality performance evaluation, monitoring, technological assessment, 
and quality enhancement capacity building; (vi) expansion of facility licensing efforts and 
accreditation programs, (vii) development and implementation of purchasing arrangements (and 
corresponding instruments) that link financing to performance,  (viii) implementation of national 
cost accounting systems for hospitals; and (ix) reforming payment mechanisms to provide clear 
incentives for quality and performance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Health (Federal Level) with assistance of 
States and Municipalities (Sub-national Levels). Project activities will take place in to-be-defined 
micro-regions in all states.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has been awarded a Japanese Grant to conduct a series of preparatory activities 
and studies, including those related to safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
stand-alone Environmental Assessment will be prepared.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The EA will include appropriate “chance find” rules and procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
It is likely that indigenous peoples will be among the beneficiaries of the improved health 
system. Therefore, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared in 
accordance with OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
QUALISUS will not finance activities that may lead to involuntary resettlement (physical 
relocation, loss of assets or access to assets). However, since the Project may finance new 
construction, the policy could be triggered through land acquisitions for construction purposes. 
Although all sites will be located on public lands, the Operational Manual will stipulate that any 
new construction that may result in resettlement will not be eligible to receive funding. 
Verification that site will not involve involuntary resettlement will also be included in the 
Environmental Framework.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/10/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Between 8/30/06 and 10/30/06.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerard Martin La Forgia 
01/31/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
02/04/2008 
Comments:   
