Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/22/2009 
Report No.:  AC3843
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P110617 
Project Name:  Bahia State Integrated Rural Poverty Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Edward William Bresnyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Power (10%);Water 
supply (10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (29%);Participation and civic engagement 
(29%);Rural non-farm income generation (28%);Rural policies and institutions (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00 
 Local 
Communities 
4.00
14.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would support the scaling-up of the ongoing 
Bahia State Integrated Project: Rural Poverty to improve well-being, employment and 
incomes of the rural poor, thus contributing to the Borrower#s objective of increasing the 
State of Bahia#s Human Development Index (HDI).  This would be achieved by: (1) 
improving access to basic social and economic infrastructure and services, and enhancing 
small farmers# productive activities and their linkages with  national and international 
markets, using proven community-driven development (CDD) techniques; and (2) scaling 
up the impact of public investments on rural poverty by using the skills, social capital and 
experience of the project Municipal (MCs) and Community Associations (CAs) to 
improve the relevance, efficiency, sustainability, targeting and outcomes of non-project 
State and Federal investments in rural Bahia.   
 
3. Project Description 
As under the original Loan, the AF will support three components:  (1) Community sub-
projects will support demand-driven requests by rural CAs for matching grants for about 
Page  2
800 small-scale socio-economic infrastructure and productive investments benefiting an 
estimated 72,000 families (360,000 people) in 349 municipalities;  (2) Institutional 
Development will support technical assistance and training to mobilize and strengthen 
community CAs in identifying, preparing, operating and maintaining sub-projects, 
training for project MCs and technical advice for the State Technical Unit (STU); and  (3) 
Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation will support, inter alia, 
the costs (excluding salaries) of the STU, monitoring of project implementation, and an 
impact evaluation program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The AF Loan will support sub-projects in 349 rural municipalities in the State of Bahia, 
already in the target area of the original Loan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (ARD) 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.  
 
Environment (OP 4.01):  The on-going project has a Category B environmental 
classification, and the same rating will apply to the activities supported by the AF. 
Neither the State, nor the Bank, through the project, will approve sub-projects which 
cause degradation of essential natural habitats. Despite the small scale of individual 
investments, the STU requires that they comply with Federal and State environmental 
laws. No sub-project agreement is signed or funds transferred, until the environmental 
viability of the sub-project is determined. The sub-project agreements between the STU 
and CAs contain environmental compliance clauses.  
Page  3
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared by the STU for the on-going 
project, with inputs from the principal State environmental agencies, and was agreed with 
the Bank. The STU has in place an advance system for analysis of the environmental 
viability of sub-projects, as well as a large quantity of sub-project standard designs which 
include treatment of environmental aspects.  During the mid-term review of the ongoing 
project in November 2007, the Bank#s safeguards specialist assessed as satisfactory the 
work of the STU#s Technical Commission for Environment, in dealing with activities 
related to environmental aspects of the project, but also suggested the following 
improvements:   (1) further training of all actors (members of MCs, CAs and STU field 
staff); (2) transfer of responsibility for supervision of environmental aspects to the STU#s 
field staff. (3) Approaches for exploring opportunities for sub-projects of an 
environmental nature; and (4) recording in the EMP of the procedures being applied by 
the State environmental agencies in the analysis of potential cumulative environmental 
effects of projects.  A revised version of the EMP incorporating these comments was 
submitted to the Bank in preparation for the AF, and has been posted on the State#s 
project website (www.car.ba.gov.br) and sent to the Infoshop.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10):  The indigenous population of Bahia numbers about 
10,610, divided into 10 identified ethnic groupings and distributed among 20 indigenous 
lands, of which 11 are formally demarcated.  Bank rural poverty projects in Bahia, and 
elsewhere in the Northeast, have worked closely with indigenous communities to ensure 
their participation.  To date, the ongoing Loan has supported 34 sub-projects benefiting 
about 3,400 individuals. Under the AF, indigenous groups are expected to execute 
another 30 sub-projects  Lessons of experience from Bahia and other Northeast states 
show that indigenous communities are clearly capable of expressing and prioritizing 
needs and administering resources received, and respond favorably to the associative 
CDD project methodology, organizing themselves rapidly, participating in the MCs and 
operating/maintaining their investments communally.  
 
In preparation for the Additional Financing, the Borrower prepared a technical note 
(NOTA TÉCNICA REVISÃO DA ESTRATÉGIA PARA PARTICIPAÇÃO DOS 
POVOS INDÍGENAS) that describes how the Indigenous Participation Plan prepared for 
the original project was implemented (including problems encountered and lessons 
learned), modifications that were made to the Plan, measures that will be taken to address 
gaps identified with implementing the Plan, and feedback from consultations.   In order to 
meet the requirements outlined under the Bank#s new operational policy on Indigenous 
Peoples (OP 4.10), the Indigenous Participation Plan prepared for the original project was 
revised and updated for the additional financing phase of the project. The Indigenous 
Participation Plan (Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework equivalent) will ensure that 
any impact, positive or adverse, which may affect indigenous peoples, will be 
appropriately managed. To reflect latest developments and lessons learned, an updated 
version of the framework has been prepared to guide implementation under the AF; and 
has been made available to the public, both in the office of the STU and on its website 
(www.car.ba.gov.br).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
See item (1) above.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
(a) Key Stakeholders:  
 
The primary stakeholders are poor rural families organized into CAs.  Particular 
attention is given to indigenous communities, quilombola communities (Afro-slave 
descendents) and female-headed households, generally among the very poorest families. 
Secondary stakeholders include State and local/municipal authorities and civil society 
linked to and integrated with the project throughout its implementation cycle.  
 
(b) Mechanisms for Consultation and Disclosure:  
 
Public consultation on all aspects of the ongoing project, including environmental 
standards and requirements, has been conducted in an effective manner through the 
participatory MCs and through statewide information dissemination activities, and this 
will continue during AF implementation.  The MCs provide an open forum which meets 
regularly, has committed leaders and membership, includes the participation of technical 
specialists, and is recognized as a legitimate, inclusive body for knowledge dissemination 
and debate.  The project will promote special meetings of the MCs to discuss 
environmental aspects of specific types of subprojects.  The OM reflects this decision, 
and the updated EMP has been posted on the STU#s website.  
 
Given the requirements outlined under OP 4.10, a process of free, prior, and informed 
consultation with indigenous representatives was undertaken for the AF phase of the 
project. Consultations reflected broad community support for the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/08/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Edward William Bresnyan 
06/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves 
06/19/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa 
06/19/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/19/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
06/19/2009 
Comments:   
