Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/09/2008 
Report No.:  AC3861
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P104995 
Project Name:  BR Santos Municipality Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paula Dias Pini 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: August 14, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Sub-national 
government administration (50%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
44.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
44.00
44.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance the management capacity of the Santos 
Municipal Government for local economic development and to improve public services 
in the Northwest Zone of the Municipality of Santos.  
 
The first objective will be attained through the development of a local economic 
development strategy for the city, technical support to increase the municipal 
government’s capacity to develop and implement a city–port initiative, strengthening of 
the municipality’s Information Technology Program, and technical assistance to increase 
the municipal government’s capacity for land management. The second objective will be 
attained though an integrated package of physical and social investments related to urban 
environmental improvements in the Northwest Zone of Santos, including: slum 
upgrading and resettlement, implementation of a macro-drainage program, physical 
rehabilitation of decentralized municipal offices which offer professional training courses 
for low-income families, implementation of landslide risk prevention measures, and an 
urban greening initiative.  
 
Page  2
The key indicators of the project include: (i) adoption and commenced implementation 
of a local economic development strategy by 2011; (ii) provision of equitable quality of 
urban services to households in slum areas as in other areas of the city; and (iii) 
rehabilitation and improvement of a macro-drainage system in the Northwest Zone with 
sufficient capacity to handle 25-year flood levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project supports initiatives and actions designed to strengthen municipal 
management capacity for local economic development. These activities are targeted to 
provide the municipal government with technical analyses and proposals to address 
priority development issues in the region. The broad goal is to support the strategic vision 
pursued by the Municipality of Santos to improve the enabling environment necessary for 
the region to achieve its economic growth potential. The primary areas of focus are the 
institutional overlaps that constitute unnecessary obstacles to the region’s economic 
growth, and the challenges of designingnew business models to tackle new economic 
opportunities available to the region.  
 
The project also includes investments designed to improve the urban environment in the 
Northwest Zone of Santos through a set of investments in public services, housing, 
drainage, and urban amenities that will directly benefit about 2,400 of the poorest 
families living in slums and indirectly benefit the population of the entire Northwest 
Zone (about 90,000 people)and of the whole city.  
 
The project includes two components and various subcomponents, as described below:  
 
Component 1: Municipal Management Enhancement  
 
This component aims to strengthen the technical capacity of the Municipality of Santos 
in local economic development. It includes two subcomponents that will benefit all city 
residents and it and has a total cost estimated at US$5.2 million.  
 
1.1: Enhancing Municipal Management Capacity for Local Economic Development  
 
Local Economic Development Study: This subcomponent will focus on addressing 
specific constraints to development within the Municipality of Santos. A consolidated 
local economic development study will be carried out under the framework of the SES, 
focusing particularly on environmental issues since those are determinant elements in the 
local geographic and economic context. This study will provide a better common 
understanding of the existing economic, environmental, and social constraints and 
opportunities, with the aim of providing guidance on alternatives for reducing the 
technical, financial and timeframe efforts currently needed to prepare environmental 
assessments for specific investments to be made by public and private entrepreneurs. The 
study would have a special focus on: (i) solutions for the existing conflicts between the 
environmental and urban legislation in order to create a clear regulatory basis to support 
the study findings and proposals; (ii) develop an initial comprehensive view of the 
potential cumulative environmental impacts from the broad range of investments planned 
Page  3
and under implementation in the region, in order to enrich the environmental studies 
which typically focus only on the impacts of the individual investment being assessed; 
(iii) develop a portfolio of proposals for future investments in environmental mitigation 
and compensation, which each entrepreneur is formally required to carry out as per the 
environmental regulation in place, in order to maximize the positive cumulative impacts 
of such investments; and (iv) propose a streamlined approval procedure for the 
environmental impact assessment carried out in the region.  
 
City
–Port Revitalization Initiative: This subcomponent will provide technical support to 
increase the municipal government’s capacity to develop and implement a “city–port 
initiative,” which requires multiple studies and a Public–Private Partnership (PPP) 
arrangement for its implementation, including designing the implementation management 
model and modeling one PPP arrangement. This will build on the following ongoing and 
planned studies: (i) assessing the integration of ongoing and planned programs aimed at 
promoting the historic center’s revitalizationand the linkage of these programs with the 
city–port initiative; (ii) macro planning to assess the integration of the historic 
center/city–port initiative with regional development prospects, including tourism; (iii) 
creation of a promotion strategy; (iv) preparation of a detailed land use plan; (v) 
preparation of an urban zoning plan; and (vi) institutional and financial arrangements.  
 
Information Technology Program: This subcomponent will provide technical support to 
the Municipality of Santos to further develop its Information Technology Program, which 
includes a fiber optic network system implemented by the municipal government, capable 
of speeds many times faster than the services available from existing private providers in 
Santos. The activity’s objectives are to: (i) model a PPP arrangement for increasing the 
system’s efficiency and its operation and maintenance capacity; and (ii) complement the 
network in the Northwest Zone of Santos as part of the large-scale municipal effort to 
improve urban services and standards in this neighborhood.  
 
1.2. Enhancing Municipal Administrative Management Capacity  
 
Municipal Land Planning and Control Mechanisms: This subcomponent will provide 
technical assistance to increase the municipal government’s capacity for land 
management by complementing the ongoing modernization process introduced in the 
land cadastre mechanisms. This will include detailed mapping of principal organizational 
macro-processing routines, recommendations for improvements, and training for staff 
responsible for implementing the new routines. The methodology adopted constitutes a 
crucial part of the technical support because it must ensure knowledge transfer. Key 
methodological steps include: workshops to discuss the proposals; establishment of 
working groups; participatory processes to identify and assess current routines; 
clarification of the missions and objectives of departments assessed; assessment of 
projected increase in demand; design of a results matrix; assessment of team profiles; and 
development and provision of training programs.  
 
Project Management: This subcomponent will support the municipality in performing 
project implementation-related activities including technical expertise on specific topics, 
Page  4
monitoring and evaluation, auditing, financial management, procurement, and works 
supervision.  
 
Component 2: Revitalization of the Northwest Zone of Santos  
 
This component focuses on an integrated package of physical and social investments 
related to urban environmental improvements in the Northwest Zone of Santos, with 
direct benefits to the 90,000 residents of the Northwest Zone, including about 2,400 
households that will benefit from better living conditions through urban upgrading and 
resettlement.  
 
2.1. Addressing Social Inequalities  
 
Slum Upgrading and Resettlement: This subcomponent will provide urban infrastructure 
and services to approximately 2,400 families living in slums in the Northwest Zone of 
Santos. The objective is to raise the quality of public services provided to the level of 
quality available in other areas of the city. About half of the families living in the slum 
area reside in precarious stilt housing, to which urban services, such as water and 
sanitation, cannot be delivered. The resettlement of 1,100 families living in stilt homes 
will be supported under this subcomponent. This subcomponent will also finance the 
provision of social assistance to the affected families, including facilitating access to job 
training programs and to better housing quality. This sub-component is almost entirely 
financed by counterpart funds and would focus on the construction of (i) basic urban 
infrastructure in existing residential blocks, and (ii) housing for resettled families. All 
activities financed with counterpart contributions will comply with relevant bank 
safeguard policies as determined in the project’s EIA, EMP and Resettlement Plan.  
 
Improvements to the Municipal Job Training Program for Low Income Families: This 
subcomponent will finance the physical rehabilitation of decentralized municipal offices 
which offer professional training courses for low-income families. These courses are 
adjusted to the skills of the families living in the Northwest Zone and to market demand. 
This should contribute to the development of human capital within the region. Capacity 
building and training activities for the resettled families will be carried out directly by the 
Municipality of Santos.  
 
2.2 Improving Public Services  
 
Storm Drainage System Improvements: Flooding in the area is a result of intense rain as 
well as sea tides. The area’s flood problems will be addressed through the 
implementation of a macro-drainage program that will increase flood protection from the 
current yearly occurrences to a 25-year rate in the Northwest Zone of Santos, with direct 
positive impacts on its 90,000 residents. Investments will include the rehabilitation of 
existing canals, purchase and installation of canal gates and pumping stations, 
construction of a flood-retention pond, and installation of a centralized operational 
control system. The resulting decrease in incidents of flooding should increase the 
Page  5
availability of developable land for investment, as well as enhance the flow of people and 
goods within the city.  
 
Preventing Risks of Landslides: This subcomponent will focus on financing the cost of 
individual and minor preventive works such as retaining walls and micro-drainage 
solutions to avoid the consequence of erosion caused by inadequate drainage in a hilly 
topography. It will also finance the acquisition of vehicles to strengthen the monitoring of 
high-risk areas susceptible to unregulated occupation.  
 
Increasing Urban Green Spaces and Amenities: This subcomponent will support 
improvements to the Botanical Garden located in the Northwest Zone, and increase the 
availability of urban green spaces through planting of trees. The Botanical Garden is the 
Northwest Zone’s main landmark, as it attracts visitors from other neighborhoods and 
municipalities and is the principal recreational space in the area. The increase in the 
number of trees and green spaces will enhance the attractiveness of the urban area and 
further promote tourism opportunities in the region, as well as provide additional surface 
area for infiltration and absorption of rainwater, thus helping decrease the flow of storm 
water into drainage systems.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the Municipality of Santos, State of SÃ£o Paulo, 
Brazil. Investments in infrastructure will take place only in the island portion of Santos, 
but some of the studies and discussions supported by the project will involve the 
participation of other municipalities of the Baixada Santista Region.  
 
Although Santos has a large territory (271 km2)as compared to the region's other 
municipalities, only about 10% of its territory is available for urban use. The remaining 
90% is composed of mangroves in the estuary, and Atlantic Forest in the mountainous 
part of the territory, with both constituting biodiversity conservation areas where urban 
use is not permitted. Nearly 100% of the Santos population live in the 10% of the 
territory that is available for urban occupation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSDE) 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as Category A, requiring a comprehensive Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA). In accordance with OP 4.01, the EIA was conducted by the borrower, 
with support from a consulting firm, and the TORs and draft EIA report were discussed 
in public consultations. The EIA evaluates with- and without-project scenarios, identifies 
potential direct and indirect environmental impacts associated with the project and other 
alternatives, develops mechanisms and measures to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate 
negative impacts, and presents an Environmental Management Plan with specific 
activities, budgets, and responsibilities to ensure the implementation of identified 
mitigation measures. The project will not cause any large, significant and/or irreversible 
negative impacts. The EIA found that the range of potential negative environmental 
impacts relates primarily to investments in flood control and drainage, as well as 
stabilization of high risk areas in the hilly part of the island, and such impacts would be 
mostly localized and temporary while construction activities are going on. Overall, the 
proposed project is expected to have a highly positive impact from an environmental 
standp
oint. It would improve the environmental quality of the Northwest Zone’s urban 
wetlands and waterways through the implementation of improved floodcontrol 
mechanisms, restoration and protection of the natural hydrological conditions of the Sao 
Jorge River, improvements in quality of the water bodies (rivers and estuary) through the 
removal of irregular untreated wastewater discharge and solid waste disposal from the 
informal settlements (mostly composed of stilt houses), and by promoting the integration 
of environmental concerns into long-term municipal development planning. Moreover, 
project-supported training activities targeting regulators, planners, decision-makers, and 
stakeholders would induce a series of behavioral changes among urban residents, which 
would be expected to bring about positive changes for the environment. Project activities 
will entail dredging to rehabilitate existing canals and natural drainage ways, and the 
borrower has already obtained a State Environmental License to dispose such dredge 
materials in an existing controlled sanitary landfill.  
 
Page  7
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12): The project will improve and provide full urban 
services to 2,400 families currently living in slums and resettle 1,100 of those families. 
The families to be resettled live in stilt houses in part of the slum that cannot receive 
urban services because it is over the water. In addition, the municipality will acquire one 
privately owned land and turn it into a flood-control pond. This area is free of occupation 
because it accumulates storm water naturally due to its topography. It is also possible that 
around a dozen families may need to be resettled in the process of implementing small 
works to stabilize hilly areas at risk of landslides. The project has established a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that offers compensatory alternatives to significantly 
improve the living conditions of the resettled families. Moreover, the project will provide 
technical support to strengthen the municipality’s social andlegal capacity in order to 
ensure that comprehensive legal and social support is available for resettled families 
throughout the entire resettlement process. The project’s monitoring and evaluation 
component will also track the success of resettlement and related institutional 
strengthening.  
 
Natural Habitats OP (4.04) and Forests (OP 4.36): The project is expected to result in 
improvements to aquatic and riparian biodiversity within the Northwest Zone and in the 
mangrove complex. The project will promote the restoration of habitat for wetland and 
non-wetland species alike through emphasis on the removal of trash in the canals, the 
removal of stilt houses, the provision of sewerage services to the remaining portion of the 
slums, the creation of urban parks, and the restoration of aquatic and riparian vegetation 
along streams and mangrove vegetation along the canal. By promoting the rehabilitation 
and conservation of natural mangrove areas and drainage ways, the project will promote 
the maintenance of existing aquatic and riparian habitats. Through the improvement of 
water quality and removal of solid waste, the project will result in direct improvements to 
aquatic and riparian habitats in the Northwest Zone. The creation of urban parks along 
streams and the mangrove will result in long-term biodiversity benefits to local plant and 
wildlife. Although the project is expected to result in significant positive impacts for 
biodiversity and natural habitats, short-term impacts on riparian habitats will result from 
the undertaking of drainage improvements. These impacts will be more than mitigated by 
project interventions to rehabilitate the water bodies in the Northwest Zone through the 
eradication and treatment of pollution sources, the resettlement of the population living 
over the mangroves, the creation of urban parks, and the restoration of mangrove 
vegetation. Specific environmental mitigation related to natural habitats includes the 
provision of sewerage services to households living in the portion of the slums occupying 
lands that have appropriate conditions for receiving basic infrastructure. Moreover, the 
project will ensure that the urban drainage program selects alternatives that: (i) use 
adjacent spaces to create or augment urban greening; (ii) maximize the preservation of 
existing waterways and riparian vegetation; and (iii) strengthen the protection of existing 
parks or protected areas to maximize the long-term sustainability of water quality 
improvements. These activities will be the responsibility of the project coordination unit 
and the technical units.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP 7.60): The project will finance the construction of a flood retention 
pond to increase retention capacity to accomodate higher storm events. The size of the 
Page  8
pond is small (water depth less than 8 meters in a 25-year storm event), and the chosen 
terrain is privately owned and is not currently being used because it retains storm water 
naturally, making it unsuitable for urban use. The elaboration of engineering designs and 
construction of this pond will be under the responsibility of engineers with technical 
expertise in this type of infrastructure.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 11.03): Project construction activities will be 
implemented in an urban estuarine area, and as such chance find mechanisms were 
addressed in the EIA and have been incorporated in the Environmental Manual for Civil 
Works.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09): The envisioned tree planting activities may require the 
control of leaf-cutter ants until the seedlings are firmly established. The Environmental 
Management Plan includes measures to ensure that application of ant control substances 
are carried out according to relevant national legislation and OP 4.09 guidelines. A 
separate Pest Management Plan is not required.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project environmental and social impacts are expected to be  overwhelmingly positive. 
The resulting improved environmental and social conditions in the project area may 
provide added incentives for greater influx of people into the area, which could put 
additional pressure on the environment.  Project design includes, under Component 1, 
activities to strengthen municipal capacity for planning, promoting and managing local 
development processes that have environmental sustainability as a core premise. This 
strategy aims to ensure that all future activities in the project area would not cause undue 
negative impacts on the local environment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Several alternatives have been considered to address the existing constraints to local 
economic development in Santos. The initial project concept focused mostly on 
engineering solutions for the insufficient drainage issue in the Northwest Zone of the city, 
but during project preparation several other alternatives were considered which took into 
consideration additional issues related to local economic development. The selected 
solution addresses current constraints to such development, such as insufficient drainage, 
sanitation, and housing in the Northwest Zone, but also supports a number of initiatives 
and studies that will help the municipality of Santos, and other municipalities in the 
Baixada Santista, to achive environmentally and socially sustainable economic 
development in the long term.  
 
In addition, all physical investments proposed under Component 2 were subject to an 
analysis of alternatives in order to determine the optimal solution based on economic, 
environmental, social, and technical considerations. In the design of the macro-drainage 
system, for example, four alternative designs were evaluated and those are described in 
the Portuguese language EIA.   
Page  9
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment Report and a Resettlement Action Plan have been 
prepared by the Borrower, making full reference to, and taking full account of, the 
safeguards triggered under the Project. Following the successful experience in preparing 
this complex Project, and based on other infrastructure investments currently under 
implementation by the municipality, the Borrower has demonstrated adequate capacity to 
plan and implement the Project components and the EMP actions taking full account of 
the Bank’s safeguards requirements. In addition, the Borrower will contract a consulting 
firm to help supervise all works financed under the project, and this firm will also support 
the borrower in supervising the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include: the Municipal Government of Santos, residents and civil 
society organizations in the Northwest Zone of the city, and residents of the city as a 
whole.  
 
A
public consultation process was carried out, including two publich meetings to 
discuss the TORs (March 2008) for the EIA and a draft EIA report (October 2008). The 
project was well received on both occasions and no major issues have been raised to date. 
Project documents and additional information have been posted in the Santos Web Portal, 
at http://www.portal.santos.sp.gov.br/conselhos/news.php  
 
Project consultation and dissemination of information will continue into project 
implementation through regular presentations on the project implementation status at 
various existing public fora, such as the Baixada Santista Basin Committee, the Baixada 
Santista Metropolitan Development Council (CONDESB), and the Baixada Santista 
Metropolitan Agency (AGEM). In addition, the borrower will establish a local office in 
the Northwest Zone where the population will have continuous access to project 
documentation and information, including reports on the status of implementation of the 
various planned activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
11/21/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  10
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/21/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
Page  11
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
12/09/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
12/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
12/09/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/09/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
12/09/2008 
Comments:   
