Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC1786
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P091827 
Project Name:  Sustainable Cerrado Initiative 
Task Team Leader:  Garo J. Batmanian 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 6, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P);Land administration 
and management (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
17.86 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
36.00
36.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Initiatives development object is to promote the increase of biodiversity conservation 
and improve environmental and natural resource management of the Cerrado Biome, 
through support for appropriate policies and practices.  During the six-year 
implementation period, the Initiative aims at achieving two specific outcomes:  
 
-
Cerrado conservation policy framework fully developed and, at least 4 policy 
components adopted and contributing to biodiversity conservation in more than 20 
percent of the Cerrado biome.  
 
-
Biodiversity conservation increased in, at least, 4 priority regions of the Cerrado 
biome.  
 
The GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative would contribute to the underpinning of the 
sustainability of system of protected areas systems (SP1) and to integration biodiversity 
conservation into production systems (SP2) as expressed in the following results:  
 
-
Increase Brazils concrete improvement in management effectiveness of its protected 
area systems;  
 
-
Increase the percentage of supported protected areas effectively protected.  
Page  2
-
Increase number of replications of pilot activities reported and verified applying 
incentive measures and instruments;  
 
-
Increase number of sector policies and plans that incorporated biodiversity aspects;  
 
-
Increase production systems that contribute to biodiversity conservation or the 
sustainable use of its components.   
 
3. Project Description 
In view of the biomes expanse, large number of stakeholders, the already high loss of 
habitat, and that the long-term policy framework for its conservation is not fully 
developed yet,  the Initiative has adopted an innovative design to achieve the necessary 
degree of flexibility, decentralization and biome-wide coordination while supporting 
immediate actions where needed.  
 
The Sustainable Cerrado Initiative has an overall set of goals presented in the Results 
Framework.  These set of goals will be achieved through a decentralized approach of 4 to 
6
sub-projects contracted directly with different executing agencies. Each sub-project 
must necessarily contribute significantly to, at least, few of those overall goals. The entire 
set of sub-projects should synergistically achieve the overall goals set forth for the 
Initiative.  The sub-projects would be developed by sub-national and federal governments 
with participation of the civil society.  
 
The GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative has four components which closely follow key 
thematic and cross-cutting activities proposed under the National Sustainable Cerrado 
Program and consistent with GEF Strategic Objectives:  
 
Component 1: Conservation of the Cerrado Biodiversity (total amount US$ 15,5 
million; US$ 5 million from GEF) - aims at increasing biodiversity conservation in the 
Cerrado region by: strengthening the mosaic of legally protected areas (PAs) of unique 
biodiversity; development of pilot financial sustainability mechanisms for these PAs, and 
the development and implementation of activities for the protection and recovery of key 
threatened species.  
 
Component 2: Sustainable Use of the Cerrados Natural Resources  (total amount US$ 
15 million; US$ 5 million from GEF) - aims at mainstreaming the use of agro-
biodiversity in the Cerrado and the management of  the rural production landscape, so as 
to improve the use of available resources and biodiversity conservation, and to reduce 
environmental impacts.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Formulation of New Public Policies (total 
amount US$ 7 million; US$ 2 million from GEF) - aims to formulate new public policies 
for the conservation and sustainable use of the Cerrado; to strengthen the government 
agencies (at the federal, state and municipal levels) to manage natural resources; to select 
and use the best available tools, and to access up-to-date knowledge.  It also intends to 
enable the private sector, civil society organizations and local communities to actively 
participate in the management of the environment and in the formulation of new public 
policies related to the conservation and sustainable use of the Cerrados natural resources.  
Page  3
Component 4: Coordination of the National Sustainable Cerrado Initiative and 
Monitoring of the Biome (total amount US$ 1,5 million; US$ 1 million from GEF) - aims 
to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of this GEF Sustainable Cerrado 
Initiative.  It also intends to support the implementation of a publicly accessible database, 
containing up-to-date, geo-referenced, social and environmentally relevant information 
on the Cerrado biome.  
 
Implementation mechanism. The sub-projects proposals will be negotiated directly with 
the Bank, after the endorsement and following the strategic implementation guidelines 
and recommendations from the Initiative Committee. The final package will be submitted 
for GEFs CEO endorsement before the contract is signed between the Bank and the 
executing agency.  The MMA and the Bank will ensure that the final set of sub-projects 
collectively address the targets set forth in the results framework.  
 
The sub-project should be between two and three years long, so as to provide sufficient 
flexibility to accommodate possible new demands during the full six-year Initiative 
implementation period.   As a large-scale and multi-stakeholder venture, it is also 
expected that some of the Sub-project proposals will require one or even two years to be 
prepared, according to their proponents capacity.  
 
The proposed Goias sub-project  is already developed under the proposed procedure and 
is summary is being presented as sample sub-project together with this proposed 
Initiative.  The MMA subproject is also prepared. These two total to approximately US$ 
5,6 M of GEF funds. These two projects have developed their own environmental 
assessments following Bank's policy requirements. Other executing agencies have 
already shown interest in presenting proposal, and its expected that by the time this 
Initiative goes to Board, new sub-projects would be under preparation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The overall Initiative would contribute to the conservation of the Cerrado biome.  The 
Brazil biome covers some areas of the States of Maranhao, Piaui, Bahia, Tocantins, 
Goias, Minas Gerais, Sao Paulo, Parana, Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul, and the 
Federal District.   The sub-projects would possibly implement activities in some of these 
states and the MMA would monitor the overall biome.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Preliminary analysis, based on the components of the Initiative and the typical social and 
environmental situation in the Cerrado, indicates that several safeguards policies could be 
triggered by each sub-project.  The list below indicates those safeguards that might be 
triggered for the entire Initiative (e.g. whole set of sub-projects).  
 
The Initiative has been considered a category B project, where one or more safeguard 
policies could be triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are technically and 
institutionally manageable (S2).  
 
For the design of this Initiative, it was developed a safeguard framework with all 
safeguards that could possibly be triggered by individual sub-projects.  However, when 
triggered, the safeguards would be analyzed following the frameworks defined in annex 
10 of this PAD for each sub-project, which would carry its own safeguard policies 
assessments.  
 
In the case of an agency not being familiar with the safeguards policies, specific training 
process would take place. Additionally, the safeguards framework would need to be 
followed and related studies, plans or mitigation procedures would take place with 
support from MMA and close assistance/supervision from the Bank.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the proposed project's investments no long term social or 
environmental negative indirect impacts are expected to occur.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental assessment and social frameworks were prepared by the Borrower for 
the initiative. The assessment and frameworks were reviewed by the Bank and considered 
satisfactory. Each sub-project will carry out its specific safeguard assessment wich will 
comply with the overall Initiative safeguard framework.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Initiative was prepared in consultation with the Sustainable Cerrado Program 
National Committee (CONACER), wich convenes government, academia and civil 
society representatives. The environmental assessment was disclosed to the general 
public at CONACER's website 
(http://www.mma.gov.br/index.php?ido=conteudo.monta&idEstrutura=54&idMenu=490
0&idConteudo=5461)in April 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The documents related to the Initiative will be disclosured as usual. The subprojects will 
also have their documents disclosed in accordance with Bank practices.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Page  7
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian 
04/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian 
04/29/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss 
04/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
06/04/2008 
Comments:  I confirm that the framework for potential env and social impacts is satisfatory. 
