Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2729 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P101507 
Project Name: RGN Rural Poverty Reduction- Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
22.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3.38 
 Local 
Communities 
2.13
5.51 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Additional Financing would support the scaling-up of the Rural Poverty Reduction Project 
in the State of Rio Grande do Norte to: (a) improve wellbeing and incomes of the rural poor 
through better access to basic social and economic infrastructure and services and support for 
productive activities, using proven community-driven development (CDD) techniques; (b) 
increase the social capital of rural communities and capacity to organize collectively to meet 
their own needs; (c) enhance local governance by greater citizen participation and transparency 
in decision-making through the creation and strengthening of community associations and 
Municipal Councils; and (d) foster closer integration of development policies, programs and 
projects in rural areas at the local level by assisting the project's participatory Municipal 
Councils to extend their role in seeking funding from, setting priorities for, and making decisions 
concerning the allocation of resources from, other complementary programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
1.  As under the Original Loan, the Additional Financing will support the following three Project 
components:  
 
(a)  Community Subprojects: will provide matching grants to community associations to 
finance their implementation of about 1,643 small-scale socio-economic infrastructure, 
productive, education, health, culture, environmental and other investments benefiting an 
estimated 51,000 families (229,500 people).  For poverty targeting purposes under the Additional 
Financing, the 165 participating municipalities have been divided into three areas of relative 
priority based on Municipal Human Development Index (HDI-M), rate of urbanization, and total 
resources received under the first-phase project.  Area A representing the poorest 59 
municipalities, will receive 42% of community subproject resources; the 59 municipalities in 
Area B, 35%; and, the 47 municipalities in Area C, 23%;  
 
(b)  Institutional Development:  will support (i) technical assistance and training to mobilize 
and strengthen community associations in their role of identifying, preparing, operating and 
maintaining subproject investments and (ii) training for the project Municipal Councils and 
technical advice for the State Technical Unit for their expanding roles under the Additional 
Financing; and  
 
(c)  Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation: will support, inter alia, the 
costs (excluding salaries) of the State Technical Unit, the monitoring of project implementation 
and subsequent impact evaluation.  
 
2.  Types of activities under this community demand-driven project will be similar to the 
Original Loan but with greater emphasis on certain aspects:  
 
(a) Productive, income-generating investments to help increase the state's Human Development 
Index will receive more focused attention.  These inherently more complex subprojects mandate 
tight screening processes including economic, social and environmental analysis and more 
systematic technical assistance, supervision and marketing support. Demand for project-financed 
productive investments has traditionally been strong in Rio Grande do Norte and exceptionally 
strong under the ongoing project, representing about 40% of all subprojects financed.  
 
(b) Acknowledging the potential benefits, the Additional Financing will intensify its approach 
to integration - initiated successfully under the ongoing Original Loan. As conceived, other 
federal and state programs will use - in parallel - the project-created operational mechanisms  
(Municipal Councils and community associations) to allocate resources for a range of 
complementary investments designed to deepen and accelerate development impact. The STU 
will also continue to strengthen partnerships with federal, state and municipal authorities, and 
with banks and organizations which provide training to community associations.  
 
(c) The STU under the first phase has been effectively mobilizing and targeting investments to 
communities in 24 municipalities with lowest HDI and this would be intensified under the 
proposed Additional Financing. The proposed project would also continue to give priority to 
ethnic groups, women and youth through information dissemination in appropriate forms, 
mobilization and financing for eligible investments.   
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project Area remains the same as that under the Original Loan and will cover 165 
municipalities (of the 167 statewide).  
 
As noted above in C.1(a) above, the plan is to allocate/target community subproject resources 
on the basis of relative poverty and other related factors.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The State Technical Unit (COPES/SETHAS), has complied fully with Bank Safeguard and 
project environmental rules in implementing the project under the Original Loan.  The project 
has an Environmental Management Plan and Operational Manual. Both have functioned well in 
supporting project operations and safeguards standards, and will be enhanced under the proposed 
Additional Financing.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSAR) 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
(a) Upgrade Operational Manual to ensure Additional Financing project complies with all 
relevant State and Federal environmental laws and Bank Safeguards; (b) Update the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and project Operational Manual, clarifying and 
enhancing existing procedures for ensuring the integration of environmental standards in 
financed subprojects including those pertaining to possible cumulative impacts, i.e., that  the 
environmental screening of water resources subprojects identifies any possible environmental, 
economic and social effects/impacts of small-scale dams/irrigation and/or other water supply 
systems which utilize a single source, including cumulative impacts;  (c) Ensure clarification in 
both documents of steps to be taken to mitigate any environmental damage identified following 
subproject implementation, especially cumulative damage, by subproject type and location.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Upgrade content of EMP and Operational Manual to ensure that neither State nor Bank will 
approve subprojects causing degradation to critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Upgrade Operational Manual to: (a) state ineligibility of subprojects involving wood 
extraction for firewood  for ceramic production; and (b) include provisions for developing 
management schemes (e.g., community woodlots) to ensure regeneration of local vegetation and 
protection of rare species.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Further enhance project Operational Manual by preparing and incorporating a Pest 
Management Plan (PMP).  Existing EMP already defines processes (including screening criteria 
in Operational Manual) for detecting potential use of pesticides and the Original Project already 
uses integrated pest management approaches.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Upgrade project Operational Manual by outlining procedure
s
to be followed in the event of 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
“chance finds” of culturally significant materials during subproject implementation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/24/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Planned for 07/02/2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas 
05/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
