Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3595 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P107146 
Project Name: Acre Social and Economic Inclusion 
Task Team Leader: Adriana Moreira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 19, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (30%);Sanitation (20%);Health (20%);Sub-national 
government administration (15%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (15%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Health system performance (P);Rural markets (P);Water 
resource management (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall project development objective is to assist the Government of Acre in its efforts for 
promoting economic growth and social inclusion of its poorest communities while preserving its 
forests and cultural diversity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to guide the spatial definition of public policies GoAc developed a participatory state 
wide Economic and Ecological Zoning (ZEE) process which lays down the long term vision for 
the development of the State. Based on the analyses on environmental, social and historic 
variables the ZEE exercise proposed and validated a sustainable development strategy. To 
implement concrete actions in the pursuit of these objectives the Government has established a 
series of spatially explicit programs and strategies with specific actions for communities located 
in low-income defined areas/zones. These actions, to be implemented under Community 
Development Plans (PDC) are the main thrust of PROACRE: to deliver spatially adequate, 
hierarchically nested public services so as to provide basic services to isolated and vulnerable 
populations.  
Page  2
Project Components:  the project will consist of four components defined by a territorial 
approach. A brief description of each component is provided below:  
 
Component 1 
–
Essencial services and food security in isolated areas: This component would 
encompass the provision of basic education, health and community development services to the 
most dispersed state’s communities. For the Health Sector the main target will be the expansion 
of PAC/PSF mobile teams for expand coverage to the remote populations living in isolated, and 
dispersed areas that faces continuous constraints to demand services, through general Family 
Health mobile teams that would simultaneously deliver State’s basic health portfolio of services 
in those communities and enroll these populations to the family health national program, and to 
the  Quality Insurance System for mother and neonatal (QIS-MN))  care to be supported by the 
Project. Additionally, the component will provide health promotion, and prevention services 
aimed at overcoming potential cultural barriers. The subcomponent would finance the 10 PSF 
mobile teams for the CAUs, and also the contracting-out of those teams by the QIS-MN as 
necessary. For the Education Sector the component objective is to provide a menu of services 
intended to universalize education opportunities for children, youth, young adults and ethnically 
diverse populations residing in isolated communities, where essential basic services are still 
lagging well behind more urbanized parts of the state. The aim will be the provision of essential 
public services and to assist in local productive activities. In Community Sustainable 
Development the main objective will be to provide technical assistance to improve agricultural 
productivity and diversification in order to insure food security for the target communities.  
 
Component 2 – Services provision and Sustainable Market Integration: The aim would be to 
offer a larger set of services and to assist the communities in developing sustainable productive 
activities. In the Health Sector this subcomponent will finance the establishment of the QIS-MN 
Fund, the vehicle for financing the delivery of all services included in the two selected health 
care chains (pregnancies and neonatal health care), and the costs of providing the Quality 
Insurance System (QIS) to the target population. Annual Management Agreements between the 
SEDACRE and providers will be establish for payments and fee-for-service transfers to 
providers of the QIS--MN, based on its portfolio of services. “Capitas” as “insurance premiums” 
for each enrolled eligible person to the QIS-MN would bedisbursed by the Bank. The average 
per-capita costs for providing the QIS-MN to the target population (pregnant women and 
neonatal population 0-28 days) would be estimated through an in-depth study during preparation, 
that would considered variable and logistic costs (transport, logistics, basic drugs and basic 
medical supplies). The QIS-MN Capita (Insurance Premium) will be the vehicle to transfer 
proceeds from the Bank to the GoA. To receive loan proceeds, other than resources for technical 
assistance or for capacity building, eligible municipalities would be required to become QIS-MN 
Program participating municipalities, through signing the Annual Management Agreements. 
SEDACRE would make resources available to participating municipalities based on enrollment 
rosters of the target population. For Education Sector an extended menu of services for 
communities where some of the essential services are already universal and a second or third 
generation of services is required to raise the skill level and competitiveness of the labor force in 
the state to seize emerging economic growth opportunities.  In Community Sustainable 
Development the main objective is to promote community empowerment and economic 
inclusion. The approach will be to frame and implement Community Development Plans (CDPs 
), which will help to define the vision of each community and the means of pursuing it. CDPs 
Page  3
framework is composed by training, appraisal, planning and implementation of activities, and 
represents an important strategy of integration across education, health and productive activities. 
Expected outcomes include the enhancement of overall production capacity and social 
entrepreneurship integrated to market chains of selected products (e.g. rubber, Brazil nut, special 
oils). Complementary investments in infra-structure are already underway through BNDES and 
IDB loans. Supporting studies for successful CDBs implementation might include economic 
viability of local productive arrangements as well as market studies for productive chains.  
 
Component 3 
–
Institutional Strengthening: The objectives of this component areto : (i)   
support the decentralization of the basic services in health and education;  (ii)  establish key 
reforms in the sectors  through the establishment of new public administration models and 
procedures to improve the effectiveness, efficiency and quality of service delivery; and (iii) 
support the capacity of the state agencies responsible for sustainable development to plan, 
monitor and evaluate the increase in the offer of  community productive activities in remote 
areas of the state. This component comprises the following main activities: (A) In education: (i) 
improve the Secretariat of Education‘s capacity ; (ii) establishthe use of performance agreements 
for early childhood education and first grades of basic education with municipalities and 
strengthen the system of municipal incentives for quality provision of these services; (iii) 
strengthen the public school management through the implementation of School PDEs (School 
Development Plans); (iv) establish a monitoring and evaluation system to monitor and evaluate 
the performance of the school network in the public education system, particularly to monitor 
school, municipalities and state IDEB  . (B) In health: (i) update and validate the PDR- (Plano 
Diretor de Regionalizacao –Health Regional Plan);(ii) strengthening SEDACREs capacities on 
its steering role in health; (iii)organize the state health delivery model, giving priority to neonatal 
and obstetric care network by establishing instruments , defining responsibilities among the 
various agencies and sub-national entities; (iii) establish new models of regulation for accessing 
and improving the quality of the neonatal and obstetric care service network, including 
accreditation, and quality measurement systems for health units offering this type of services; 
and (iv) introduction of a tele-health system for qualifying attention to the maternal and infantile 
health care; and (v) implement a decentralization program of 22 health units with in-house 
patients and other 6 more units without in-house patients; (C) In Community Sustainable 
Development: (i)   promoting capacity building an training for those involved in sustainable 
development activities; (ii) define and implement participatory planning instrument to work with 
the communities (PDCs) and mechanism for monitoring and evaluating its efficiency for 
expanding the range of services to remote areas of the State; and  (iii)  implement a program of 
quality standards for the Agro-forestry and Forestry program.  
 
Component 4 – Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation: This component will include support 
for project management, monitoring and evaluation, coordination of activities for health and 
education systems, and coordination of support to urban, rural and forest communities. Two key 
activities would be financed in these areas: i) the health monitoring system, and ii) the 
observatory of quality.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in the State of Acre.   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The state of Acre has a good institutional capacity to handle the safeguard policies potentially 
triggered by the proposed project. Moreover, the state's institutional capacity is being 
strenghened under an ongoing IADB project. The proposed project will also include additional 
institutional strenghening activities so as consolidade recent achievements in areas such as 
environmental management, forest management, and social inclusion of indigenous peoples and 
vulnerable communities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Adriana Moreira (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss (LCSSO) 
Mr Thomas Ludewigs (LCSRF) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will support environmentally benign activities consistent with Acre's government 
policy to pursue a sustainable development policy based on the wise use of its forest resources. 
On the productive components the project will support community forestry and sustainable agro-
ecological practices. Although these activities do not represent a threat to the forests the State has 
agreed to prepare an EA which will, inter alia, identify potential environmental impacts and 
proposed adequate mitigation measures. The EA will also assess potential environmental impacts 
of the education and health activities proposed by the project and identify mitigation measures. 
Therefore, in addition to identify potential impacts the EA will guide the proposition of 
institutional capacity strengthening activities for the project implementing agencies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project does not anticipate negative impacts on natural habitats. Much to the contrary, 
the project aims to improve the conservation and increase areas for natural habitats thereby 
increasing critical habitats which will allow for an improved genetic flow of the regions rich 
biodiversity.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will support community management of forest resources. Measures to address 
possible adverse impacts will be treated under the projects EA. Institutional strengthening 
activities will be part the project so as built the capacity the states forest and environmental 
agencies for addressing this safeguard policy requirements.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project supports an integerated pest management approach to dealing with leaf cutter 
ants. The project supports significantly reducing (through IPM) if not entirely eliminating 
(adoption of organic agriculutre) pesticide use.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Acre has population of 17.000 indigenous peoples. So as to ensure their participation on 
project benefits in the provision of basic services and productive projects the Project will 
prepared an Indigenous Peoples Framework. Institutional strengthening activities will be part of 
the project, and will support  capacity building for the state agencies working directly with 
indigenous peoples so as to enhance the social benefits and mitigate
any social risks for 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
indigenous peoples participating in the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Currently there are no activities, but pending SATs recommendation the team will prepare an 
involuntary resettlement framework.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/24/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Assessments:  
 
First draft: June 9th, 2008  
 
Public consultation: June 11th, 2008  
 
Second draft (to be submitted to SAT for comments): June 20th, 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
