Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3814 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/28/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P111996 
Project Name: Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit Project   II 
Task Team Leader: Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
215.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective is to: a) improve the level-of-service provided to the urban 
rail transport users in the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region (RJMR) in a safe and cost-efficient 
manner by increasing the peak
–hour and off-peak carrying capacity of the suburban rail system 
operated by SuperVia; and b)  continue the strengthening of the transport management and 
policy framework in  the RJMR.  
 
These objectives will be met by: (i) financing rolling stock which is critical for increasing the 
peak-hour carrying capacity of the rail-based system; (ii) upgrading systems (signaling, telecom 
and electrical) to increase train frequencies to allow timely transfers between buses, suburban 
trains and the metro thereby facilitating the mobility of the low-income population and their 
access to employment areas; and (iii) designing urban transport strategies and actions to mitigate 
the impact of rising transport costs on the mobility of the poor by introduction of an integrated 
multimodal tariff.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project would comprise two components:  
 
(a) Infrastructure and Equipment to acquire Thirty trains (Electrical Multiple Units-EMUs) of  
four cars each for SuperVia. This component accounts for about 97% of the total project cost. 
The train acquisition alone represents about 90% of the project total cost of R$221 million.  The 
financing of signaling, electrification and telecom systems and upgrading of existing transfer 
stations is the responsibility of SuperVia under a parallel program.  
 
(b) Institutional and Policy Development to help in (i) consolidating the Regional Transport 
Coordination Commission (AMTU-RJ) for the RJMR; (ii) updating the integrated Transport 
Policy, Land Use and Air Quality Management strategy (PDTU) for the RJMR to meet both 
transport and air quality targets and to introduce sound cost-recovery, tariff, regulatory and 
subsidy policies; (iii) support through studies and technical assistance the adoption of some type 
of “Bilhete-Unico” ; and (iv)  project management and supervision  including acquisition and 
reception of the trains. This component represents about 3% of the total project cost.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region.  
 
Rail Right-of-way of Central - Companhia Estadual de Engenharia de Transportes e Logistica, 
operated by Concessionaire Supervia.  
 
The original Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit project and the Add. Financing to the same project 
were rated as a Category B by LATEN and SAT. No EMP was required but independents 
consultants  were hired to verify whether there was potential resettlement. There was no 
involuntary resettlement or expropriation in the project. The main aspects to be monitored and 
mitigated had to do with day-to-day operational activities of the system, the prevention of 
“dengue” and other diseases in the vegetation that grows in the right-of-way, the reduction of 
work accidents and in the shops and the need for an educational campaign. Also clauses were 
introduced in the bidding documents to ensure that contractors working in the railway facilities 
would properly dispose of their residues.  The award of the concession to SuperVia was preceded 
by an environmental audit required by the State under model terms of reference provided by the 
Bank and undertaken by independent environmental consultants. On the basis of such report 
undertaken in the context of the Rio State Reform and Privatization project,  the concessionaire 
(Supervia) agreed to undertake a plan to mitigate the impact of the disposal of residues (oil, 
grease, sewage), to disinfect the vegetation to  prevent dengue, to educate the staff in adequate 
practices to prevent operations and shop accidents. The reports prepared by Supervia are 
monitored by the project team through supervision consultants and have been satisfactory.   The 
results insofar as disposing of residues, cleaning the right-of-way  which before the concession 
was littered with trash and the reduction in work accidents has been notable since the 
concessionaire took over in 1998.  
 
The proposed Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit 2 project does not trigger any new safeguard 
policies. There is no resettlement involved because there will be no construction of new 
buildings financed either by the loan or by SuperVia.  The main issues are the continuation of the 
implementation of the plan agreed by SuperVia to mitigate the impact of the disposal of residues 
Page  3
(oil, grease, sewage), to disinfect the vegetation to  prevent dengue, to educate the staff in 
adequate practices to prevent operations and shop accidents. Overall, given that the project will 
switch passengers from road to rail-based electric traction systems the impact on the 
environment will be highly beneficial with reduction of emissions.  The use of regenerative 
braking in the new trains will also have a significant impact in CO2 emission reduction. A short 
study on CO2 reduction potential of the project is being planned to maximize the benefits and 
monitor results.   
 
E.  Bor
rower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has the institutional capacity required through the Project Management 
Implementation Group and consultants.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
n/a   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Pest Management policy is triggered because there are periodic spraying of the right way 
with products to prevent the dengue mosquitoe.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/30/2009 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Meetings will be held with the SuperVia Environmental Management and Safety department 
to agree on a table of contents for the revised EMP.  
 
a) Meetings with SuperVia Env. and Safety Department on October 28-31, 2008 to agree on 
table of contents for EMP and on the basic study for Regenerative Braking.  
 
b)
Draft EMP to be ready by December 15, 2008  
 
c) Draft Study on Impact of Regenerative Braking to be presented by February 15, 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
10/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/22/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
10/22/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
