Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3925
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P107146 
Project Name:  Acre Social and Economic Inclusion 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Moreira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 20, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (30%);Sanitation (20%);Health (20%);Sub-national 
government administration (15%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (15%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Health system performance (P);Rural markets (P);Water 
resource management (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to contribute to Government of Acreís 
efforts to promote social and economic inclusion of the poorest/most disadvantaged 
populations living in both urban and isolated rural areas of the State.  
 
To this end, the Project will support GoAC to achieve the following eight project 
development objectives:  
 
(a) 
Student populations living in the most remote and disadvantaged areas of the state 
have better access to quality education programs in pre-school, elementary and secondary 
levels;  
 
(b) 
Young and adult populations living in the most remote and disadvantaged areas of 
the state have better access to literacy and life-long skills development programs;  
 
(c) 
Poor and vulnerable populations across the State have improved access to basic 
health care services (especially maternal and neonatal health care) and those services are 
of higher quality;  
Page  2
(d) 
Rural communities experience higher economic inclusion through improved 
access to agricultural extension services and stronger market chains for selected products;  
 
(e) 
Poor urban communities located in river valleys engaged in entrepreneurial 
initiatives;  
 
(f) 
The Government of Acre has stronger technical for delivering basic health and 
education services;  
 
(g) 
The stateís natural endowment is more securely managed through improved 
sustainable forest management practices; and  
 
(h) 
Intra-governmental coordination is strengthened between Acreís municipalities 
and the Federal government, as well as across State agencies.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of four components defined by a territorial approach and a 
component of project management and information dissemination. A brief description of 
each component is provided below:  
 
Component 1 ñ Basic services for isolated communities (US$24.8 million).  This 
component will support the provision of basic services in health, education and 
agricultural extension services, including technical assistance, to Acreís dispersed and 
most isolated communities, or CAUs. In these communities, essential basic services are 
still mostly lacking and coverage is far behind more urbanized parts of the state.  
Component 1 will expand access to health and education services by using informal and 
non-traditional methods of reaching children, youth, young adults and ethnically diverse 
populations. Agricultural and food consumption activities in these communities will be 
supported by Community Development Agents.  
 
Component 2 ñ Social and Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas (US$39.1 million).This 
component intends to: (i) improve the quality of education and health services in CAPs 
(Priority Service Communities) and COPs (Pole Communities) and (ii) improve income 
levels of the population living in these communities by supporting selected production 
chains. This component will develop activities in CAPs and COPs, the two types of 
communities targeted by the project that have relatively higher level of existing 
infrastructure and better access to markets.  The more developed nature of CAPs and 
COPS allows the project to offer a more complete set of health, education and technical 
assistance services, including support for the preparation and execution of Community 
Development Plans (CDPs). The CDPs will support the identification, definition and 
selection of specific productive activities that will be implemented by each target 
community. This component will also support professional training for workers of the 
agricultural and industrial sectors.  
 
Component 3. Entrepreneurship for selected marginal urban communities (US$42.7 
million).  The objective of this component is to promote social inclusion of urban 
communities in areas of high socioeconomic and environmental vulnerability.  These 
urban communities are those located in the bottoms of valleys, close to rivers and in 
urban marginal areas. In addition, the component will seek to foster entrepreneurship and 
promote economic empowerment through the promotion of community enterprises, and 
Page  3
the expansion of micro-credit and vocational training for professionals and community 
members. A socioeconomic survey based on a sample of some 103,000 people will be 
developed to identify the housing, sanitation, health, education, employment, and income 
conditions of the population living in these areas. The Bolsa Fam√É¬≠liaís Unified 
Integrated Register - Cad√É≈°nico will also be used to define the socioeconomic 
condition of teenagers and young adults in the target areas so that they may be effectively 
included in education vocational training programs. Beneficiaries of the Bolsa 
Fam√É¬≠lia Program will be the main target of this component.  
 
Component 4 ñ Public Policy and Institutional Strengthening (US$37 million). This 
component aims to (i) modernize state agencies with emphasis on those involved in 
Project implementation; (ii) foster decentralization of basic services in health and 
education, which are responsibilities assigned to municipalities by the Brazilian 
Constitution; and (iii) introduce results-based management strategies in selected sectors.  
Considering the weak capacity of Acreís municipalities, this component seeks to support 
the transfer of certain responsibilities to municipalities and public or private agencies by 
structuring the transfer around performance-based agreements and providing technical 
assistance to the local level, municipalities and communities. To pursue these objectives 
and modernize the State administration, the component will develop activities to 
modernize and strengthen Acreís Government Secretariats and other public sector 
agencies.  
 
Component 5 ñ Project Management and Information Dissemination (US$6.4 million). 
This component will support overall project coordination and supervision and will help 
strengthen the effectiveness and quality of all project operations.  The component will 
finance the incremental operating costs of the Project Coordination Unit at SEPLAN, 
which is responsible for overall coordination of project activities in technical partnership 
with the other Secretariats and State agencies involved in the project (SEPLAN, SEE, 
SESACRE, SEMA, SEAPROF, IDM, and SAS).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the state of Acre, in the Brazilian Amazon. The state still 
maintains 88% of its original forest cover.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Adriana Moreira (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss (LCSSO) 
Mr Thomas Ludewigs (LCSRF) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The EA analyzed the potential environmental impacts (both positive and adverse) of the 
actions to be supported by the project. In general, the adverse impacts are expected to be 
localized and reversible, arising mainly from activities inherent to the implementation of 
sustainable productive activities, and may be minimized through the adoption of 
preventive measures dealing with planning the execution of interventions and procedures 
that adequately use natural resources, as defined in the Community Development Plans 
and Community Forest Management.  
 
The Project foresees activities in three sectors: production, health, and education. 
Activities in the education sector involve mainly the improvement of provision of 
education services within existing facilities, and will not involve construction of 
infrastructure or any other activity that might cause negative environmental impacts. 
Rather, the improvement of curricula will increase quality delivery of continuous 
environmental education, which should result in positive, long-term environmental 
impacts. Therefore, the assessment of the overall possible environmental impacts of the 
Project focused mostly on activities in the production and health sectors.  
 
Health sector activities will improve quality and increase delivery of health services in 
hospitals, health clinics, and mobile units. To improve community health, the Project will 
also support the construction of cisterns and septic tanks in rural communities, with an 
expected positive environmental impact. However, possible negative environmental 
impacts might arise from activities in this sector, related to inappropriate handling of 
medical waste or groundwater contamination from inadequate location or construction 
te
chniques, or from inadequate use of agricultural chemicals. The Projectís 
Environmental Management Plan (and Integrated Pest Management Plan, with more 
details on acceptable agricultural practices) foresees activities to prevent/mitigate these 
impacts by developing and applying adequate procedures, and delivering awareness-
raising and informative activities to the target public.  
 
Page  5
Activities most likely to cause environmental impacts are related to the production 
sector, since the stateís vocation is directed at a forest-based economy.Thus, foreseen 
activities seek to promote sustainable extractive, forestry, and agro-ecological practices, 
and are responsible for triggering most of the safeguards included below. Preventive and 
mitigation activities for these possible impacts were included in the Projectís 
Environmental Management Plan. The client alsoprepared a comprehensive Integrated 
Pest Management Plan, in compliance with OP 4.09, to guide sustainable agricultural 
practices and the adequate, reduced use of agricultural chemicals, if required and 
approved.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative indirect and/or long term impacts are foreseen for the project. Project 
activities should result in long term conservation and sustainable use of Acre's forest 
resources. Another very positive impact expected from the project is the preparation and 
implementation of Indigenous Land Management Plans (Planos de Gest√£o de Terra 
Ind√≠gena) for all of the 34 legally recognized indigenous territories of Acre, with the 
participation of the indigenous communities, and a 35th Protection Plan to be prepared by 
the state to protect the area inhabited by the so-called isolated indigenous peoples who 
have chosen not to make contact with the national society. Thus, with support from this 
project, Acre will be the first of all Brazilian states to have participatory indigenous 
management plans in place for the totality of its indigenous communities and population.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project design based on sectors: The initial proposal for the project was structured by 
sectoral components.  The project activities were to be implemented by individual Acre 
state secretariats.  After analysis, the project team was concerned that weak integration 
among the involved sectors could hamper the projectís success and segment impact 
monitoring. Consultations with GoAc officials confirmed that the territorial approach was 
preferable, since it followed the state governmentís existing system of dividing areas of 
the state according to socio-economic vulnerability.  The territorial approach allows the 
project to jointly plan health, education and economically productive activities as an 
overall strategy to foster inclusion and regional sustainable socio-economic development.  
 
No significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed. PROACRE was 
specifically tailored to support the Government of Acre in enabling the long-term 
sustainable, forest-based development of the state, promoting enhanced education and 
health, social inclusion, and environmentally-friendly economic activities. The project's 
environmental assessment includes a detailed environmental management plan with 
preventive and mitigation measures for any eventual impact stemming from project 
activities.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower addressed safeguard policy issues by preparing: (a) a detailed 
environmental assessment and environmental monitoring plan; (b) a brief social 
assessment analysis, named Key Social Issues; (c) an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework; and (d) an Integrated Pest Management Plan. Throughout the process, the 
borrower showed an adequate capacity of selecting consultants and producing all basic 
documents on due time and of good quality.  
 
The borrower has also shown great capacity to mobilize partners, beneficiaries and civil 
society as a whole to participate in the consultation processes, as well as to contribute 
with several suggestions to enhance the basic documents after the consultations and as an 
ongoing process. Furthermore, the borrower has developed and started implementation of 
an ongoing communication system to provide timely feedback to the participants of the 
consultations specifically, and to the general public as a whole.  
 
Consultations held in May and June 2008 were followed by an intense dialogue between 
the project team and the indigenous representatives, mostly to: (a) clarify the range and 
budget of specific project activities pertaining to the indigenous peoples; (b) define basic 
implementation processes and methodologies; and (c) agree on the principles for the 
partnership to be established between the government and the indigenous organizations 
leaders during the whole project cycle: preparation, implementation, monitoring, 
evaluation, and (as an innovation) feedback of the results to the indigenous communities 
and other beneficiaries.  
 
The environmental assessment also includes a detailed evaluation of the existing 
institutional capacity to carry out project activities, including measures to address 
safeguard policy issues. The borrower's capacity was considered satisfactory and 
institutional strengthening activities were included in the project under component 4 to 
further implementation capacity:  
 
ï
Public Sector Management Interventions.  The project is planning to: (a) support 
the development of e-government strategies to both increase the populationísknowledge 
of and access to governmental services and programs as well as strategies that will 
monitor the delivery of those services; (b) support the decentralization of basic services 
in health, education, and environmental management activities; (c) define key reform 
areas for introducing new public administration models and procedures to improve 
effectiveness, efficiency and quality of service delivery; (d) development of capacity 
building activities for strengthening the state agenciesí ability for planning, 
implementing, monitoring and evaluatinggovernmentís programs and activities; (e) 
development of capacity building and training activities for those involved in agro-
forestry and forestry programs; (f) design of quality standards in the forestry sector for 
certifying all processes (and products) of the timber productive chain in Acre; and (g) 
modernization and strengthening of cooperatives, and development of studies on markets 
and on the economic and financial viability of the main productive chains, including 
marketing, logistics, industrial processing, and the development of a management system 
for products and processes. In addition, following the example of most states in Brazil, 
which are developing Results Based management approaches, GoAc intends to introduce 
Page  7
this approach in selected sectors of the Stateís public administration. This subcomponent 
will finance: (i) technical assistance, studies, and consultancy services for development of 
computer systems and other monitoring and evaluation systems, including the 
methodology of the CDPs; (ii) equipment, materials and vehicles; (iii) training programs 
for staff members of the different Secretariats and agencies executing the programs; and 
(iv) operational costs.  
 
ï
Institutional Strengthening and Modernization of Indigenous Organizations (US$ 
0.7 million). Activities are foreseen to improve the indigenous populationsícapacity for 
effective supervision of development of their protected areas, and to strengthen the 
institutional capacity of indigenous organizations to create and support sustainable 
development activities in their territories. To achieve these objectives the subcomponent 
will develop the following activities: (i) support to indigenous associations, including 
capacity building and acquisition of equipment and materials; (ii) development of studies 
to evaluate the viability of a creation of an endowment fund to finance future indigenous 
projects, to be managed by an indigenous institution; and (iii) training programs for 
indigenous populations. Based on the results of the Census, IDM will identify gaps in the 
current supply of educational services to indigenous groups and offer extra training 
programs as needed.  The subcomponent will also develop vocational technical training 
programs. In addition, IDM in cooperation with federal indigenous agencies and NGOs 
such as Comiss√£o Pr√≥¬≥-Indio, will use Census data to identify sustainable 
opportunities for linking indigenous communities to different markets, and development 
of vocational technical programs in key development areas. This subcomponent will 
finance: (i) technical assistance and consultancy services for the development of studies 
and capacity building activities; (ii) purchase of equipment and materials; and (iii) 
training programs for indigenous associations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
PROACRE social scope equally benefits indigenous and non-indigenous groups.  
Support to isolated rural communities and urban populations living in marginal areas will 
be centered on education, health, and environmentally-sound economic alternatives to 
promote social inclusion. Although no adverse impact is to be expected from this project, 
the Government conducted extensive and comprehensive consultations will all interested 
parties. Indigenous peoples communities, who are present in all areas to be touched by 
project, were especially consulted on two rounds of meetings, in which all the 
requirements of OP4.10 and of the Brazilian Legislation were properly met. 
Representatives from all those related to the project, including leaders of indigenous 
communities, participated in the consultation processes of the project and of the 
environmental assessment. All relevant documents were broadly disclosed during public 
hearings, on the internet, and through regular mail to ensure extensive social 
participation. Feedback meetings with the main communities to be involved were held by 
the State to directly inform and thank community leaders for their participation and 
engagement with the project. An on-going consultation process has been kept open via 
internet, so that every citizen of Acre can give his or her contribution to the Project at any 
time. Consultations with indigenous groups resulted in the mutual agreement that: (a) 
Project objectives are essential to assist in the improvement of the quality of life among 
Page  8
Acreís indigenous peoples; (b) Although important, indigenous education and health are 
to be funded by other sources, and not by PROACRE, which will rather fund: (1) the 
preparation and/or implementation of the Indigenous Land Management Plans; (2) the 
institutional strengthening of indigenous organizations; and (3) a feasibility study for the 
creation of an autonomous indigenous fund; and (c) no negative, cultural, environmental 
or social impacts were foreseen by the stakeholders for this  Project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/17/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
No 
Page  9
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
10/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas Ludewigs 
10/07/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss 
10/07/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
10/17/2008 
Comments:   
