Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC3933
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P108443 
Project Name:  BR-SP Sustainable Rural Development 
Task Team Leader:  Laurent Debroux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 6, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (5%);Agro-industry (5%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural markets (S);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
78.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
52.00
52.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase the competitiveness of family 
agriculture in priority areas of the State of Sao Paulo while improving its environmental 
sustainability.  
 
This would be achieved by assisting small-scale farmers and other vulnerable rural 
producers to:  
 
•Increase the productivity of their land and labor, and improve the quality of their 
products through enhanced production techniques;  
 
•Engage more actively in supply/value chains, where there is a comparative advantage, 
by undertaking basic processing and marketing techniques and/or strengthening 
partnerships with larger private operators in these areas;  
 
•Strengthen the organizational and managerial capacity of producers associations, as 
well as promote the emergence of new associations/cooperatives;  
Page  2
•Mainstream improved land and water management practices tested under the previous 
operations for more competitive production systems.  
 
Key Indicators are:  
 
•Increase in sales value (unit value x quantity sold) for participating producers’ 
organizations  
 
•Increase in agricultural area where improved land and water management practices are 
being implemented.  
 
A
long-term objective of the project is to increase small farmers’ net income, which 
depends on a combination of factors including quantity, quality and costs of production, 
and marketing efficiency. The project will aim to make progress towards that long-term 
objective by helping small farmers improve their production, associative, and marketing 
techniques. It would also improve the public physical and institutional infrastructures to 
the extent needed to support the project development objective (i.e., economic 
monitoring, extension services, environmental management, and rural roads).   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan of US$78.0 million over 
a
five-year period. The total project cost is estimated to be US$130.0 million, including 
US$52.0 million of counterpart funding from the State of Sao Paulo.  
 
Component 1, Supporting Small Farmers’ Business Initiatives: This component will 
provide support to small farmers’ business initiatives through the following Sub-
components:  
 
Sub-component 1.1, Implementing Small Business Investments: This Sub-component 
will finance selected business initiatives, submitted by producers’ organizations, aimed at 
increasing their competitiveness for products with demonstrated market viability. Direct 
beneficiaries and contractual partners of the project will be small producers organizations 
based on geography or products (associations, cooperatives, other forms of 
organizations). It is envisaged that participating organizations will enter at different levels 
of managerial capacity, with some receiving initial project support to achieve minimum 
levels of take-off (though Sub-Component 1.2.), while others will already have the 
capacity and experience to engage in more complex business undertakings. The project 
would provide financial support for productive investments only to formally-constituted 
organizations.  
 
Criteria of eligibility will be used to signal the focus on competitiveness and 
environmental sustainability. Eligible proposals will have to demonstrate market 
viability, and preference will be given to initiatives using improved land management 
techniques (restoring soil fertility, reducing pollution).  The selection will be done 
through a transparent and technically focused process involving representatives of 
SAA/CATI, SMA, agri-business practitioners, academics, and municipalities.  
 
Page  3
The project will assist (under Sub-component 1.2) potential beneficiaries to develop 
their business initiatives, and it would continue to provide technical assistance to 
beneficiaries (e.g. governance and organizational issues, financial management, 
technical) during the implementation phase, and it would monitor progress and 
performance.  
 
This Sub-component will also promote eligible commercial and other (e.g. subsistence 
agriculture) initiatives developed by indigenous and quilombola organizations, as well as 
those developed by women and youth organizations.  
 
Sub-
component 1.2, Strengthening Producers’ Organizations: This Sub-component will 
help create or strengthen the capacity of producers’ organizations with regards to 
organizational management and marketing. This training and assistance will be delivered 
qualified private service providers contracted by the project and/or by beneficiaries.  
 
First, this Sub-component will finance broad information, training, and exchange 
programs on agricultural competitiveness in targeted municipalities and micro-
catchments across the State in order to stimulate the emergence of business ideas from 
potential beneficiaries and assist small farmers to identify more profitable opportunities 
in specific productive chains and/or end-markets. This effort will help small producers 
identify their comparative advantages on specific products and market niches.  
 
Second, this Sub-component will assist interested organizations in the preparation of 
business proposals for funding under Sub-component 1.1. It will assist small farmers’ 
organizations with the identification of possible business opportunities; help carry out 
market analysis, feasibility assessments, and other financial and technical analysis; assist 
in negotiations with business partners; and advice on legal issues. It will also help 
existing informal producers’ groups to create legal organizations, establish basic 
management structures, and formulate business proposals for possible support through 
Sub-Component 1.1.  
 
Third, this Sub-component will continue to provide beneficiaries with technical 
assistance on organizational, financial, or technical issues throughout the implementation 
phase (at least two years) and it would monitor progress and performance.  
 
Component 2, Strengthening Public Institutions and Infrastructures: This Component 
will support a set of public functions and investments that are critical to increasing the 
competitiveness and sustainability of small farming.  
 
Sub-component 2.1, Policy Framework, Market Monitoring, and Rural Extension: This 
Sub-component will help mainstream competitive small-scale agriculture within the 
policy, regulatory, and planning frameworks at state and municipal levels. It will finance 
studies and workshops to improve regulation and incentives systems (i.e. labeling 
systems). It will also carry out studies and assessments relevant to state-level agricultural 
competitiveness (i.e. analysis of specific supply-chains) and set up an online agri-
Page  4
business information center. This Sub-component will help identify opportunities in 
productive chains and end-markets, and adjust the project strategy on a regular basis.  
 
This Sub-
component will also strengthen CATI’s capacity to advise small farmerson 
production technologies, marketing, organizational management and other areas critical 
to competitiveness. It would accompany CATI’s modernization process togradually 
include management and marketing as part of the extension package, in addition to 
production techniques. This would include training and assessment of skills mix and 
future staffing strategy. It would also support partnerships with local research centers and 
business organizations.  
 
Sub-component 2.2, Rural Infrastructure: This Sub-component will aim to facilitate 
small farmers’ physical access to markets. It would focus on the maintenanceand 
rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads, under the responsibility of municipalities. It would 
assist priority municipalities to prepare simple rural roads management programs, devise 
joint financing arrangements, and strengthen partnerships with private service providers. 
It would also help assess various implementation modalities (joint acquisition of 
equipment, direct execution of works, various types of outsourcing) based on local 
conditions, capacity, and sustainability. Where minimum levels of technical, institutional 
and financial sustainability are met, the project would financially contribute to the 
rehabilitation and maintenance of priority sections (‘critical points’) identified in the 
roads management programs so as to ensure year-round transit. The project may also 
support other rural investments identified in municipal development plans when they 
complement investments undertaken by small farmers’ organizations (e.g. increase of 
supply of energy and water to enhance production systems).  
 
Sub-component 2.3, Environmental Sustainability: This Sub-component would help 
strengthen small farmer’s competitiveness over the long-term by ensuring the sustainable 
management of their productive resource-base (land and water). It would support the 
implementation of the State’s licensing system, combined with environmental awareness-
raising. It will promote sustainable agricultural practices through pilot projects at farm-
level. This Sub-component will also help extend the application of Sao Paulo’s new 
program of payments for environmental services to agricultural areas, thus providing a 
new source of income for small farmers who adopt agricultural practices that generate 
off-site environmental benefits (quality of water, storage of carbon) and increasing their 
competitiveness. This will also help ensure that new agricultural practices do not result in 
adverse environmental impacts. The project would help design and implement pilot 
programs to monitor the impact of improved agricultural practices on water quality, and 
design appropriate payment mechanisms to farmers.  
 
Component 3, Project Management: This component will finance the institutional 
structures, equipment, and personnel required to manage the project activities. It will 
support the executive, deliberative, and consultative functions involved in project 
implementation at the central and municipal levels. It will ensure the fiduciary functions 
(procurement, accounting, financial management), as well as the technical planning and 
monitoring and evaluation of the project, including the implementation of the social and 
Page  5
environmental safeguards instruments.  It will disseminate project results and implement 
a
pro-active communication strategy.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
An estimated 30,000 small farming families would be reached by the project through 
their own producer organizations (estimated 200-300 organizations with potential for 
direct involvement in the project).  This target population also includes an estimated 
1,000 indigenous families and 500 quilombola families. These small farming families are 
located primarily in 15 priority regions consisting of 212 municipalities covering 7.8 
million hectares, or a third of the total State area, primarily congregated in the western 
part of the State. The project would also benefit public institutions such as the 
Coordenadoria de Assistencia Tecnica Integral (CATI, the Rural Extension Agency for 
the State Secretariat of Agriculture and Supply),  SMA, and municipalities to the extent 
that is needed to support the small farming competitiveness agenda. Beyond the number 
of families that would benefit directly, the project is also envisioned to provide a 
demonstration effect to the overall small farming sector in the State by better engaging 
family agriculture in strengthened agricultural organizations and allowing better access to 
markets.  
 
Environmental Issues  
 
For the most part, the project is expected to produce positive environmental impacts. 
According to the final draft Environmental Assessment (EA) and related Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF), which were reviewed and cleared by the Bank, the most 
significant positive impacts foreseen include watershed and biodiversity protection, 
improved soil management and conservation, improved water quality, and restoration of 
degraded lands. However, some activities carried out in subprojects supported under 
Component 1 (small business investments) and Component 2 (rehabilitation and 
maintenance of unpaved roads and other productive infrastructures under municipal 
responsibility) could generate small negative impacts, mostly temporary and at the local 
level.  No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen. The impacts of 
any misdirected support for productive investments could result in soil erosion, water 
pollution and noise/air pollution, the latter from road rehabilitation works.  
 
As sub-projects cannot be identified a priori because of the demand-driven nature of 
interventions, specific impacts cannot be anticipated, but all investments under 
Components 1 and 2 will be subjected to a rigorous screening process to ensure 
maximum environmental benefits and to prevent or minimize unintended negative 
environmental impacts. Investments’ environmental screening, evaluation, approval, and 
monitoring procedures have been incorporated into the Project design (i.e. business 
initiatives and other investments cycle).  These procedures, detailed in the EMF report, 
will be included in the Project’s Operational Manual.  
 
The Project would build on the existing EA capacity and institutional arrangements 
established under the recently closed Sao Paulo Land Management Project and the 
Page  6
ongoing Ecosystem Restoration of Riparian Forests GEF Project. CATI would need to be 
strengthened to support investments review.  The EMF includes provisions for 
strengthening EA capacity within SMA and CATI at the regional and central levels, as 
well as local CATI municipal extension officers.  
 
Social Issues  
 
For the most part, the project is expected to produce positive social impacts. The social 
assessment documents, provide further evidence of poverty indicators for most of the 
small family farmers of Sao Paulo, and additional data on some of the most vulnerable 
rural social groups specifically indigenous people and quilombola (descendents of ex-
slaves) communities, as well as consideration of other relevant social differentiation 
variables such as gender and age. Preparation included six free prior informed 
consultations with indigenous people, focusing on the formulation of the project’s 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.  
 
CATI also carried out numerous consultations and meetings with a broad cross-section 
of project stakeholders and beneficiaries between 2005 and 2008, including seven 
consultations in 2008 two of which were with representatives of quilombola 
communities. Stakeholders consulted included rural producers, leaders of associations 
and cooperatives, technicians from partner institutions, representatives of non-
governmental organizations, among others.  Key concerns expressed focused on 
improving agricultural productivity with a strong emphasis on commercialization, better 
delivery of technical assistance, and improved coordination among public agencies and 
programs, all of which have been reflected in project design. The project design  includes 
specific targeting of indigenous communities, prioritization of quilombola communities, 
and includes participatory processes to improve participation of women and youth.  
 
Lastly, because road maintenance activities supported under Subcomponent 2.4 could 
result in the acquisition of new land, particularly in ROWs (right-of-ways), a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
Ms Katia Lucia Medeiros (ACTRT-HIS) 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves (LCSAR) 
 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 
–
Environmental Assessment. The Project is classified as Category B,the 
appropriate classification for projects whose potential adverse environmental impacts on 
human populations or environmentally important areas are site-specific, reversible and 
can be readily mitigated (OP 4.01, paragraph 8).  In accordance with this classification, 
an Environmental Assessment (EA) and related Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF) have been prepared. As mentioned above, the EA/EMF specifies the criteria and 
procedures that would be used during project implementation to avoid or minimize 
potentially adverse environmental impacts. Key aspects regarding Bank’s safeguards 
included in the EA/EMF are described below.  
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats. The project would not support or lead to the conversion 
of natural habitats. In fact, it would help rehabilitate, restore, and protect degraded 
riparian forests which are important to preserve local biodiversity and the quality of water 
resources. On-farm investments are expected to take place in areas that have been 
traditionally dedicated to crop and livestock farming and would not therefore involve 
conversion of natural habitats. Instead, the proposed project would support natural habitat 
conservation since (i) increased agricultural productivity will be a result of  sound 
environmentally  practices, (ii) it would help restore and protect degraded riparian forests 
which are important to preserve biodiversity and the quality of water resources, and (iii)  
the project would support conservation practices and improved land use planning and 
management leading to a more sustainable use of agricultural lands, conservation of 
natural habitats, and the rehabilitation of degraded natural habitats. The EMF explicitly 
forbids any project activities in areas supporting critical natural habitats or inducing 
significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats.  It also ensures that any 
activity in the buffer zone of a protected area would be designed to help reduce pressure 
on the protected area itself. Moreover, the EMF provides clear guidance regarding 
unintended impacts on natural habitats.  
 
Page  8
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests. The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project overlap with those of 
OP 4.04. The project would support activities that generate positive environmental 
impacts by promoting the rehabilitation and conservation of degraded native forests 
(including riparian zones), as well as by contributing to the restoration and maintenance 
of ecological functions in those areas. The project would also test models of sustainable, 
non-timber use of such areas in small rural properties. Importantly, this would be carried 
out in accordance with addendum 2166-67 to Federal Law 4771/65, which allows for 
sustainable agro-forestry activities in small rural properties as long as they do not change 
the overall character of the forest cover and do not alter ecosystem functions in the area.  
The project would also support the connection of fragmented forest corridors. Despite the 
positive impacts foreseen through the implementation of these activities, the EMF 
includes clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on native forests. The EMF 
contains procedures to ensure that all project activities comply with OP 4.36, and with the 
national legislation, which establishes a series of measures to protect existing forests. The 
project would deal with the issue of Areas de Preservacao Permanente and Reserva Legal 
in a pragmatic manner, helping the farmers to progressively improve the level of 
environmental compliance.  
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management. The project would not finance the procurement of any 
pesticides or other chemical amendments that would trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, small 
amounts of pesticides would probably continue to be used by a small portion of farmers 
in targeted microcatchments.  A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been included as an 
Annex to the EMF, and agreed procedures will be incorporated into the Operational 
Manual in order to provide guidance on how to minimize potential negative 
environmental impacts and on training in safe pesticide use, handling, storage, and 
disposal, as well as guidelines for Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and screening 
procedures against the WHO list of approved products. The need to use pesticides would 
be assessed on an individual subproject basis, and any approved use should comply with 
Brazilian Laws 7.802/89 and 9.974/00. Whenever possible, the project will adopt proven 
IPM and economically and environmentally sustainable measures. The project would 
support technical assistance for the adoption of IPM practices, in order to reduce input 
costs and human health risks and minimize adverse environmental impacts through the 
gradual elimination of pesticide use, without significantly affecting yields. In addition, 
the project would promote training in good practices and the dissemination of IPM 
information.  
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples. The screening and social assessment estimated that 
there are approximately 5000 indigenous peoples in the rural areas of the State of Sao 
Paulo comprised of the follow
ing six ethnicities: Guarani Kaiowa, Guarani M’Bya, 
Guarani Nhandeva, Kaingang, Krenak, and Terena. Consultations demonstrated their 
strong interest in participating in the project, and indigenous peoples are one of the 
project’s target beneficiary populations. Socio-environmental diagnostics, site-specific 
sustainable development plans, and the preparation of demand-driven subprojects for 
financing will be carried out under the project.  Hence, the client prepared an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework.  
 
Page  9
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources. The Project would finance small-scale works 
in already established agricultural zones where the likelihood of disturbing 
archaeological, paleontological, or other culturally significant sites is small. The project 
is not expected to have negative impacts on cultural property, including movable or 
immovable objects, sites, structures, groups of structures or natural features or landscapes 
with archeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic or other 
cultural significance. The EMF includes a framework for screening project activities in 
relation to potential negative impacts to cultural property, according to national and state 
legislation. In any case, such impacts would be avoided through the application of 
subproject eligibility criteria and the safeguard screening system.  The EMF also instructs 
that “chance find” procedures would be included in the contracts for any subproject 
involving works, as well as in the Operational Manual, in order to comply with this 
safeguard and with national and state legislation on cultural property.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement.  The client has prepared a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) that addresses any potential loss of assets issues that might occur 
during project implementation as the result of rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads.  A 
satisfactory first draft of the RPF, which has already been publicly disseminated, was 
delivered to the Bank on December 29, 2008. It will be further evaluated during appraisal 
after which a final draft will be submitted to the Bank for a “no objection.” Subsequently, 
the RPF will be publicly disseminated by the Client and the Bank.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant indirect or long-term or cumulative impacts are foreseen under the Project. 
Initiatives to be supported under Components 1 and 2 will be subjected to a rigorous 
screening process to ensure that maximum socioeconomic and environmental benefits are 
accrued and that any unintended negative environmental impacts are avoided or 
minimized, including those eventually associated to secondary or indirect and long-term 
effects.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is relatively goodat the state 
level, but tends to be uneven and mostly weak at the municipal level. The State 
Secretariat of Agriculture and Supply (SAA) would manage the project at the central 
level. Implementation responsibilities would be carried out through CATI, where the 
Project Management Unit (PMU)  would be located, and the SMA would act as co-
manager and provide support where appropriate. These institutions have substantial 
experience in working with safeguard policies through implementation of the Sao Paulo 
Land Management Project and the ongoing Ecosystem Restoration of Riparian Forests 
GEF Project. To strengthen safeguard capacity, particularly at the local level, specific 
Page  10
capacity-building activities would be carried out, especially with respect to working with 
indigenous populations since there is little prior experience in working with these 
populations. In addition, a cooperation agreement would be signed with the national 
Indian agency (FUNAI), and collaborative linkages would be sought with other state, 
federal, and non-governmental organizations already working with indigenous peoples as 
well as quilombola communities in the SoSP.  
 
The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are 
described in the following.  
 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The Project is classified as Category B.  In 
accordance with this classification, an EA and related EMF have been prepared. Based on 
the results of the EA, the project remains designated as Category B project.  As 
mentioned above, the EA/EMF specifies the criteria and procedures that would be used 
during project implementation to avoid or minimize adverse environmental impacts.  
 
The Project would build on the existing EA capacity established within the 
organizational framework of the implementation agencies, CATI and SMA. The 
capacities of these agencies would be strengthened to implement the EA/EMF. In 
addition, environmental requirements and procedures for investment proposals would be 
disseminated among the beneficiaries, stakeholders, municipal authorities and other 
relevant organizations at the municipal and regional levels. The PMU would include a 
group of environmental technical specialists in charge of monitoring the implementation 
of the EMF. Proposed physical investments would be categorized by the CATI staff that 
would be accountable for recruiting and carrying out the overall supervision of EA-
related reports before submitting investment proposals for final approval. CATI would 
also inform concerned environmental authority that could also monitor the EA process.  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The EMF explicitly forbids any project activities in areas 
supporting critical natural habitats or inducing significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats. It also ensures that any activity in the buffer zone of a protected 
area would be designed to help reduce pressure on the protected area itself. Moreover, the 
EMF provides clear guidance regarding unintended impacts on natural habitats.  
 
OP 4.36 Forests. The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project overlap with those of OP 
4.04. Despite the project expected positive impacts, the EMF contains procedures to 
ensure that all project activities comply with OP 4.36, and with national legislation, 
which establishes a series of measures to protect existing forests. The EMF includes clear 
guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on native forests. The project would deal 
with the issue of Areas de Preservacao Permanente and Reserva Legal in a pragmatic 
manner, helping the farmers to progressively improve the level of environmental 
compliance.  
 
OP 4.09 Pest Management. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been included in the 
EMF, to be incorporated into the Operational Manual, in order to provide guidance on 
how to minimize potential negative environmental impacts and on training in safe 
Page  11
pesticide use, handling, storage and disposal, as well as guidelines for Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) and screening procedures against the WHO list of approved products. 
The need to use pesticides would be assessed on an individual subproject basis, and any 
approved use should comply with Brazilian Laws 7.802/89 and 9.974/00. Whenever 
possible, the project will adopt proven IPM and economically and environmentally 
sustainable measures. The project would support technical assistance for the adoption of 
IPM practices, in order to reduce input costs and human health risks and minimize 
adverse environmental impacts through the gradual elimination of pesticide use, without 
significantly affecting yields. In addition, the project would promote training in good 
practices and the dissemination of IPM information.  
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples.  The client carried out a social assessment and 
extensive consultations with indigenous people in rural Sao Paulo. The consultations 
demonstrated their strong interest in participating in the project, and indigenous peoples 
will be one of the project’s target beneficiary populations. The client has prepared a 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, which complies with the requirements of OP 
4.10,  and specifies the methodology by which indigenous people will participate in the 
project and will develop future subprojects for financing.  A satisfactory draft of the 
IPPF, already publicly disseminated by the client, was delivered to the Bank on Dec 29, 
2008.  It will be further evaluated during appraisal after which a final version will be 
submitted to the Bank for “no objection.” Subsequently, the IPPF will be publicly 
disseminated by the client and the Bank.  
 
OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The EMF includes a framework for screening 
project activities in relation to potential negative impacts to cultural property, according 
to national and state legislation. In any case, such impacts would be avoided through the 
application of subproject eligibility criteria and the safeguard screening system.  The 
EMF also instructs that “chance find” procedureswould be included in the contracts for 
any subproject involving works, as well as in the Operational Manual, in order to comply 
with this safeguard and with national and state legislation on cultural property.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement.  The client has prepared a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) that addresses any potential loss of assets issues that might occur 
during project implementation as a result of the rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads.  A 
satisfactory draft of the RPF, which has already been publicly disseminated, was 
delivered to the Bank on December 29, 2008. It will be further evaluated during appraisal 
after which a final version will be submitted to the Bank for a “no objection.” 
Subsequently, the RPF will be publicly disseminated by the Client and the Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Main stakeholders in the Project are: (i) beneficiary stakeholders, including small-scale 
farmers and their families, indigenous communities, quilombola communities, rural 
women and youth, and community leaders; (ii) state and municipal institutions (mainly 
SAA and SMA); Municipal Rural Development Councils; CATI extension services; 
Page  12
national and local NGOs; universities; professional producer associations; and private 
technical assistance providers.  
 
The mechanism for consultations of civil society organizations and stakeholders are 
primarily workshops and focus groups organized usually at the regional level.  
 
The EA report has been subjected to a virtual public consultation process 
(http://www.ambiente.sp.gov.br/desenvolvimentoRuaralSustentavel.php) with a broad 
range of key stakeholders.  The EA is available at the home pages of the State Rural 
Extension Agency (CATI) and State Environment Secretariat (SMA), respectively.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/22/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/22/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  13
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  14
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Debroux 
02/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Katia Lucia Medeiros 
02/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
02/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Estela Maria Souza Costa Neves 
02/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
