Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3506 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P102818 
Project Name: Additional Financing Espirito Santo Water & Coastal Pollution 
Management 
Task Team Leader: Carlos E. Velez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 23, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (80%);Water supply (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
71.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
38.50
38.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable the beneficiaries in the project area to 
benefit from improved quality of and access to water supply and sewerage services. This will be 
achieved by: (a) improving the efficiency of the water supply and sewerage systems of CESAN 
by supporting its efforts to operate on a commercial basis with financial self-sufficiency; (b) 
increasing the coverage level of CESANs water supply and basic sanitation services (sewage 
collection, treatment and disposal) in the urban areas of the Metropolitan Region of Grande 
Vitória (MRGV) and other towns located mainly in the Santa Maria and Jucu river basins; and 
(c) providing appropriate water and sanitation infrastructure in low-income urban areas of 
Grande Vitória and Guarapari. Strengthening the States environmental management capacity 
has also been a complementary purpose of the project since the approval of the original loan.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional loan would finance activities under the following four components:  
 
Page  2
a. 
Sewerage. Completion and operationalization of the sewage collection and treatment 
system of the MRGV by: (a) building additional sewage collection networks to connect to the 
trunk infrastructure built with financing from World Bank loan 3767-BR; (b) building new 
sewage collection systems; (c) expanding the sewage treatment system of Grande Vitória to a 
nominal treatment capacity of 540 l/s; and (d) preparing a sanitation master plan for the MRGV 
and developing a model for receiving water bodies in such region.  
 
b. 
Water Supply. Capacity expansions for raw water intakes and water treatment plants, 
construction of storage tanks and distribution mains to improve the quality and service continuity 
of water supply in the MRGV.  
 
c. 
Institutional Strengthening of SEAMA/IEMA. This component would strengthen the 
environmental management capacity of the State Secretariat of the Environment and Water 
Resources (Secretaria de Estado do Meio Ambiente e Recursos Hídricos,SEAMA) which is 
charged with defining Espírito Santos environmental policies and its sister institution, the 
State Environmental Institute (Instituto Estadual de Meio Ambiente e Recursos Hídricos, 
IEMA) which is responsible for carrying them out. Possible activities include: (a the design of an 
institutional strategy for SEAMA/IEMA; (b) implementation of an integrated environmental 
information system; (c) improvements to the environmental licensing process in Espírito 
Santo;(d) implementation of a monitoring network for water resources; (e) construction of a 
water resource management system; and (f) environmental education.  
 
d. 
Institutional, Financial and Operational Strengthening of CESAN. This component would 
include activities designed to: (a) improve CESANs financial and operational performance; and 
(b) hold CESAN accountable to its customers in terms of performance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Water supply and sewerage investments will be located in the MRGV (Vitória, Vila Velha, 
Cariacica, Serra, Viana and Guarapari municipalities). All of these areas (except for Cariacica 
and Viana) have beaches and in-land waterways that are contaminated by uncollected and 
untreated sewage discharges. The project will improve the quality of these water bodies by 
building new sewerage networks in Vitoria, Vila Velha, Cariacica and Guarapari; expanding the 
Mulembá sewage treatment plant, connecting additional users to existing secondary sewage 
treatment plants and constructing new systems in unattended areas (Nova Almeida/Praia Grande 
and Manguinhos in Serra).   
 
E.  Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The ongoing project execution has been properly following the Bank social and environmental 
safeguards, and fully complied with the national environmental legislation. Environmental 
licenses have already been issued for the transportation and final disposal of sludge generated in 
the wastewater treatment plants. This compliance has been ensured by the presence of 
environmental specialists in the Bank supervision team as well as by the increased local capacity 
of the state environmental agency and the state water company. The strengthening of 
SEAMA/IEMA will continue under the proposed additional loan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The ongoing project was classified as Category B under the Bank's environmental guidelines. 
The activities to be financed under the proposed additional loan were the subject of another 
updated Program Environmental Assessment and an updated Environmental Management Plan, 
which were also prepared and discussed in public consultations in the State. Water supply and 
sanitation investments under implementation or to be carried out under the additional loan have 
also been classified as Category B.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The Institute of National Historic and Artistic Heritage (IPHAN), the federal institute 
dedicated to protect such assets, has been consulted and its recommendations are included in the 
environmental licenses. Archeologists will accompany construction works, from the preparation 
of the executive projects to their completion, including the laying down of the collection 
network.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/27/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
All required safeguard studies and documentation have been completed.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos E. Velez 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
 
Comments:   
