Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3392 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P107843 
Project Name: Brazil Federal District Multisector Managament Project 
Task Team Leader: Joana Godinho 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 11, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (28%);General education sector (27%);General public administration 
sector (25%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Managing for development results (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
71.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
329.00
329.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives (PDOs) are the following: (1) improve public 
sector management and accountability; and (2) increase access to and the quality of  basic 
education, primary health care and urban transport.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would improve public sector management and accountability by implementing 
results-based management and financing, simplifying public administration, and launching 
related governance initiatives, including strengthening of financial management and 
procurement; and it would increase access to and the quality of primary education, primary 
health care and urban transport, by implementing results-based management in these sectors, and 
strengthening their institutional capacity.  
 
The Project would co-finance the $400 million GDF Multisector Public Management Program 
through a Sector Investment Loan (SIL) of US $71 million to be disbursed in three years (2009-
2011). The project would follow a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp). The Bank would co-finance 
a
percentage of eligible expenditures of the government reform program. The project would use 
Page  2
state government systems, procedures and staff (including on financial management and 
procurement, M&E and reporting), which would contribute to foster ownership. The project 
would contribute to the establishment of a results-based financing system - from the Bank to the 
GDF, within the GDF, and from the GDF to other parties (e.g., contractors).  
 
The project would have two components:  
 
Component 1. This component would support four critical GDF programs linked to sector 
reform objectives: (1) Public Sector Management, (2) Education, (3) Health, and (4) Transport.  
 
The Component will finance Eligible Expenditure Programs in the areas of education, health 
and transport that will contribute to: 
 
*
Modernize the education system, aiming at improving the quality, efficiency and equity of 
basic education in all levels. This will be achieved by adopting a new school-based management 
model, which includes performance-based results strategies and performance-based incentives 
for schools, mainly those with the lowest education indicators, and located in low-income areas 
of the Federal District. 
 
*
Modernize, decentralize and integrate various levels of health care (primary, secondary and 
tertiary), aiming at increasing access, quality and efficiency. This will be achieved through the 
establishment of management by results in the sector, development of managerial and clinical 
information system and of the Electronic Health Card; extension of primary health care, 
including by establishing 127 Family Health teams in Administrative Regions, to decrease 
pressure on hospitals; and piloting a public-private partnership for management by an OS of the 
Hospital Sta. Maria. 
 
*
Increase access to, quality and efficiency of public transport services by carrying out strategic 
planning in the sector and strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of DFTRANS 
to permit this agency to effectively and efficiently plan, manage, and supervise public transport 
services. 
 
Component 2. This component would finance technical assistance on M&E, results-based 
management, fiduciary matters, and education, health and transport key reforms to support the 
timely and evidence-based implementation of the GDF Multisector Public Management 
Program. This component would follow Bank procurement guidelines and disbursement methods 
(SOE).   
 
The GDF is proposing to implement a more systemic public sector management reform as an 
overall strategy, in addition to targeted programs in the education, health and transport sectors. 
This will be accomplished by improving public sector management and accountability and 
increase access, quality and efficiency of the education, health and transport services by 
modernizing the education system; modernizing, decentralizing and integrating various levels of 
health care; and modernizing and building the capacity of public transport services.  
 
More specifically, the project, in the education sector, will support the refurbishing of 52 
schools throughout the Federal District. The nature of the activities is facility improvement 
(electrical, plumbing, roof) and enlargement of classrooms. Likewise in the health sector the 
project will also support refurbishing of existing facilities in order to be able to offer a better 
service to the population. These reforms will focus on facility improvement (electrical, 
Page  3
plumbing, roof) and enlargement of facilities for immunization, consultations and doctors 
quarters.  
 
Therefore construction activities that are envisioned in the health and education sectors under 
the proposed project are all minor repairs to existing clinics and schools and are not anticipated 
to create any disturbances out of the ordinary. The GDF will however, include in the Operational 
Manual guidance to contractors on minimizing any environmental impacts (dust, noise, etc.). The 
project does not present any potential environmental impacts that will be of environmental 
concern.  
 
Given that there will be no major building activities such as the construction of schools or 
Polyclinics there is no threat of physical displacement and/or adverse impact on people's 
livelihoods thereby not triggering Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) 
 
During preparation it was determined that the project does not involve any resettlement and 
indigenous safeguards (Indigenous Peoples (OP4.10), will not be triggered.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Brazil Federal District.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has the capacity to carry out an Environmental Assessment, and implement an 
environmental management plan if required. The Government of the Federal District (GDF) has 
experience with Bank Safeguards and procedures through the Brasilia Sustentavel project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The project will only include minor works for the refurbishing of existing schools and health 
clinics. No new construction would be financed with project resources irrespective of financing 
sources.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Given that the project will only finance minor works it is not expected to encounter physical 
cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The PCN originally contemplated including in the GDF reform program the building of 
vocational schools and the construction and rehabilitation of hospitals. As project development 
ensued this was dropped and no new construction is now envisaged. None of the investments 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
supported under the proposed project have the potential to require the taking of land leading to 
physical and/or adverse impacts on people's livelihood.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/23/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
06/06/2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Joana Godinho 
04/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
04/25/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
