Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/09/2008 
Report No.:  43594
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P102818 
Project Name:  Additional Financing Espirito Santo Water & Coastal Pollution 
Management 
Task Team Leader:  Carlos E. Velez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 23, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (80%);Water supply (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
71.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
38.50
38.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable the beneficiaries in the project 
area to benefit from improved quality of and access to water supply and sewerage 
services. This will be achieved by: (a) improving the efficiency of the water supply and 
sewerage systems of CESAN by supporting its efforts to operate on a commercial basis 
with financial self-
sufficiency; (b) increasing the coverage level of CESAN’s water 
supply and basic sanitation services (sewage collection, treatment and disposal) in the 
urban areas of the Metropolitan Region of Grande Vitoria (MRGV) and other towns 
located mainly in the Santa Maria and Jucu river basins; and (c) providing appropriate 
water and sanitation infrastructure in low-income urban areas of Grande Vitoria and 
Guarapari. Strengthening the State’s environmental management capacity has also been a 
complementary purpose of the project since the approval of the original loan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional loan would finance activities under the following four components:  
 
Page  2
a. 
Sewerage. Completion and operationalization of the sewage collection and 
treatment system of the MRGV by: (a) building additional sewage collection networks to 
connect to the trunk infrastructure built with financing from World Bank loan 3767-BR; 
(b) building new sewage collection systems; (c) expanding the sewage treatment system 
of Grande Vitoria to a nominal treatment capacity of 540 l/s; and (d) preparing a 
sanitation master plan for the MRGV and developing a model for receiving water bodies 
in such region.  
 
b. 
Water Supply. Capacity expansions for raw water intakes and water treatment 
plants, construction of storage tanks and distribution mains to improve the quality and 
service continuity of water supply in the MRGV.  
 
c. 
Institutional Strengthening of SEAMA/IEMA. This component would strengthen 
the environmental management capacity of the State Secretariat of the Environment and 
Water Resources (Secretaria de Estado do Meio Ambiente e Recursos Hidricos,SEAMA) 
which is
 charged with defining Espirito Santo’s environmental policies and its sister 
institution, the State Environmental Institute (Instituto Estadual de Meio Ambiente e 
Recursos Hidricos, IEMA) which is responsible for carrying them out. Possible activities 
include: (a the design of an institutional strategy for SEAMA/IEMA; (b) implementation 
of an integrated environmental information system; (c) improvements to the 
environmental licensing process in Espirito Santo;(d) implementation of a monitoring 
network for water resources; (e) construction of a water resource management system; 
and (f) environmental education.  
 
Institutional, Financial and Operational Strengthening of CESAN. This component 
would include activities designed to: (a) improve CESAN’s financial and operational 
performance; and (b) hold CESAN accountable to its customers in terms of performance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Water supply and sewerage investments will be located in the MRGV (Vitoria, Vila 
Velha, Cariacica, Serra, Viana and Guarapari municipalities). All of these areas (except 
for Cariacica and Viana) have beaches and in-land waterways that are contaminated by 
uncollected and untreated sewage discharges. The project will improve the quality of 
these water bodies by building new sewerage networks in Vitoria, Vila Velha, Cariacica 
and Guarapari; expanding the Mulemba sewage treatment plant, connecting additional 
users to existing secondary sewage treatment plants and constructing new systems in 
unattended areas (Nova Almeida/Praia Grande and Manguinhos in Serra).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The ongoing project was classified as Category B under the Bank's environmental 
guidelines. The activities to be financed under the proposed additional loan were the 
subject of another updated Program Environmental Assessment and an updated 
Environmental Management Plan, which were also prepared and discussed in public 
consultations in the State. Water supply and sanitation investments being carrying out or 
to be carried out under the additional loan have also been classified as Category B. The 
project’s Environmental Management Plan is being properly implemented, and neither 
the water supply nor the sanitation investments are expected to have either major 
negative environmental impacts or to involve resettlement of population in the project 
area. There are no outstanding environmental or social issues, no problems have been 
found so far, and the additional financing loan does not trigger any new safeguard 
policies or issues. An expansion of the sewage treatment capacity of the Mulemba plant 
from 210 l/s to 570 l/s (instead of 210 l/s to 420 l/s as originally planned), is the main 
environmental issue concerning the additional loan. However, as the expansion of the 
plant is going to take place in the same area of the existing plant no problems are 
expected. Specific environmental assessments or individual investments are being carried 
out and will continue to be carried out as required by local law.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are not indirect and/or long term negative impacts expected from this project. 
There are however large positive environmental impacts due to a significant decrease in 
the discharge of raw sewage in the natural environment, including mangroves. The large 
expansion of wastewater collection and treatment services (projected to reach a universal 
coverage level in the city of Vitoria and 60% in the MRGV) is also expected to lead to 
significant health benefits both for local residents along polluted water ways and for users 
of Espirito Santo's beaches more generally.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
An engineering study undertaken by the State of Espirito Santo in 2007 concluded that 
the best technical option for wastewater treatment in MRGV was the immediate 
expansion of the Mulemba treatment plant to a full capacity of 570 l/s. Based on detailed 
topographic and geological work and new population projections, the study demonstrated 
that a single stage of treatment works for an incremental capacity of 360 l/s (instead of 
the two stages of 210 l/s each foreseen in the initial design) would more efficiently satisfy 
the demand for the design horizon. This project alternative also maximizes environmental 
benefits. By early 2011, Vitoria would have increased its coverage to 100% (from 11% in 
1994), becoming the first Brazilian state capital besides Brasilia to reach universal access 
to water supply and sewerage services; Guarapari would have increase the sewage 
collection and treatment services coverage level to 90% and the entire MRGV would 
have increase it to 60%.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard policy issues that may arise from the implementation of works are addressed 
through the incorporation of environmental guidelines for contractors as part of bidding 
documents. These guidelines will include rules on the disposal of construction waste in 
pre-approved landfills, communication with local communities, pedestrian safety, dust 
and noise abatement measures, etc. Although no impact on physical cultural resources is 
expected, appropriate procedures exist to cope with chance finds during construction.  
 
The ongoing project execution has been properly following the Bank social and 
environmental safeguards, and fully complied with the national environmental 
legislation. Environmental licenses have already been issued for the transportation and 
final disposal of sludge generated in the wastewater treatment plants. The 16 areas 
needed for the construction of the sewerage pumping stations have been carefully 
screened to confirm that there are no constructions or population living in those areas. 
Archeologists will accompany construction works, from the preparation of the executive 
projects to their completion, including the laying down of the collection network. 
Appropriate measures have been taken to request to issue ‘water rights’ in order to 
operate the wastewater treatment plants; to avoid negatively impacting the Environmental 
Conservation Units located in the proximity of the project’s sites; and to protect sites that 
fall under a historic, cultural or archeological heritage. The Institute of National Historic 
and Artistic Heritage (IPHAN), the federal institute dedicated to protect such assets, has 
been consulted and its recommendations are included in the environmental licenses.  
 
This compliance has been ensured by the presence of environmental specialists in the 
Bank supervision team as well as by the increased local capacity of the state 
environmental agency and the state water company. The strengthening of SEAMA/IEMA 
will continue under the proposed additional loan.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Paneleiras and the people living nearby construction sites. 
Specific agreements have been made in relation to the Paneleiras to replicate the 
measures taken during the building of Mulemba wastewater treatment plant, particularly 
the removal and storage of clay (the raw material for the production of the region’s 
traditional Paneilas (clay pots), in places previously indicated by the Paneleiras, under 
their orientation and supervision. This agreement was endorsed and its satisfactory 
completion made a condition for starting the construction by IPHAN (the Brazilian 
National Institute for the Preservation of the Historical and Artistic Patrimony). The 
updated Program Environmental Assessment and an updated Environmental Management 
Plan were prepared and discussed in public consultations in the State. The overall project 
environmental impacts on stakeholders are expected to be extremely positive, as 
proposed sewerage investments will improve water quality at beaches and in inland 
waterways. Construction may cause temporary traffic and noise inconvenience, which are 
and will continue to be minimized through appropriate construction guidelines in the 
bidding documents. Furthermore, project supervision will continue closely monitoring 
and evaluating project implementation, including social and environmental issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos E. Velez 
04/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
04/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes 
04/03/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
