Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4374
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P108654 
Project Name:  Pernambuco Sustainable Water 
Task Team Leader:  Marcos T. Abicalil 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 20, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (40%);Sewerage (40%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (50%);Water resource management (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
220.00
220.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective is to improve sustainable water supply and sanitation 
services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river basin and the Metropolitan 
Region of Recife (MRR).   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will complement and contribute to the implementation of the 
Government of Pernambuco#s (GoPE) water sector program through the following 
components: (1), Water Sector Management and Institutional Development (2) 
Improving Efficiency in the Provision of Water Supply and Sanitation Services, and (3) 
Water Supply and Sanitation Service Expansion.  
 
Component 1: Water Sector Management and Institutional Development (US$29 
million). This component will contribute to the GoPE#s goal of long-term water security, 
through strengthening the sector#s institutional and regulatory frameworks as well as the 
state#s capacity for integrated sector planning, policy and management. This component 
will be implemented by the State#s Secretariat for Water Resources (SRH) and will 
Page  2
finance technical assistance activities, goods and works to consolidate, improve and 
implement integrated water resource management activities.  
 
Component 2: Improving Efficiency in the Provision of Water Supply and Sanitation 
Services (US$52 million). This component will provide support to State Water Utility 
(COMPESA), responsible for its implementation, in order to increase the company#s 
operational and economic performance and improve its corporate governance and 
management. This support will be carried out through the financing of technical 
assistance activities, acquisition of goods and works necessary for the implementation of 
a
non-revenue water program for the southern part of the MRR, and assistance to the 
implementation of COMPESA#s strategic and corporate development plans.  
 
Component 3: Water Supply and Sanitation Service Expansion (US$320 million). This 
component will support the GoPE and COMPESA on the implementation of activities 
aimed at: (i) increasing the volume of water supplied in the MRR, which will result in 
reduced population affected by intermittent supply, (ii) expanding sewerage services in 
the main cities located upstream of the main water supply reservoirs in the Capibaribe 
river basin, reducing pollution loads and protecting water quality, and (iii) improving the 
state#s capacity to leverage future investments, by reviewing and preparing plans and 
engineering designs for future priority water supply and sewerage systems to be 
implemented in the state.  
 
This component will be implemented by COMPESA and is divided into the following 
sub-components: (a) Pirapama Water Supply System, which comprises the construction 
of the Pirapama water supply conveyance system and will be financed by the State#s 
counterpart funds; and (b) Expansion of Services, which will finance technical assistance, 
goods and works to expand water and sanitation services and leverage sector investments 
in priority areas.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Pernambuco is one of the driest states in Brazil with a per capita water availability of 
1,320 m3/year on average, equivalent to 3.5% of the national average per capita 
availability. The state#s semi-
arid Sertão and Agreste sub-regions represent 89% of the 
state#s territory and have only about 20% of the water available in the state and its lowest 
per capita water availability, ranging from 400 m3/year to 800 m3/year, respectively. The 
coastal wetter sub-regions of Mata Pernambucana and the MRR concentrate 57% of the 
population, mainly in the MRR (43% of the state population and 65% of the state GDP) 
and about 80% of the available water.  
 
The low water availability in the semi-arid regions of the State, coupled with the high 
rate of urbanization and economic activity in the coastal regions, where levels of water 
availability are higher, place the state#s available water resources under a great deal of 
stress. In spite of high levels of coverage with about 91% of urban households connected 
to the public water supply network, the service is unreliable and intermittent. Of the 170 
municipalities that are served by the COMPESA, only 30 receive water 24 hours per day. 
Rationing is commonplace, even in the MRR, where residents on average alternate 
Page  3
between 24 hours with water supply and 28 hours without service. Water losses are 
estimated to be around 60%, which is significantly above the 40% national average.  
 
With regards to sanitation, of the 170 municipalities served by COMPESA, only 20 
have sewerage networks with an average coverage of about 20%, well below national and 
regional averages. This situation impacts not only the un-served population presenting 
risks to public health, but also indirectly the population served as the raw wastewater 
contributes to the pollution of water resources. Some of the most important state water 
sources, located in the Capibaribe river basin and providing water to about 2.6 million 
people, are receiving increasing pollution loads due to untreated domestic sewage.  
 
The proposed interventions are focused in the MRR, aimed at optimizing existing water 
infrastructure and increasing operational and financial efficiency of water supply and 
sanitation services; as well as implementing investments in sewerage and treatment that 
in the short to medium-term aim at reducing the pollution loads from untreated sewage 
within the Capibaribe river basin, which is the main source of water for the MRR and 
Agreste sub-regions.  
 
Based on the need to reduce pollution loads into rivers, five selected municipalities 
located upstream of the main water supply reservoirs in the Capibaribe river basin are the 
focus of investments. These cities are: Paudalho, Limoeiro, Salgadinho, Toritama e 
Vitoria de Santo Antão. Most of them present condition of high poverty and social 
vulnerability and significant deficits in water supply and sanitation services, particularly 
for wastewater where the level of wastewater collection and treatment is extremely low 
or even zero, with important consequences for the health of the population and the quality 
of the water bodies and supply sources in the basin.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (SARRM) 
Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSUW) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Through its focus on environmental recovery and 
improvement in the quality of life for local residents, the Project will primarily have 
positive environmental impacts and will improve and protect critical natural assets with 
focus on water resources. The proposed Project has received an Environmental Category 
A
rating. A comprehensive Environmental Assessment (EA) was undertaken according to 
the Bank Safeguard Policies. The EA evaluates existing conditions, identifies potential 
direct and indirect environmental impacts, and proposes measures to mitigate negative 
impacts and to enhance positive impacts.  
 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) summarizes these measures along with 
their associated costs, responsibilities, and schedule. A public consultation was carried 
out and documented following the disclosure procedures recommended by the Bank#s 
environmental policy. The EA results and recommended measures are incorporated in the 
EMP and into Project components. Consultations were carried out in preparing the 
Project. In addition, as part of the environmental licensing process, SRH and COMPESA 
consulted several times with civil society organizations. These consultations were 
covered by newspapers and radio, Project documentation was made available at the office 
of the State Secretariat for Water Resources # SRH, Government of Pernambuco, Av. 
Cruz de Cabugá 111, Recife # PE, Brazil, and safeguard studies were made available at 
the InfoShop on May 29, 2009.  
 
The Natural Habitats Policy (OP 4.04) is triggered because the Project will rehabilitate 
and protect water resources, including degraded riparian vegetation under the category of 
natural habitats and urban parks that will also protect vulnerable environmental sites.  
 
The Forests Policy (OP 4.36) is triggered because the Project will rehabilitate degraded 
riparian vegetation and extend the area with appropriate vegetation, and promote 
reforestation as part of the environmental compensatory measures for the implementation 
of the Pirapama Water Supply Conveyance System.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). Brazil has a well-developed legislative and 
normative framework for management of physical cultural property, which is under the 
oversight of the National Institute for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites 
(Instituto do Patrimônio Histórico, Artístico e Cultural Nacional - IPHAN). In accordance 
with IPHAN and Bank requirements, the State of Pernambuco will include procedures for 
screening any known cultural property in the Project area and incorporate #chance find# 
procedures in the event that culturally significant resources are discovered during 
implementation. Procedures for the identification and protection of physical cultural 
resources will be included in the EMP.  
 
The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) is triggered because: (i) ongoing, 
counterpart financed infrastructure works (the Pirapama water supply conveyance 
system) have affected 294 families, including the resettlement of 202 families and 92 
processes of acquisition of sections of land as right of way, which has been evaluated and 
the findings indicated that the resettlement procedures undertaken were appropriate and 
consistent with the Bank safeguard policies; (ii) additionally about 130 families and eight 
small business will be resettled and 82 properties will be temporarily affected as right of 
Page  5
way to allow the Pirapama water supply conveyance system construction works, for 
which a resettlement plan has been prepared and considered satisfactory to the Bank (The 
Pirapama Resettlement Plan of July 11, 2009); (iii) for the remaining infrastructure 
works, although the technical information available do not anticipate the need for any 
resettlement, the Pernambuco Sustainable Water Project Resettlement Framework was 
prepared stating principles and procedures for the Project, which will be used in the 
preparation of resettlement plans or any other resettlement document needed in the 
unlikely case it becomes necessary.  
 
Safety of Dams Policy (OP 4.37) is triggered because an existing and operational 
reservoir to supply water to the metropolitan region of Recife is part of the Pirapama 
water supply system, and some of the infrastructure that constitute the Pirapama system is 
included in the Project. Works for the Pirapama dam were concluded in late 2000, and 
the reservoir was filled up in 2001. The construction of the dam and the reservoir were 
subject to detailed environmental impact assessment and report (EIA), commissioned by 
COMPESA and prepared by a local consulting firm in 1999. All required environmental 
licenses were issued by the State Environment Agency (CPRH) and the water rights were 
granted by SRH. Since 2008, the Pirapama reservoir is providing an average of 1.0 m3/s 
of bulk water to increase de production of the Gurjaú water system. The dam has been in 
operation since 2001 with no reported safety incidents. However, considering that the 
Pirapama dam is about 20 meters high and a significant withdrawal is expected to start on 
October 2010, the dam would be evaluated by an Independent Dam Safety Panel, to be 
commissioned and paid for by SRH prior to the beginning of any works related to the 
Pirapama water system, which would be financed with loan proceeds, particularly the 
non-revenue water investment activities under Component 2.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As part of its objectives and design, the Project has a strong environmental emphasis, 
which main positive contribution to the natural environment are summarized below, as 
well as the potential negative impacts identified.  
 
Positive Environmental Impacts  
 
Water Quality. The Project would result in significant water quality improvements to 
the Capibaribe river basin and several other river basins through the reduction and 
treatment of pollution sources, and restoration of environmental services provided by 
riparian zones of urban streams. The Project will directly address the current lack of 
wastewater collection and treatment # which is responsible for a number of critical 
negative urban environmental and quality-of-life impacts within the Capibaribe river 
basin.   
 
Specifically, the Project will address the current critical water quality situation within 
the river basin through repairs to the existing sewerage network, the expansion of 
sewerage services to cover all critical urban areas within this river basin, the 
identification of irregular household sewerage connections, and construction of sewage 
systems. In addition to the reduction and treatment of domestic pollution sources, the 
Project will target industrial and other non-domestic pollution sources for reduction 
through identification of existing and potential pollution sources, implementation of a 
Page  6
water quality monitoring program to identify the presence and composition of industrial 
pollutants, and institutional enhancements for addressing environmental issues.   
 
Additionally, by emphasizing the incorporation of environmental criteria in the design, 
planning and implementation of the Project activities, as well as promoting 
environmental education amongst residents, the Project will indirectly lead to long-term 
improvements in water quality. Lastly, Project activities to restore riparian vegetation and 
protect environmental units will result in the restoration of important environmental 
services provided by buffered, unpolluted, free-flowing creeks.  
 
Efficient water supply services. The Project will directly improve COMPESA#s and 
municipal water and sanitation providers# capacity in efficiently using water resources by 
reducing water losses and reducing the contamination of water sources..  
 
Water Resources and Environmental Management. The Project will directly improve the 
environmental management of the Capibaribe river basin natural resources through 
support to the state and COMPESA#s environmental management units, as well as to the 
river basin management bodies. This support will emphasize technical capacity 
improvements related to the state and COMPESA#s execution of the environment 
requirements associated with plans and works. The Project will also finance the creation 
and operation of the state water agency (APAC) of Pernambuco. The Project will 
contribute to additional urban environmental management improvements through support 
to the strengthening of water resources management and water quality monitoring.  
 
Specifically, the Project#s support to the water resources management committees, both 
financially and institutionally, through the development of river basin plans, 
environmental education programs and water quality monitoring, will result in improved 
water quality. The Project will strengthen the Committee#s technical capacity by 
developing planning tools, through developing decision models for water usage and 
discharge, and through mapping land use and capability. This system will serve as a basis 
for the Project#s monitoring of Capibaribe river water quality. The Project will also 
promote #greening# of the urban environment through integration of environmental 
considerations in urban planning, as described above.  
 
Biodiversity/Natural Habitats. The Project is expected to result in improvements to the 
aquatic and riparian biodiversity within the Capibaribe river basin. The Project#s 
emphasis on improving the quality of rivers and restoration of protecting environmentally 
sensitive areas along streams will promote the restoration of habitat for wetland and non-
wetland species alike, and will promote the maintenance of existing aquatic and riparian 
habitats. Through the improvement of water quality the Project will result in direct 
improvements to aquatic and riparian habitats in the Capibaribe river basin.  
 
Potential negative environmental impact  
 
During construction: Given the proposed Project objectives and activities focused on 
improving key environmental aspects within the Capibaribe river basin, no negative 
impacts are foreseen at the regional level. Potential negative impacts might happen at the 
local level, associated with the construction works. To avoid these potential negative 
impacts, appropriate measures were incorporated in the Project. These measures are 
addressed in the Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan, 
especially concerning to the technical criteria to be adopted by the engineering designs, 
the environmental assessment to be undertaken following the recommendations in the 
environmental framework, as well as in the Environmental Construction Manual, which 
Page  7
is going to be part of the bidding documents and contracts for the execution of works to 
be financed by the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the project and its potential negative impacts, alternatives will be 
considered at the detailed design stage in order to minimize the impacts of construction, 
and taking into account the recommendations of the EA and the EMP.  
 
The rehabilitation of existing and building of new wastewater collection networks and 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) will follow the Brazilian standards for system 
dimensions and the standards of quality of CPRH and CONAMA for effluent discharge 
and sludge disposal, including continuous monitoring of treated wastewater and sludge 
reuse. In addition, proposed standards will be in line with IFC/World Bank Group 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for wastewater and Environmental Water 
Quality.  
 
Only small- and medium-sized wastewater treatment facilities will be built, which 
reduces the technical complexity of these interventions. The detailed project studies will 
consider alternatives for the location of WWTPs in relation to the urban area, taking into 
account predominant winds and a minimum distance of 500 meters from homes and/or 
planned urban areas.  In the case that is not feasible, the WWTP design must foresee a 
minimum distance of 100 meters from edifications and the appropriate treatment of gases 
with the elimination of odors.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EA and an EMP were prepared, coordinated by SRH e COMPESA, also a 
comprehensive environmental analysis was undertaken in accordance with Bank 
Safeguard Policies and federal, state and municipal legal requirements for the selected 
activities.  
 
These overarching and more preliminary analyses will be complemented by the 
requisite environmental impact studies that are an obligatory requirement for applying for 
environmental licenses (such as Preliminary Environmental Report for small- or medium-
size wastewater treatment plants), in compliance with the environmental legislation of the 
State of Pernambuco; and by specific environmental reports and/or environmental 
screening data sheets to be approved by the Bank.  
 
In addition, a social analysis was undertaken in conjunction with the environmental 
assessment during project preparation. This included assessments of: (i) the socio-
economic characteristics of the population in the five municipalities selected for project 
interventions of Component 3; and (ii) the procedures for disclosure and public 
consultation.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was also prepared to guide the resettlement 
process if this becomes necessary for works other than the ongoing Pirapama water 
system. Although during the preparation of the project, one of the eligibility criteria for 
Page  8
subproject selection was the need to avoid involuntary resettlement, there exists the 
possibility that a case of involuntary resettlement could arise during project execution, for 
example a land expropriation or an eventual relocation of a family because of the 
construction of a water pump station or a wastewater treatment plant.  
 
The Borrowers# capacity to handle safeguard issues is generally good. The State of 
Pernambuco is capable in terms of social and environmental safeguard issues, 
demonstrated by considerable experience gained during the implementation of the Recife 
Urban Upgrading (Prometropole) project, the Pernambuco Rural Development and 
Poverty Reduction (pro-Rural) Project, and the federal Proagua Project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Aside from SRH and COMPESA directly involved in the execution of the Program, the 
social assessment also identified a number of key stakeholders that will participate in the 
Program#s implementation, including the water basin committees, the State Water 
Resources Council, the State Environmental Counsel, environmental and social NGOs, 
community and other associations.  
 
The preparation of the Pernambuco Sustainable Water Project comprised two sets of 
public consultation exercises conducted in the Capibaribe River Basin Committees, 
respectively in September 2, 2008, in the Municipality of Recife, and in April 16, 2009, 
in the Municipality of Limoeiro (all open to the general public).  
 
In the first meeting the project#s concept was presented and discussed.  The main 
purpose of the meeting was to brainstorm ideas and proposals for structuring the 
proposed project, identify concerns of those affected or benefited by the project, identify 
responsibilities for project execution and discuss and validate the Terms of Reference for 
the hiring of the Environmental and Social Assessment of the project.  
 
In the second public hearing the EA report, including the EMP and the resettlement 
framework as well as other documents concerned with the process of approval and proper 
implementation of the operation with the World Bank were presented and discussed. 
Both consultations and discussions were carried out with the main stakeholders, under the 
coordination of the Capibaribe River Watershed Committee. This committee is composed 
of representatives of state and municipal governments, civil society and academia, 
amongst others.  In addition other institutions such as COMPESA, IBAMA, Industry 
Associations, and different NGOs from environmental, fishing and tourism sectors 
participated in the consultations.  
 
There will be specific procedures for disclosure and public consultation of specific 
subprojects, as well as their respective environmental assessments, and these will depend 
on the size of the subproject and the significance of its environmental impacts. The 
reports for obtaining environmental licenses and the environmental reports produced for 
the World Bank will be disclosed in accordance with Brazilian legislation and Bank 
procedures. The procedures for disclosure and public consultation are defined in the 
EMP.   
 
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/06/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
06/26/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/06/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/29/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
Yes 
Page  10
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcos T. Abicalil 
07/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua 
07/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
07/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/27/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
07/27/2009 
Comments:   
