Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3726
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P110487 
Project Name:  Additional Financing to the Ceara Integrated Water Resource 
Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Manuel Contijoch Escontria 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 23, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (86%);Sub-national government administration (14%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
103.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
104.26
104.26 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
(a) Increase the sustainable water supply for multiple uses, improve the efficiency of 
Ceara's Integrated water resources management system and decrease vulnerability of poor 
populations to cyclical drought; (b) Stimulate multiple use, efficient and shared 
management of Ceara's water resources; and (c) Promote the improved management of 
soil and vegetation in tributary watersheds to enhance conservation, minimize erosion 
and maximize natural water storage mechanisms, through the adequate management of 
critical micro-basins and groundwater resources.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Component 1 
ñ
Water Resources Management would continue to support and deepen 
the same water resources sector reform agenda with the objective of: enhancing water 
resource management efficiency; consolidating the management of water supply, through 
the strengthening of the capacity for O&M of the hydraulic infrastructure, and 
introducing new water quality management mechanisms for groundwater; improving 
public participatory mechanisms and management of water uses conflicts; and 
Page  2
strengthening the capacity of COGERH, SOHIDRA, and SRH. This Component will 
comprise the following group of activities: A. Institutional Strengthening; B. Water 
Rights, Licensing and Control System, Bulk Water Tariff Program; C. Water Basins 
Committees and Water Users Associations; D. Operation and Maintenance of Hydraulic 
Infrastructure; E. Water Quality Management and Groundwater Management.  
 
Component 2 
ñ
Hydraulic Infrastructure would focus on the preparation and 
implementation of additional water storage and supply sub-projects that were 
contemplated in the original broader project scope but not included in its final design, 
with the objective of complementing existing systems or expanding strategic water 
infrastructure for the provision of reliable water supply for human consumption and 
economic development. It will contemplate three groups of activities: A. Strategic 
Reservoirs Network; B. Water Transfer Axis; and C. Studies and Engineering Designs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The State of Ceara is semi-arid, known for prolonged droughts and very variablerainfall 
regimes. The rainfall is almost wholly concentrated in the three months of March, April, 
and May, so that there is a long dry period during which many rivers and streams become 
dry beds. Average temperatures year-round range from 79 to 82 degrees F (26 to 28 
degrees C) but may peak to 86 or 90 degrees F (30 or 32 degrees C) in the backlands 
during the dry season, thus aggravating the aridity. The soil is, in general, thin and porous 
and does not retain moisture; consequently the long, dry season turns the region into 
semi-deserts.  
 
Most of Ceara's territory is situated on crystalline rock formations with relatively little 
good-quality groundwater reserves.  In two regions of the state, however, there are 
significant groundwater resources: in the coastal zone regions of Ceara and in the Cariri 
region.  
 
More than 90% of Ceara was once covered by caatinga, a type of natural habitat 
associated with the semi-arid climate; the caatinga has already been affected by human 
interventions. The most important river in Ceara is the Jaguaribe; nearly all the rivers in 
Ceara are intermitent (dry out during part of the year). Artificial reservoirs ("acudes") 
have been built all over the State, to store water from rives; the largest reservoirs in Ceara 
are Oros and Banabuiu.  The additional financing will finance 6 additional reservoirs, 
finalize the works of an integration canal to bring water from the Castanh√£o reservoir to 
the north of the state, and water supply systems.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 
ñ
Environmental Assessment  
 
The preparation of the Additional Financing included an overall environmental 
assessment of PROGERIRH implementation, a new Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) for the implementation of the Additional Financing Project, and an 
overall Environmental Management Plan (EMP) as well as EMPs for each first year sub-
project.  
 
Between 2002 and 2004, the PROGERIRH project financed the elaboration of 
EIA/RIMAs for all six reservoirs to be financed by the PROGERIRH Additional 
Financing. As part of preparation of the additional financing, a detailed and independent 
environmental review was undertaken for the first year interventions of the Umari and 
Gameleira Reservoirs and associated pipelines and water treatment plants. The 
environmental review also included the review of Dam Safety provisions and procedures, 
the environmental licenses and its provisions, and visit to both sub-project sites. The 
compliance with applicable Brazilian legislation and Bank Safeguard policies were also 
evaluated.  
 
In addition to the public consultations held during the preparation of the EIA/RIMAs 
and respective environmental licenses; the sub-projects, the EMF, and the EMPs were 
submitted to new consultations during the months of July and August of 2008. In general, 
the works are perceived to have positive impacts since they will provide proper water 
supply to communities and access to water resources throughout the year. The main 
expressed concerns are related to the proper implementation of the resettlement activities. 
Detailed minutes and results of these consultations are available in the project 
documentation.  
 
The main environmental issues related to the implementation of the reservoirs and 
related pipelines and infrastructure are presented below:  
Page  4
The Reservoirs of Gameleira and Umari were projected to address multiple uses, most 
importantly public water supply for the town of Barrento in Itapipoca Municipality, and 
towns of Macaoca and Lagoa do Mato in Madalena Municipality.  
 
Both reservoirs are vulnerable to eutrophication, due to nutrient pollution as a result of 
the release of sewage effluent and run-off from fertilizers into natural waters. The risk of 
salinization is low. The water quality monitoring program, together with the reservoir 
protection and operation program should guarantee the quality of the water for the 
different uses.  
 
In addition, a number of mitigation measures, described in the EMP of each reservoir 
(e.g. Social Mobilization and Environmental Education Programs, Recovery of Quarry 
and Borrow Pit Areas and Construction Sites, and Rational Deforestation of the 
Inundated Area), will be implemented as part of infrastructure works.  
 
The main pipeline systems include the implementation of raw water pipelines, the 
construction of a water treatment plan (WTP), as well as main pipelines for the water 
supply network. The pipelines are being installed along secondary roads and highways, 
not affecting natural environments, habitats or population. The WTPs include waste 
water and sludge treatment facilities.  
 
In the resettlement plans for the population affected by the construction of the reservoir 
(inundated area and Permanent Protection Areas 
ñ
APPs), one of the options is the 
relocation to the agrovilas and/or agricultural lots to be demarcated specifically for the 
population in the reservoirís area of influence.  
 
In the definition of such areas, the analyses of alternative locations took into 
consideration environmental criteria as well as soil characteristics for agriculture and the 
preferences of the population. The selected areas have already been altered by 
anthropogenic activities.  
 
OP 4.04 ñ Natural Habitats  
 
The selected subprojects will not affect Environmental Conservation Areas or Critical or 
significant natural habitats. The list of priority areas for Environmental Conservation and 
Biodiversity were reviewed and the areas affected by the reservoirs, including the 
Agrovilas, are already largely occupied and altered by anthropogenic activities.  
 
The project's main adverse impact upon terrestrial natural habitats would be the 
inundation of natural vegetation by the new reservoirs. The six reservoirs would inundate 
roughly 4,228 ha and the Agrovilas will occupy an additional 1,101 ha (see table below). 
The additional financing includes the creation of Permanent Protection Areas (APPs) of 
at least 100m around the reservoirs with specific re-vegetation program. The list below 
presents a summary of the cumulative impacts and APPs to be created under the 
Additional Financing at each reservoir as well as the ones created under PROGERIRH.  
Page  5
The total area impacted by each sub-project and created APPs is as follows:  
 
AF Reservoirs:  
 
-
Umari Reservoir - Inundated area: 738 ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 202ha / 
Area of APP that will be created: 865ha  
 
-
Gameleira Reservoir - Inundated area: 1,148ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 
215ha / Area of APP that will be created: 657ha  
 
-
Jatoba Reservoir - Inundated area: 121ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 146ha / 
Area of APP that will be created: 52ha  
 
-
Jenipapeiro Reservoir - Inundated area: 836ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 
254ha / Area of APP that will be created: 557ha  
 
-
Mamoeiro Reservoir - Inundated area: 369ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 116ha 
/
Area of APP that will be created:  515ha  
 
-
Trairi Reservoir - Inundated area: 1,016ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 168ha / 
Area of APP that will be created: 1,019  
 
-
Total AF inundated area: 4,228 ha  
 
-
Total AF agrovilas and farming plots area: 1,101 ha  
 
-
Total AF APPs area to be created: 3,665 ha  
 
PROGERIRH Original Reservoirs:  
 
-
Catu-Cinzenta - Inundated area: 883ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: N/A / Area 
of APP created: 282ha  
 
-
Carmina Reservoir - Inundated area: 319ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 20ha / 
Area of APP created: 168ha  
 
-
Malcozinhado Reservoir - Inundated area: 795ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 
N/A / Area of APP created: 357ha  
 
-
Aracoiaba Reservoir - Inundated area: 2,393ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 
358ha / Area of APP created: 1.095ha  
 
-
Fae Reservoir - Inundated area: 193ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: N/A / Area of 
APP created: 222ha  
 
-
Pesqueiro Reservoir - Inundated area: 318ha / Agrovila and farming plots area: 249ha / 
Area of APP created: 142ha  
 
-
Total cumulative inundated area: 9,129 ha  
 
-
Total cumulative agrovila and farming plots area: 1,728 ha  
 
-
Total cumulative APPs area: 5,931 ha  
 
In addition, an agreement was reached with SEMACE that the PROGERIRH AF will 
support some activities under the Mata Branca Project (part of the World Bank GEF 
Caatinga Project) and develop a strategy to implement Conservation Units within the 
Conservation and Biodiversity Priority Area (Ca 154) close to the Umari Reservoir, as 
well as support fire prevention programs within conservation units in the Caatinga.  
 
OP 4.09 
ñ
Pest Management  
Page  6
This policy is triggered due to activities aimed at (i) controlling ant infestation in newly 
reforested areas, and (ii) controlling and eliminating the presence of ant hills or animal 
burrows in or in the immediate vicinity of dam walls. The EMP will include procedures 
to ensure that any pesticides used in such activities comply with the requirements of OP 
4.09 including a definition of the types of pesticides that can be used, the procedures for 
their application, the safety of those applying it, and potential contamination of the 
surrounding environment.  
 
OP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
 
The additional financing investments are located in areas of archaeological and 
paleontological interest, especially around the Reservoirs of Gameleira and Umari. 
Therefore, an identification and recovery program for chance finds was prepared as part 
of EMP, including the following measures:  
 
-
A
prior research of the project area, investigation and recovery procedures of historic, 
archeological and paleontological remains. Any activity related to this program has to be 
approved by IPHAN - Instituto do Patrimonio Historico e Artistico Nacional (historic and 
archeological remains) and by DNPM - DepartamentoNacional de Producao Mineral 
(paleontology).  
 
-
Public awareness programs.  
 
-
Destination of remains encountered to research centers.  
 
-
Chance finding identification and recovery program.  
 
OP 4.12 
ñ
Involuntary Resettlement  
 
The Additional Financing (AF) triggers the Bank policy OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement.  The preparation of the resettlement action plans were concluded together 
with the basic and detailed designs of the reservoirs. Since some time has passed since 
the conclusion of these plans and designs between 2002 and 2004, as part of the 
Additional Financing preparation, the following measures were taken:  
 
-
Review and update of the resettlement action plans for the first year investments: 
Gameleira e Umari reservoirs.  
 
-
Update of the Resettlement Framework to be applied to the remaining reservoirs.  
 
-
New consultations with the affected population.  
 
These studies are included in separate documents. It is estimated that between 920 and 
950 families will be resettled under the additional financing. In the Umari Reservoir, 331  
families will be affected, with opting for moving to the agrovila and 25 families for 
resettling on their own. For the Gameleira Reservoir, 163 families would be affected, 
with 32 moving to the agrovila and 22 resettling on their own.  
 
Page  7
The updating of the Umari and Gameleira Resettlement Plans was carried out by SRH 
and its Resettlement Unit based on the experiences of PROGERIRH. For the Additional 
Financing, SRH will continue to implement and update the remaining Plans.  
 
The objective of the State Resettlement Policies as reflected in the Umari and Gameleira 
Resettlement Plans and Jatoba, Jenipapeiro, Mamoeiro and Trairi Resettlement 
Frameworks is to improve the quality of life of the resettled population, ensuring the 
reestablishment of their livelihoods and social networks, while providing sound 
governmental support to promote sustainable development of the affected population.  
 
The applied Resettlement Policy Framework included the following process: to 
minimize the number of resettlements; to observe cultural appropriateness and social 
diversity; to ensure the population affected, based on the eligibility criteria, are offered 
free options for resettlement as well as compensation and indemnities; to assure all the 
community members participation along the project cycle; to the appropriate legal 
instruments to carry out expropriation measures; to improve housing for all the affected 
population; to assign the rural housing (Agrovilas) and the agricultural land in accordance 
to sound environmental norms; to ensure all affected families whether with legal or 
illegal tenure are properly resettled; to ensure gender inclusion and participation of family 
members in the endorsement for cash compensation and indemnities; to ensure the 
appropriate consideration for payment of all infrastructure, property improvements and 
possessions affected; to provide resettlement solutions before starting reservoir 
construction works; to provide transitional accommodation only in exceptional cases; to 
elaborate a timetable for the resettlement activities and have an information and 
communication strategy. In addition, arrangements for participatory monitoring and an 
external ex-post evaluation are programmed.  
 
The updated Resettlements Plans included the following: characterization of the 
population, affected areas, description of indemnity types, options for the affected 
population and types of benefits; expropriation plan, selection of the resettlement area, 
cadastre of assets, reference values to be paid as compensations and indemnities; 
implementation stages of the resettlement plans infrastructure projects, sustainable 
development programs, and systems for claims, queries and grievances. During the 
updating of the plans, the affected families were consulted and informed. The 
resettlement costs have been updated in the cases of Umari and Gameleira. For the 
updating of Jatoba, Jenipapeiro, Mamoeiro and Trairi Plans, the resettlement costs will be 
revised in accordance with Bank policies.  
 
OP 4.36 
ñ
Forests  
 
The policy is triggered due to activities involving reforestation of APP areas using 
native tree species. For this project, the requirements of OP 4.36 overlap with those of OP 
4.04 (Natural Habitats) and, therefore, the requirements have been addressed under OP 
4.04.  
 
OP 4.37 ñ Dam Safety  
Page  8
The basic and detailed project designs of the Gameleira, Umari, Jatoba, Jenipapeiro, 
Mamoeiro and Trairi Reservoirs were prepared under the supervision of an Independent 
Dam Safety Inspection Panel that was created for the State of Ceara according to World 
Bank's requirements. The Panel provides assistance to SRH and monitors all major and 
complex reservoirs in the state.  
 
The Umari Project and the Gameleira Projects were approved by the Panel during the 
40th meeting in August of 2002 and the 45th meeting in July of 2003, respectively.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
For cumulative environmental and related social impacts (not restricted to one 
subproject), a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) encompassing the Jaguaribe, 
Curu, Metropolitana, Acarau and Coreau Riverbasins of the State has been provided. The 
REA addresses issues such as environmental and social selection criteria for reservoirs; 
specific plans for establishment and/or strengthening of compensatory protected areas (if 
needed to comply with the Bank's Natural Habitats Policy or Brazilian law); mitigation of 
the environmental impacts of induced regional development; environmental institutional 
strengthening needs; environmental criteria and procedures for managing water releases 
from reservoirs (including inter-basin transfers); and regional watershed management 
priorities.  
 
To mitigate the potential adverse environmental impacts and further improve 
environmental conditions, PROGERIRH includes a comprehensive Regional 
Environmental Management Program (REMP), estimated to cost about US$3.5 million.  
 
In accordance with Bank policy and Brazilian law, the draft REA and REMP were 
discussed at a public meeting held February 1999 in Fortaleza with a wide range of 
stakeholders, including NGOs; comments on the proposed project and REMP were 
mostly highly positive. The updated EMPs and RAPs for the Umari and Gameleira 
reservoirs were discussed with the public in July and August 2008.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The final list of projects were the result of assessment of different alternatives and a  
rigorous screening process that include analysis of a wide range of criteria (including 
environmental, social, technical, economic and financial). The studies and alternatives 
selection took into account not only the individual effects of each subproject but also the 
cumulative and regional impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
SRH established a special environmental unit (Nucleo de Controle Ambiental 
ñ
NUCAM) responsible for all environmental aspects of SRHís work, including the 
implementation of mitigation measures set forth in the REMP. Although environmental 
Page  9
consciousness within SRH is relatively high, the need remains for strengthening SRH's 
technical capacity to manage the environmental aspects of its work. While the NUCAM 
has adequately addressed key safeguard issues, there is a need to better coordinate the 
planning and implementation of works with the environmental activities. A number of 
measures will be implemented to further strengthen NUCAM's capacity to address 
safeguard issues, namely:  
 
-
The hiring of 3 additional environmental staff to assist in the implementation and 
environmental supervision.  
 
-
Acquisition of equipment (laptops, computers, printers) and software to assist in the 
monitoring activities, as well as digital cameras to document field visits.  
 
-
Design and implementation of an Environmental Information System to help plan and 
mainstream environmental activities during the different phases of the project cycle.  
 
-
Capacity building and training of the NUCAM: (i) Environmental Management; (ii) 
Decision making methods and tools; (iii) Water Resource Management and Planning; (iv) 
Environmental Economics of Natural Resources; (v) Water and Environmental Law; (vi) 
Environmental Impacts of Hydro Works; (vii) Environmental Management of Works.  
 
Regarding the social aspects, SRH also has established a resettlement special unit 
NUREA (Nucleo de Reassentamento), which relies on a specialized technical team to 
prepare and conduct the resettlement process. This team is currently composed of six 
people dealing with all aspects related to the resettlement activities and will continue to 
provide support for the implementation and monitoring of the AF Resettlement plans. In 
addition, NUREA team will be strengthened with permanent staff to be hired under the 
capacity building component supported by the AF. The existence of the present safeguard 
plans and the implementation capacity within SRH should ensure satisfactory compliance 
with social safeguard policies. Moreover, the AF project will implement a system to deal 
with claims, queries and grievances of the resettled population as a mechanism that will 
alert the project of any fault in compliance with the safeguards during implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are SEMACE, COGERH, (Water) Basin Committees, and Users 
Associations. They have been involved in the first PROGERIRH loan and have been 
consulted in the design of the project and planning and implementation of sub-projects.  
 
These include the preparation of specific strategies to mitigate environmental and social 
impacts on communities, community consultation and participation in the preparation and 
implementation of specific activities and the preservation of water resources and 
protection areas; and, implementation of specific activities, agreed on with the 
community, to address key social and environmental impacts, as well as concerns raised 
by the community.  
 
Issuing the Involuntary Resettlement Plans for the PROGERIRH Additional Financing 
included consultations with key stakeholders. Based on the lessons learned during the 
Page  10
implementation of PROGERIRH, further consultations will take place with resettled 
population in a case by case basis.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Page  11
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  12
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Contijoch Escontria 
11/06/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
11/06/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
11/06/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
11/06/2008 
Comments:   
