Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2649 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/26/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P101504 
Project Name: Second Bolsa Família 
Task Team Leader: Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (97%);Central government administration (2%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12,000.00
12,000.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This is the second phase of the proposed World Bank support for Bolsa Família Program with its 
two-phase programmatic series of operations.  APL-1 covered the transitional (2004-05) and the 
expansion and stabilization (2005-08) phases.  It focused on improving the basic architecture of 
the program and consolidating the integration of the various CCT programs into one and scale-up 
its operation.  While the SWAp component was fully disbursed by December 2006, the technical 
assistance component has been extended until December 31, 2009 to continue the support on the 
program monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Because the APL supports the Government#s own safety net reforms along with co-funding the 
Bolsa Família Program, the ultimate development objective of the Bank#s project are the same 
as those of the program.  The broad objective of the program is to reduce poverty and inequality 
through the provision of direct monetary transfers to poor families and incentives for investing in 
human capital.  As the World Bank contribution is small compared to the total costs of the 
conditional transfers part of  BFP), it would be most accurate to state that overall reduction of 
Page  2
poverty and inequality is the ultimate objective of the Bank#s assistance under the proposed 
project.  
 
The proposed second phase of the project (2009-2013), would seek to further strengthen the 
BFP#s ability to achieve these broader objectives of reducing poverty and inequality and 
promoting human capital development by supporting: (a) the strengthening of the program#s 
overall governance through enhanced basic program management functions and accountability, 
oversight and control functions, in three axes: the registry of beneficiaries (Cadastro Único), 
management of benefits, and monitoring of conditionalities; (b) the consolidation of the program 
monitoring and evaluation system; (c) the integration of social protection programs, with Bolsa 
Família as the central intervention to promote innovations and strategies for beneficiaries# 
graduation from poverty through investments in human capital such as additional education 
incentives, and links with complementary actions outside the program#s jurisdiction such as 
social and productive inclusion interventions and job and productivity programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed second phase of the APL project (2009-2013) would consist of four components, 
including co-financing the conditional cash transfers component and four technical components 
to help deepen the basic architecture of the program, strengthen oversight and controls, and 
address second-generation issues on social protection programs articulation.  
 
Component 1: Conditional Cash Transfers (Grants) ($185 million).  This component would 
continue co-financing the program via a program-performance-based Sector Wide Approach 
(SWAp).  Specifically, the project would disburse funds against cash transfers (grants) to poor 
families upon their compliance with key human development conditionalities.  
 
Financing will flow directly from the Treasury to the Caixa Economica Federal after the 
Ministry of Social Development (with program management by the National Secretariat for 
Citizen Income) approves the benefit payment roster, #Folha de Pagamento#.  CEF will then 
transfer the money to a pooled account, which beneficiaries can access with a debit card.  
 
Component 2: Consolidation of the Bolsa Família Program and the Cadastro Unico. ($19.3 
million).  The consolidation of the program seeks to permanently update program#s design and 
adjust operational processes within the Ministry of Social Development. This component, carried 
out by the National Secretary for Citizen#s Income (SENARC), would finance activities aimed at 
strengthening program#s overall management, governance and accountability through four 
channels: enhanced basic program management functions, accountability and oversight and 
control functions, management of program#s benefits and conditionalities, and strengthening the 
Cadastro Unico.  
 
#
Component 2A.  Program Management. ($6.4 million; Bank Financing: $3.2 million)  
This sub-component would support activities to strengthen the basic management and 
consolidation of the functions of the program by the MDS and its decentralized implementation 
by states and municipalities.  This includes:  
 
#
Component 2B. Management of program#s conditionalities (US$2.5 million; Bank 
Financing: $1.25 million). Management of program#s co-responsibilities involves a set of 
processes aimed at 1) Monitoring compliance with co-responsibilities in education and health at 
local level as pre-requisite to authorize payments, 2) Registering information about compliance, 
3) Ensuring that families comply with co-responsibilities, and 4) Supporting families in non 
Page  3
compliance situations.. Processes involved in the management of program#s conditionalities are 
carried by the Ministries of Social Development, Health and Education at central and local level 
and the municipalities. This subcomponent is aimed at strengthening instruments, 
implementation and management arrangements to improve and consolidate the above mentioned 
processes.  
 
#
Component 2C. Management of Program#s Benefits (US$2 million; Bank Financing: $1 
million). The management of benefits is a set of processes and activities that the program carries 
out to ensure that benefits are regularly transferred to beneficiary families. The management of 
benefits in Bolsa Familia involved three set of processes and activities: 1) Authorization of 
payments #information on families composition, updated information on the registry, analysis of 
compliance with co-responsibilities by the families; 2) Management of benefits at local level 
#processes and regulations to block, unblock, cancel, reinstatement and suspension of benefits, 
according to programs rules; and 3) Payment #logistics, mechanisms to reach families in remote 
areas, and strategies for beneficiaries to better manage their payments. This component, 
implemented by SENARC would support MDS to improve the management and logistics of 
program#s payments cycle, through improving and strengthening existing mechanisms used by 
MDS and the payment agency (CEF).  
 
#
Component 2D.  Cadastro Unico (US$5.4 million; Bank Financing: $2.7 million). The 
Cadastro Único is the federal government instrument to identify and measure poverty of low 
income families, and is the mandatory tool to select beneficiaries of federal social programs. The 
Cadastro Unico is also used by State and Municipal authorities to target their own social 
programs. The Project will support the consolidation of the Cadastro Unico as the main 
mechanism for the registry of low income families in order to improve the information on the 
socio-economic status of the target population, improve beneficiary selection for existing and 
future social programs, to minimizing exclusion and inclusion errors, and to serve as a reference 
for the articulation of social policy reforms and interventions.  
 
Component 3: Consolidation of the Monitoring and Evaluation System.  ($9.5 million; Bank 
Financing: $4.5 million).  This component, to be implemented by the Secretary for Evaluation 
and Information Management (SAGI), would support the Secretary to enhance and consolidate 
the Ministry#s capacity to monitor and evaluate social programs implemented by the Ministry of 
Social Development as well as other Ministries. Therefore, strengthening the M&E system of the 
MDS goes beyond the impact evaluation of Bolsa Familia program (third follow-up data 
collection for the baseline survey of the program specifically) but involves other interventions 
carried out by the Ministry, as well as other social programs under implementation by other 
Federal agencies.  
 
Component 4: Supporting the National Commitment for Social Development (CNDS 
#Compromisso Nacional pelo Desenvolvimento Social) ($3 million; Bank Financing: $1.5 
million).  The CNDS is an initiative launched by the federal government in early 2008 to 
improve the impact of social policies and enhance their effectiveness through a better horizontal 
integration among federal agencies and a vertical integration between the Federal Government 
and the States. The National Secretary for Institutional Articulation and Partnerships (SAIP) at 
the Ministry of Social Development is the agency responsible to promote and oversee this 
initiative. Accordingly, funds for this component will be carried out by SAIP. The Project will 
support a set of key areas for action included as part of the CNDS. As part of this component, the 
Page  4
Project will also support the Federal Government in its effort to extend to states and 
municipalities# technical and financial support as well as incentives to comply with specific 
goals set in the agreements signed under the National Commitment for Social Development.  
 
Component 5:  Operational Support to Project Coordination at the Ministry of Social 
Development. The proposed project would maintain its financial support to the Ministry of 
Social Development to keep a small team to coordinate and provide support to the 
implementation of components 2 to 4.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National scope.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government has started innovative targeting practices for quilombolas and indigenous 
populations during the first phase  and expressed its commitment to increase the access and 
social participation of the most vulnerable populations according to their cultural identities, 
traditions and values. Consultations will be held to share results, hear about expectations and to 
validate innovations with the target audiences.  
 
The program carries out several actions to improve social participation and accountability in the 
program, including: (i) training of about 22,000 councilors do BFP and Social Assistance 
Secretariat in 2009 and 2010, staring in August 2009; (ii) the program in partnership with SAGI 
carried out a qualitative about social control agents to institutional strengthen them, involving 
beneficiaries and councilors, and (iii) training coordinators and state teams of BFP on social 
control and #fiscaliazação#, to provide support to municipalities in strengthening the social 
control agents. The program will develop an information system about social control and local 
audits to both collect and share information provided by the different agents and disseminate 
results and activity reports.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Jose Vilas Boas Per Weiss (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will trigger the Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) safeguard policy.  An Indigenous 
People#s Plan (IPP), building on the one of Phase 1, will be prepared by the Government during 
project preparation in consultation with the indigenous population. The Social Assessment will 
be carried out before September 2009.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/31/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
06/17/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/17/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
06/17/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
