Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4283 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P113540 
Project Name: AIDS-SUS (National AIDS Program - National Health Service) 
Task Team Leader: Joana Godinho 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: HIV/AIDS (29%);Health system performance (29%);Managing for development 
results (28%);Decentralization (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
67.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
133.00
133.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives (PDOs) are the following:  
 
(i) Increase usage of prevention, care and treatment services by highly vulnerable groups.  
 
(ii) Improve the National STIs and AIDS Program transparency, accountability and social 
control by promoting performance-based management, and organization of services involving 
relevant networks.  
 
(iii) Increase the use of evidence in policy making by the three levels of government by 
promoting monitoring and evaluation of HIV/AIDS and STIs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would be implemented nation-wide, reaching out to the 27 federal units, with the 
North, Northeast, and Center-East regions as a priority.  The $200 million Brazil AIDS-SUS 
Project would be co-financed by a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US $67 million to be 
disbursed in four years (2010-2014). The project would follow a Sector Wide Approach 
Page  2
(SWAp), with the Bank co-financing a percentage of Government Eligible Expenditure 
Programs (EEP).  Disbursements would be triggered by the execution of the agreed subprograms 
and achievement of specific result targets.  
 
Component 1. Improving the Governance of the National STI and AIDS Program (US$57 
million)  
 
This component follows a SWAp approach by financing a percentage of the following Eligible 
Expenditure Programs (EEPs):  
 
*** 
Policy and Institutional Arrangements. This program would focus on:  
 
o
Policy Formulation and Regulation.  Develop policies, guidelines and technical 
regulations for the health care network to better reach highly vulnerable groups; improve the 
logistic system for provision of condoms and pharmaceutical drugs for HIV/AIDS and other STI.  
 
o
Information Management.  Integrate epidemiological surveillance of HIV/AIDS and 
other STI, R&D and monitoring and evaluation; monitor and evaluate R&D; develop tools and 
processes to make the information available to key stakeholders.  
 
o
Research and Technology Innovation. Promote research and technology development in 
innovative, priority areas to better reach highly vulnerable populations, and to develop vaccines 
and other prevention products; cooperation between research institutes, private sector and 
development agencies; develop technology assessment.  
 
o
National and International Cooperation.  Development of national and international 
networks to improve national response; increase South-South cooperation, especially in the 
context of MERCOSUR and with Lusophone countries in the world; and integrate the efforts of 
the relevant health subsectors.  
 
***
Management, Financing and Results. This program would focus on:  
 
o
Decentralized Performance-based Management and Financing. Establish performance-
based financing of STI and HIV/AIDS programs in states, municipalities and NGOs. This would 
include performance incentives for State and Municipal Secretariats and NGOs.  
 
o
Network Organization.  Organize a network of care integrating primary secondary and 
tertiary care to expand the provision and quality of services in the areas of prevention, and 
diagnosis and treatment of STIs and HIV/AIDS, focusing on highly vulnerable groups;  
 
o
Transparency, Accountability and Social Control.  Strengthen social participation in the 
formulation and control of policies for HIV/AIDS and other STI, and increase transparency and 
visibility of Program inputs, processes, activities and results.  
 
Component 2. Building the Capacity of the National STI and AIDS Program (US$ 10 million).  
 
This component would finance specific technical assistance and training for expanding 
prevention and care for highly vulnerable groups, and improving the Program’s governance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scope.   
 
E.  
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The project would not present any potential impacts that would be of environmental concern, and 
would not involve any resettlement. Although PO 4.01 would not be triggered, the project would 
develop (i) adequate monitoring guidelines for reducing health risks; (ii) guidelines on proper 
handling and disposal of waste; (iii) training program of health care workers and all new 
participating entities on handling of blood products and delivering health care to PLHIV; and (iv) 
a
communication strategy for proper usage and disposal of condoms.  
 
Given that the project will support expanding the provision and quality of services in the areas 
of prevention and diagnosis and treatment of STIs and HIV/AIDS, the project will assist the 
borrower in developing a training program of healthcare workers and all new participating 
entities on handling of biomedical waste with an emphasis on blood by-products and delivering 
health care to STI and HIV/AIDS patients.  
 
OP 4.10 is triggered, and an Indigenous People Planning Framework will be developed in the 
context of the project social assessment.  
 
The Ministry of Health has a long tradition of providing training and building capacity within 
its own ranks. The Project will support the Borrower in this effort.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous People Planning Framework will be developed in the context of the project 
social assessment.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) to be carried out in the context the Social 
Assessment by 06/30/09   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Joana Godinho 
04/10/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
05/15/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
