Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3190 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/15/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P101324 
Project Name: Minas Gerais Partnership II SWAP 
Task Team Leader: Jose Guilherme Reis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSPF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (35%);Roads and highways 
(30%);Health (15%);General education sector (10%);General industry and trade sector 
(10%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P);Managing for development results (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
880.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Initial discussions with the Minas authorities have led to the following general and specific 
project objectives.  
 
Broad Project Objective:  The project will support the Government of Minas Gerais in its 
efforts to implement the State for Results model in order to improve quality and efficiency in the 
delivery of public goods and services, reinforcing the fiscal and macroeconomic advances made 
through previous reforms, with the overall objective of promoting economic growth and poverty 
reduction.  
 
Specific project objectives:  
 
Page  2
Help the Government of Minas Gerais to strengthen fiscal quality by increasing the efficiency 
of public expenditures at the sectoral level.  
 
Support the process of improved innovation in public management of the State, including more 
efficient and effective processes for the delivery of services.  
 
Support the Government of Minas Gerais in implanting a system of monitoring and evaluation 
of results in order to reinforce improved fiscal quality and modernization of public sector 
management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would be a US$888 million SWAP to support implementation of the 
Government's program over a three year period. The project would aim to finance expenses 
associated with priority expenditure programs that are fundamental to achievement of the 
Government's program, while at the same time linking disbursement of these resources to 
continued improvements in fiscal management, improvements in the efficiency of spending and 
in achievements of specified results in the results areas. The project will also have a TA 
component of about 2 percent of total Bank financing.  
 
The operation will focus on three cross-cutting themes that will themselves be strengthened, but 
will also be the focal points for drilling down into the results areas. These three areas are: 1) 
improving fiscal quality (the efficiency of expenditures); 2) innovation in and strengthening of 
public sector management; and 3) further development of monitoring and evaluation tools. While 
the operation will support the Government's program as a whole, particular attention will be paid 
to drilling down in the following results areas: Healthy Life; Quality in Education; Innovation, 
Technology and Quality; Investment and Value Added in Production; and Integration, Logistics 
and Regional Development. These areas were chosen as those in which the Government sought 
Bank assistance and in which the Bank could provide the highest value added.  
 
The Bank team is working with the Minas Government to identify in each results area: 1) key 
results indicators to be phased over the life of the project; 2) key expenditure programs that 
require finance and against which Bank funds can be disbursed; and 3) TA requirements of the 
Government.  
 
Work is underway to define and focus both indicators and the priority expenditure programs. 
As the team moves toward appraisal and negotiations, we will work with the Government to 
define a set of parsimonious indicators appropriate to the magnitude of the project. These 
indicators will be linked where possible to the priority expenditure programs.  
 
The Technical Assistance Component.  The Government has identified a wide range of 
technical assistance needs that they would like to be supported by the project. These include 
activities in the cross-cutting themes, as well as by results area.  The team is currently working to 
identify which requests should be included. At the same time, the Minas authorities have 
requested some support for immediate needs in the form of non-lending technical assistance. We 
are actively seeking finance from a variety of sources, yet, Senior Management may wish to 
consider whether it is possible to allocate some resources for TA support to the Government on 
top of what would be allocated for project preparation.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The state road maintenance and rehabilitation program will finance investments localized 
principally in the southern part of the state, the most economically developed part of the state, 
where most of the important state paved roads are localized.  The state program of surfacing of 
accesses to municipalities will finance investments localized in the northern part of the state, the 
less developed part of the state, where the poorest municipalities are localized.  
 
All civil works under these two state programs will be localized in the roads’ right-of-way.  It is 
not expected that road civil works will be undertaken as to have an impact on existing 
indigenous/traditional people or protected areas.  In addition, it is expected that the execution of 
road surfacing and road maintenance and rehabilitation works will not generate significant 
environmental or social impacts, as works will take place on existing roads.  Most environmental 
impacts will be linked to the execution of the civil works.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The demonstrated track record of the Minas authorities to manage these kind of programs 
evidences the borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies.  
 
With respect to the road sector, the state environmental system seems to be well performing: (i) 
the state environmental agencies work in close partnership with the road administration and 
resulting efficiency gains have been significant over the last 3 years; and (ii) the road 
administration has adequate capacity to identify and mitigate environmental impacts resulting 
from the execution of road civil works.  In addition, the implementing agency for the state road 
maintenance and rehabilitation program and of the state program of surfacing of accesses to 
municipalities, the state road administration (DER) has a well defined body of norms and 
procedures to deal with environmental and social issues, implemented through its environmental 
and resettlement units. In addition, the state road administration has benefited from IADB 
institutional strengthening in the identification and mitigation of environmental and social 
impacts under the state program of surfacing of accesses to municipalities, partially financed by 
the IADB.  
 
Recent experience with resettlement and land acquisition in various programs managed by DER 
provide strong evidence that the state institutions responsible for these activities have the 
capacity to plan, implement and monitor complex resettlement and land acquisition schemes, 
establishing the necessary partnerships with local governments and private entities as needed in 
order to ensure proper implementation. Current framework and practice indicates that 
involuntary taking of land and/or resettlement is avoided or it is minimized by modifying the 
technical design of the projects as much as feasible.  When resettlement and/or land acquisitions 
have been unavoidable, proper participatory mechanisms have been used to ensure that affected 
peoples are consulted on their preferences.  A social assessment of the affected peoples has been 
undertaken to inform the design of the resettlement and land/acquisition options.  Measures to 
ensure that the displaced persons receive assistance during the relocation process are common 
practice.  Alternative housing arrangements at least equivalent to the old site have been provided  
 
for the affected peoples.  Overall, the current experience with resettlement / land acquisition in 
the state, indicates that these processes have been completed planned, budgeted and implemented 
in a reasonable time, with participation of the community and proper supervision.   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario (LCSSO) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
Mr Flavio Chaves (LCSTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Safeguards will need to be verified for some sector activities specially hospital construction, 
and any new water and sanitation programs.  With respect to road civil works, environmental 
impacts resulting from the execution of such works on existing road sections are expected to be 
relatively minor, and mostly related to civil works’ execution.  In lieu of the standard 
Environmental Assessment (EA), taking into account the strong capacity of the Borrower, it is 
proposed for the Borrower to prepare, and for the Bank to review, an assessment of its current 
environmental management capacity as well as an institutional strengthening plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is not expected that the execution of road civil works will have any negative impact on 
physical cultural resources, as the project civil works will be normally located within the existing 
right-of-ways of road sections.  However, "chance findings" during paving works are possible, 
and to handle such findings, Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative framework, 
which is under the oversight of the National Institute for Protection of Historical and 
Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Additionally, DER has proven experience and appropriate 
procedures to recover “chance findings” in line with these procedures and rules. 
Theseprocedures have been described in the strategic environmental assessment mentioned 
above.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
According to the last Indigenous Census  (2002) some 8,000 indigenous peoples (IP) from 7 
different ethnic groups live in Minas Gerais.  While the project is not expected to have negative 
impacts on indigenous communities and lands, to ensure that IP communities will fully benefit 
from the activities supported by the different programs, specific measures have been taken.  A 
set of policy principles (framework) has been agreed to guide implementation.  These policy 
principles are based on the current Brazilian legislation regarding Indigenous peoples, FUNAI 
guidelines and the Bank’s Operational Policy.  These principles include: (i)informed 
participation; (ii) recognition of indigenous peoples rights and customary practices; (iii) 
protection indigenous lands; (iv) equitable and culturally appropriate benefits from the project.  
Regarding health and education programs, specific goals and indicators regarding access have 
been introduced to monitor improved access and quality of services.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is expected that some small involuntary resettlement and localized land acquisitions will 
occur in order to proceed with localized road realignment, elimination of accident-prone points, 
and widening of bridges.  Since the specific resettlement needs at this time are not known, a draft 
Resettlement Framework has been prepared by the Borrower. This framework is in line with the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
requirements of OP4.12.  This framework specifies the policy and planning principles, 
institutional arrangements and design criteria that will be followed when resettlement / land 
acquisitions needs arise.  The framework specifies that affected peoples will be properly 
informed of their choices, regardless of tenure status.  All affected families are included in the 
planning and provided with a choice between cash compensation and replacement housing better 
or equivalent to the current at no cost to the affected family.  Full replacement costs of assets are 
used to estimate compensation of affected families and, in the event of disruption of income 
streams, support to reestablish income will be provided.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/24/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jose Guilherme Reis 
01/15/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lily L. Chu 
01/15/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
