Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3400
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P088716 
Project Name:  QUALISUS-REDE Brazil Health Network Formation and Quality 
Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gerard Martin La Forgia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
235.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
441.80
441.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall APL Program objectives are:  
 
(a) Improve the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the SUS-financed delivery 
system, through the development of integrated regional health care networks (RHCNs), 
with emphasis on high and medium complexity health care providers, support services 
(e.g., diagnostics), and logistical systems (e.g., transport).  
 
(b) Contribute to improving the continuity of care by strengthening the prevention, 
detection, and treatment of diseases and conditions with the greatest impact on the 
country’s disease burden, including hypertension, diabetes, and cancer. 
 
The objectives of the proposed first phase project are:  
 
(a) Improve the effectiveness of the SUS-financed delivery system to prevent, detect 
and treat priority chronic and non-communicable conditions in the project’s targeted 
regions and populations.  
 
Page  2
(b) Improve the quality and efficiency of SUS-financed health services with an 
emphasis on secondary-level hospitals, specialty, diagnostic, and emergency centers, and 
logistical systems (e.g., tr
ansport) serving the project’s targeted regions and populations.   
 
3. Project Description 
The first phase  will consist of three components: (A) development of regional health care 
networks and strengthening of health care facilities; (B) systems development for 
performance enhancement; and (C) project management.  
 
Component A - Development of Regional Health Care Networks and Strengthening of 
Health Care Facilities (Estimated total cost US$646.1 million or 95.5 percent of total 
project costs; estimated loan US$205 million or 87.5 percent of total loan proceeds).  
 
This component supports two related categories of activities. The first involves the 
development and implementation of regional and organized arrangements for coordinated 
or integrated care (regional health care networks – RHCN). The second consists of 
upgrading, quality enhancement, organizational reform, and strengthening of 
management practices in facilities within the RHCNs. All facilities benefiting from 
investments in this component must be affiliated with a pre-defined RHCN. Both types of 
activities will be incorporated into a single type of subproject – Regional Health Care 
Network Development and Quality Improvement Subprojects, or RHCN subprojects. The 
subprojects would aim to develop and implement RHCNs in a subset of regions to raise 
the effectiveness of care provision as well as strengthening the performance (efficiency, 
quality and responsiveness) of health and support services there in.  
 
The Component would finance works, goods, training and technical assistance. Works 
would include upgrading and equipping of health facilities, including the construction of 
ambulatory and diagnostic units, remodeling of health centers, polyclinics, and specific 
departments within hospitals, and procurement of medical and non-medical equipment 
(including basic communications equipment), furniture and vehicles.  
 
The component will support up to 15 demand-driven subprojects through investments in 
the “fundamental” and “functional” attributes of RHCNs outlined below. These attributes 
represent a menu of interventions. Each participating state will select a subset of 
interventions for a defined region based on a diagnosis of population needs, local 
conditions, and implementation capacity. The investments will be phased over the ten-
year APL cycle. The team estimates that during the first APL phase each subproject will 
finance 3-6 “fundamental” interventions and 3-4 “functional” interventions.  The first 
phase is expected to include 10 subprojects in highly-urbanized metropolitan regions and 
5
in non-metropolitan regions.  
 
The RHCN fundamental attributes eligible for subproject support are: (i)   network and 
facility policies; (ii) network configuration; (iii) network and facility governance 
arrangements; (iv) network and facility management structures; (v) network and facility 
financing systems and payment mechanisms; (vi) monitoring and evaluation systems; 
(vii) support systems; and (viii) logistics.  
Page  3
The RHCN functional attributes eligible for subproject support are: (i)  evidenced-based 
care pathways or clinical guidelines; (ii) disease and care management; (iii) organized 
management of referrals, bed assignment, diagnostic exams, specialty consultations, and 
urgent/emergency care; (iv)  contracting and contract management arrangements; (v) 
patient communication and health promotion; (vi) continuous quality improvement; (vii) 
efficiency enhancement; (viii) continuous education for professional and auxiliary staff; 
(ix) information and communication systems; and (x) change management.  
 
Component B - Systems Development for Performance Enhancement (Estimated total 
cost US$26.3 million or 3.9 percent of total project costs; estimated loan US$26.3 million 
or 11 percent of total loan proceeds).  
 
This component supports the creation of an enabling institutional and systems 
environment to support the implementation of RHCNs to improve quality and care 
management, promote alternative payment systems, and strengthen monitoring and 
impact evaluation. This Component will have a national focus and will be implemented 
directly by the MOH.  
 
Consisting of studies, consultancy services, goods (information technology), training 
(including materials and logistics), and travel expenses, the project would support a series 
of activities that are divided into six areas as follows: (i) support for network formation; 
(ii) disease and care management; (iii) quality enhancement; (iv) technological 
innovation and assessment; (v) health financing and performance; and (vi) monitoring 
and impact evaluation.  
 
Component C: Project Management (Estimated total cost US$3.8 million or 0.6 percent 
of total project costs; estimated loan US$3.1 million or 1.5 percent of total loan 
proceeds).  
 
The Component C is aimed at strengthening the MoH to implement and supervise the 
project implementation and results.  It would finance a group of full-time consultants that 
would support the MoH’s staff to conduct procurement, financial management, and 
administrative tasks associated with the Project’s daily implementation. It would also 
finance facility upgrading (rehabilitation, office furniture and computer equipment), 
consulting and non-consulting services such as printing, training, and travel expenses.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The 26 States and the Federal District will be eligible to participate in Component A of 
the proposed project. Given the demonstration approach expected from the health 
networks to be formed, the project would support up to 15 demand-driven subprojects. 
Because each State can only have one subproject financed by loan proceeds, there are 15 
potential implementation agencies represented by the State Secretariats of Health, which 
will be selected during the first year of project implementation.  
 
Page  4
As part of the support to health networks and units under Component A, subprojects 
will take place in two types of regions: urbanized metropolitan areas with at least 500,000 
inhabitants (up to 10 subprojects), and non-metropolitan areas with at least 250,000 
inhabitants (up to five subprojects).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSHE) 
Ms Maria Cristina Cachenski Brito (LCSHH) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment  
 
The project received a “B” classification, and an Environmental Assessment (EA)was 
prepared to identify potential environmental impacts. The EA proposes activities to 
enhance environmental management, particularly under RHCN Subprojects of 
Component A.  
 
As part of the support to health networks and units under Component A, the proposed 
project would involve construction in urban areas of new but relatively small-scale, 
ambulatory facilities such as specialty clinics and laboratories, and the rehabilitation or 
expansion of existing facilities. Construction will not take place in protected areas or on 
ecologically fragile sites. Nor will construction result in involuntary resettlement. New 
hospital construction is ineligible for project financing.  
 
The EA analyzes potential impacts of new construction, both positive and negative. In 
general, any adverse impacts are expected to be localized and reversible. During facility 
construction, the impacts would generally be temporary, of low intensity and with well-
known mitigation measures that can be easily implemented. Negative impacts could 
result from inadequate site selection, terrain movements, dust and noise contamination of 
superficial water supplies and inadequate disposal of garbage and construction waste. 
Page  5
However, the potential impact is low because all works are small scale. Environmental 
guidelines that are aligned with Brazilian legislation as well as MOH basic unit 
construction guidelines will be included in the Operational Manual.  
 
The Environment Framework (EF) aims to guide the selection, screening, construction 
and monitoring of health networks and units. It will be incorporated in the Operational 
Manual. The EF specifies actions and measures to mitigate potential environmental risks, 
including any required procedures and approvals, at four stages of construction activities: 
functional analysis and site selection, design, construction and operation.  In order to 
address the Physical Cultural Resources safeguard (OP/BP 4.11), the EF also includes 
“chance find” rules and procedures, as well as screening procedures to identify any 
known cultural resources requiring special attention during renovation activities.  
 
Indigenous  
 
The project targets two types of regions: urbanized metropolitan areas with at least 
500,000 inhabitants and non- metropolitan areas with at least 250,000 inhabitants. 
According to the 2000 Census, less than 0.3 percent of the population is indigenous in 
large metropolitan areas. However, it is possible that indigenous peoples can be 
beneficiaries of QUALISUS-REDE in non metropolitan areas where approximately five 
subprojects will be implemented. As those health regions will be selected during the first 
year of project execution, the development of an IPP is not yet possible given the 
uncertainty whether the selected regions contain Indigenous populations.  The proposed 
project incorporates an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework to be observed by the 
States for the development of Indigenous Peoples Plans for subprojects whose catchment 
areas include indigenous communities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As stated above, the EA analyzes potential impacts of new construction during 
construction and operation. During facility operation the main possible internal negative 
impacts are related to inadequate management and disposal of medical waste generated 
from patient diagnosis and care. This risk will be mitigated through strengthening the 
system for management and disposal of medical wastes, per government environmental 
regulations  and MOH guidelines.  
 
Importantly, the project will take an additional step toward achieving more effective 
medical waste management. Assessments and site visits performed by the MOH and 
Bank project preparation team found that one of main obstacles to management of 
medical waste was poorly organized sanitary transport and disposal systems in many 
municipalities. Although specific facilities may comply with MOH/ANVISA standards 
for collection and separation of medical wastes within the facility, collection, transport, 
and disposal by municipalities can be irregular and ad hoc. To mitigate this risk, 
establishing or strengthening an organized sanitary and transport system for medical 
waste that serves all municipalities and units within the targeted regions for RHCN 
subprojects will be a mandatory Subproject activity.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The health sector possesses a vigorous legal and regulation framework related to facility 
construction and medical waste management. The legal and regulatory framework has 
been strengthened in recent years through the issuing of more detailed regulations and 
guidelines governing medical waste management and health facility construction (in 2004 
and 2005).  More recently (in 2006) the MOH produced a construction manual for basic 
care units based on current legislation, incorporating these recent changes. The guidelines 
included in the manual will be followed by participating states as they plan, construct and 
operate their networks and units. The EF is based on the following regulatory and 
institutional instruments:  
 
Medical Waste Management  
 
National Environmental Board (CONAMA) 283/01 (2001) stipulates general procedures 
for the management and disposal of medical waste in health facilities, including 
mandating the preparation of a Management Plan for Medical Waste in Health Facilities.  
 
ANVISA 306/04 (2004) and CONAMA 385/05 (2005) (i) sets a single and integrated 
regulatory framework for management of medical waste generated in health facilities, 
including separation, storage, transport, treatment and final disposal; and (ii) mandates 
the development and implementation of a Management Plan for Medical Waste in all 
health facilities.  
 
ANVISA/MOH Guidelines (Manual for Medical Waste Management, 2004) provides 
detailed guidelines to local system and facility managers regarding the implementation of 
the above mentioned regulations including the development and execution of a 
Management Plan for Medical Waste in all health facilities.  
 
Building Codes for Health Facilities  
 
Federal Law 6.437/77 (1977) represents the basic sanitary legislation and mandates the 
essential structural features of health facilities according to type (hospital, diagnostic 
center, basic care unit, etc.). All health facilities are required to be licensed according to 
this law.  
 
National Agency for Sanitary Control (ANVISA) RDC 50/02 (2002), drawing on Law 
6.437/77, is the regulatory instrument for new buildings, rehabilitations, and expansions 
of health units. It details norms regarding potable water, electricity, collection and 
disposal of sewage, solid and medical waste disposal, etc.  
 
Page  7
CONAMA no. 297/97 regulates the criteria and processes to obtain an environmental 
license, requiring an environmental assessment and local consultations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Unified Health System (SUS) is built upon consensus among health authorities, civil 
society and communities. An essential element of its structure is a set of formalized 
forums to discuss policies, plans, and initiatives at all levels of government. Health 
Councils consisting of representatives of civil society (universities, NGOs, women and 
indigenous groups) are legally mandated in each subnational level. The proposed RHCN 
subprojects will be debated and approved by Municipal and State Health Councils. The 
MoH will not approve any plan until evidence is presented of consultations with and 
approval of the Councils and any affected communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  8
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerard Martin La Forgia 
02/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Cristina Cachenski Brito 
02/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena 
02/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
02/04/2008 
Comments:   
