Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/21/2009 
Report No.:  AC3175
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bulgaria 
Project ID:  P099895 
Project Name:  Municipal Infrastructure Development 
Task Team Leader:  Gabriel Ionita 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
110.25 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
27.49
27.49 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objectives are to: (a) Improve the reliability and quality of water provision to 
the communities in selected settlements in the project area, and (b) Assist municipalities 
to improve investment-planning capacity. These objectives are in line with Bulgaria's 
National Strategy on Environment (2005-2014) which has a goal to "provide good quality 
and sufficient quantity of water for various purposes".   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have three components:  
 
Component 1 (Total Cost Euro 5.12 million):  Project Implementation Support to carry 
out activities under Component 3 of the project and completion of project audits. These 
would include preparation of feasibility studies, updates of design and Environmental 
Management Plans, preparation of bidding documents, construction supervision and other 
consulting assignments needed for project support, including a communication plan to 
help ensure people are aware of the status of land issues.  
 
Component 2 (Total Cost Euro 20.88 million): Preparation of Master Plans in 48 water 
and wastewater regional utilities.  The Master Plans will help identify investment needs 
for rehabilitation of water supply network and construction of sewerage network and 
Page  2
wastewater treatment plants in each ViK.  The information from the Master Plans would 
be used to prepare investments that would help Bulgaria meet the relevant EU water and 
wastewater directives. The Master Plans will also comprise corporate development plans 
and any other related documents and activities promoting improved service delivery and 
greater efficiency.  
 
Component 3 (Total Cost Euro 75.00 million): Completion of three water supply dams 
and rehabilitation of a fourth dam that is currently operational. This component will also 
support the completion of water treatment plants preparation work included in the dam 
investments and construction supervision. The feasibility studies for the dams will be 
completed during project implementation so cost estimates are based on an earlier 
assessment and physical contingencies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Eligible activities under Component 3 include the rehabilitation of the Studena dam and 
the rehabilitation and completion of three water supply dams Luda Yana, Neikovtsi, and 
Plovdivtsi where construction had ceased in 2001. The dams are located in mountainous 
areas and built on streams which collect several small tributaries before finally reaching 
Maritza or Danube rivers. These tributaries are characterized by uneven seasonal flow 
reaching high waters in spring during snow melting season and almost no water during 
summer. Villages including an average of 15,000 people are located within less than one 
km (Neikovtsi); two km (Luda Yana) and 400m (Neikovtsi) in distance from the 
respective dam sites. Some of these settlements have constant tourist attractions including 
historical buildings (e.g., Panaguriste). The current environmental physical characteristics 
at the 3 dam sites are impacted by the constructions works performed earlier, which 
stopped when about 60-70% of the facilities were raised. The areas underwent partial 
deforestation and topsoil removal and currently show signs of erosion, scarce vegetation, 
soil excavations and other impacts from uncovered quarries. There are no critical natural 
habitats or endangered/threatened species at the dam sites, within the inundation areas or 
in the impact zone of the dam downstream. Based on existing information it is expected 
that only the protective sanitary zones of the dams reservoirs will overlap with PAs (to be 
confirmed during detailed design), and the management regime for such protection zones 
are compatible with PA management.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (OPCFC) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment: the project is rated as environmental assessment 
category A because the completion of the three dams could potentially have adverse 
impacts on the upstream or downstream environment. Possible environmental impacts are 
divided into those related to temporary aspects during construction works and possible 
long-term impacts due to  the existence of the reservoir and dam and its operation overall.  
 
The previous construction has significantly affected the three dam sites.  The additional 
construction related impacts during completion of the dams are likely to be localized and 
can be prevented or reduced to acceptable levels by applying international construction 
practice and planning. Such potential impacts may be related to: (i) air pollution/dust, 
noise, vibration, and access restriction, (ii) improper disposal of construction related 
waste; (iii) temporary pollution of soil and surface waters due to accidental spillage of 
fuel and oil from construction activities; (v) safety hazards including worker safety; (vi) 
damage to trees and existing vegetation, and (vii) chance finds of physical cultural 
resources. However, these impacts will be properly managed during the construction 
phase by the contractor and closely supervised by PIU and designated supervisor 
engineer.  
 
Potential environmental effects due to the existence and operation of the future dams 
and reservoirs may be related to: (i) changes in downstream morphology of riverbeds and 
banks due to altered sediment loads of the rivers that would result in increased local 
erosion; (ii) changes in downstream hydrology (total flows, seasonal flows, short-term 
fluctuations); (iii) changes in downstream water quality (e.g., nutrient load, concentration 
of heavy metals, temperature); (iv) reduction of biodiversity and river ecosystems due to 
blockage of movement of local species (e.g. fish) and because of elimination of floods; 
and (v) impacts on existing infrastructure such as roads and bridges.  These impacts are 
expected to be moderate and manageable as indicated in the EIAs/EMPs for each site.  
 
In order to study the potential impacts of the project and to propose related mitigation 
measures to address such impacts during construction and operation of the proposed 
Page  4
dams, the Borrower prepared the following environmental safeguard documents to meet 
the OP/BP 4.01 requirements:  
 
a) An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that describes the project 
environmental assessment process to be followed by Government during implementation 
(this EMF was prepared in anticipation of the possible revisions that the EIAs prepared 
for project appraisal - and specially EMPs - for the 3 dams could undergo once feasibility 
studies and detailed designed are updated during project implementation);  
 
b)
Three Environmental Due Diligence (EDD) Reports reflecting briefly the 
environmental situation in October 2007 at the three incomplete dam sites where works 
stopped some years ago due to lack of finances;  
 
c) Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for Luda Yana and Neikovtsi dams, 
including Environmental Management Plans (EMP) were developed based on the EDD 
Reports and new site investigations in September 2008. For the Plovdivtsi Dam, an EIA 
was approved by Ministry of Environment in accordance with the Bulgarian legislation, 
in 2000, based on which construction permit was issued. However, a Supplemental 
Update EIA acceptable to the Bank was prepared by the Borrower to meet OP/BP 4.01 
requirements.  All these 3 EIA documents were subject to review by the Bank and 
finalized accordingly by the Client prior to project appraisal. These final documents were 
also disclosed in country and at the Infoshop and will be updated based on the revised 
feasibility studies to be completed at the beginning of project implementation; and  
 
d)
A
stand-alone EMP for the rehabilitation works proposed at Studena dam.  
 
These reports were developed based on information provided by the existing, old 
feasibility studies and detail designs as well as visual assessments of the existing sites. 
The documents summarize each dam history, include option analysis, identify the 
legislative and organizational structures for environmental management; describe the 
existing environmental and social conditions and the anticipated environmental impacts 
during dam construction and operations.  They also outline the environmental impact 
mitigation and monitoring plan; and describe the public consultation process.  
 
One of the important mitigation measures for the operational period will be the 
maintenance of an environmental flow adequate to maintain downstream environmental 
conditions.  The basis for calculating the required flow is a model that is detailed in the 
EIAs and was found to be acceptable by the Bank. Once the feasibility studies and detail 
designs are updated during project implementation, the EMPs and EIAs if necessary will 
be revised to reflect any new engineering documentation and information collected 
during the process.  
 
In the case of Luda Yana dam site, the EIA does not currently cover potential impacts of 
the construction of the water treatment plant.  The precise location and design for this 
plant will be determined during project implementation and a separate EMP will be 
prepared for it.  
 
During the preparation of the above noted environmental safeguard documents two 
rounds of public meetings were held at the national and local level, in October-December 
2007 and February 2009.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: The bulk of the land required for the main dam 
wall, dam lakes and corresponding submerged area, ancillary structures and adjacent 
Page  5
infrastructure has previously been acquired by the Government of Bulgaria in the years 
between 1982 and 2000, before initial discussions between Government and the Bank 
about financing completion of the dams. Therefore, while the previous land acquisition is 
linked to construction of the dam, it is not linked to the project.  A deadline of May 14, 
2007 for land restitution claims was set by and in accordance with the Agricultural Land 
Ownership and Use Act 1991 and the Act Restoring Ownership on Forests and Forest 
Stock Land Tracts from the Forestry Fund, 1997.   On this basis, OPCQC, LEGEN and 
the Region concluded that the past land acquisition is a legacy issue and not a current 
issue, and OP 4.12 does not apply to it. As good practice, during preparation the Bank 
sought information on the past land acquisition and resettlement activities and this is 
available in the Social Due Diligence (SDD) reports for the three dams.  
 
Land that has been or may in future need to be expropriated includes the site of the 
dams, their respective reservoir areas, and the area of the Sanitary and Security Area Belt 
I
(SSA-Belt 1) sanitary zones.  A Land Acquisition Policy Framework (LAPF) has been 
prepared to address the requirements of future land acquisition. The LAPF was disclosed 
in country and in Infoshop in December 2007 (as indicated in Section II B).  It was 
updated and finalized and the final version disclosed in country and in Infoshop in March 
2009.  
 
For civil works associated with MIDP, it is likely that limited acquisition may result in 
the loss of land or the loss of sources of income and cash compensation will be provided. 
People are not expected to lose their residences or other structures. In all three dam areas, 
there is informal use of the land, primarily for grazing animals, and the local authorities 
have agreed that alternative land for grazing purposes would be provided to the affected 
people. The government has indicated October 26, 2007 (the last date of the survey) as a 
cut-off date after which any person carrying out illegal informal activities in the area is 
not eligible to receive any assistance. The SDD and the LAPF were publicly discussed at 
the national and local levels in October-December 2007 and February 2009 and have 
been publicly disclosed on March 24, 2009.  
 
Although no such cases have been identified to date, the LAPF covers cases in which an 
initial restitution claim was made prior to the deadline of May 14, 2007, but which have 
not yet been resolved.  The LAPF applies to Component 2. The outputs of TA under 
Component 2 are expected to be only at a pre-feasibility level of detail, with feasibility 
studies, detailed designs and investment to follow later and be financed separately, 
possibly with assistance from EU.  However, the TA provided under Component 2 
involves preparation of site assessments including specific recommendations for sitting of 
facilities that, if followed, could involve expropriation of land. The TA will therefore 
provide all information needed to apply the processes outlined in this Policy Framework 
to the acquisition of any such land.  
 
Based on the information available it is not expected that people might (in the context of 
this project) seek to revive previously rejected restitution claims or seek additional 
compensation for past expropriation.  A communication plan will be put in place under 
Component 1 to clarify that the LAPF is applicable to future land acquisition, not to past 
actions, and thereby to reduce the risk of perception of linkage between past 
expropriations and the project.  The Government and Bank agreed to inform each other 
Page  6
on any claim or complaint regarding past land expropriation and/or restitution that may 
arise in relation to the Project sites.  While such claims will not be subject to the 
provisions of LAPF, the Government will inform and discuss with the Bank the measures 
to be taken to find an equitable resolution to such potential claims or complaints in 
accordance with the Bulgarian laws and regulations.   
 
OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams: due to the completion of the Luda Yana, Neikovtsi, and 
Plovdivtsi dams and the rehabilitation of the Studena dam, the policy will be triggered.  
Bulgarian dam safety requirements are in line with those of the Bank and for the project 
design, construction, and operation the Bulgarian legislation and Bank policies will be 
followed.  Prior to appraisal, the Government appointed a panel of three national experts 
on dam safety that provided comments on the Terms of Reference for the feasibility 
studies related to the dams and will further review the feasibility studies and engineering 
designs and provide guidance during implementation of works, whenever necessary.  
 
In order to address the safety of constructed dams, the Borrower will prepare 
Emergency Preparedness Plans for each dam site during project implementation (as part 
of the updated feasibility studies), including action plans in case of seismic or 
hydrological risks.  In addition, during preparation of designs for the new dams, the 
Borrower will prepare a Plan for Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance, and an 
Instrumentation Plan, which will be reviewed and endorsed by the Panel of Experts on 
Dam Safety before tendering for construction.  Once the designs are ready, the Borrower 
will draft an Operation and Maintenance Plan, which will be refined during 
implementation and finalized at least six months before first filling of the reservoirs.  
 
OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways: The policy is applicable due to the 
completion of the following dams as they are located on streams that eventually 
discharge to riparian countries or international waterways as follows: (i) the Luda Yana 
dam is constructed on the Luda Yana stream which is a tributary of the Maritsa River that 
forms a border between Turkey and Greece and finally discharges into the Aegean Sea; 
(ii) the Neikovtsi dam is constructed on the Neykovska and Sarbogaska streams, which 
are tributaries of the Trevnenska River, which discharges in the Yantra River, that flows 
eventually into the Danube, and (iii) the Plovdivtsi dam is constructed on the Iskretska 
stream, which is a tributary of the Arda River that flows into the Maritsa River. However, 
given the relatively small volume of the water retained in the dams compared to the flow 
of the rivers that exit Bulgaria, there would be no adverse effect on water quantity and 
quality for other riparian countries.  Although the works financed under the Project will 
not cause any adverse downstream effects to any international waterways, as per the 
Bank’s OP 7.50, through a letter dated March 19, 2008, the Bulgarian Government has 
authorized the Bank to notify the riparian states about the project.  Through letters dated 
March 21, 2008, the Bank, on behalf of the Government, has informed Turkey, Greece, 
and the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River about the earlier 
version of the project. (The current project design differs from the one finalized in 
February 2008.  The earlier design included a component to rehabilitate water supply 
networks in six regional water utilities and technical assistance to utilities to implement 
the project and increase operational efficiency.  The Government of Bulgaria 
subsequently requested changes to the project design that are reflected in the current 
project.)  
Page  7
Furthermore, there has been an exchange of letters between the Bank and Government 
of Turkey (GoT) regarding the construction of dams and the summary follows:  
 
-
Through a letter dated May 30, 2008, the GoT sought additional information on 
the project;  
 
-
Through a letter dated June 19, 2008 the Bank provided references to the publicly 
available documents on Environmental Due Diligence and Social Due Diligence 
documents and hard copies of these documents were also provided.  The Bank requested 
that GoT provide any comments by July 21, 2008;  
 
-
Through a letter dated July 8, 2008, the GoT requested that additional time be 
provided to review the documents;  
 
-
Through a letter dated July 15, 2008, the Bank requested that any comments 
should be provided by September 5, 2008;  
 
-
Through a letter dated September 2, 2008, the GoT noted their general concern 
regarding potential adverse impact of the project concerning water quality and quantity, 
bio-capacity for cropland, grazing land and forest related to the proposed dams.  Other 
comments were raised regarding the need for the dam designs to consider adequate 
capacity to "absorb flooding"; the dam management should take into account the river 
basin capacity as well as downstream water demand in various months; and the hydraulic 
and meteorological data should be provided by Bulgarian authorities to Turkey on a 
regular basis.  Further, any irregularities in flow should be reported through the Center of 
Early Warning Mechanism formed between the two countries.  The GoB already 
maintains a designated minimum flow, provides reports on water releases to the GoT in 
keeping with existing agreements and will continue to do so with regard to the three dams 
after their construction is completed.  
 
The Borrower and World Bank agreed that the World Bank will maintain 
communication with the riparian countries related to final EIA findings. The final EIAs 
for the three dams were publicly disclosed on the website of MRDPW and in Washington 
at the Infoshop on May 12, 2009. The World Bank sent the updated information on the 
project, including the final EIAs, to riparian countries and the International Commission 
on Danube River Protection on May 13, 2009. The riparian countries have been requested 
to reply to the information provided in the letter by June 15, 2009.  
 
OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats Natural Habitats will apply since small areas of one or 
more of the dam sites may fall within Protected Areas (also Natura 2000 sites).  Based on 
existing information it is expected that only the protective sanitary zones of the dams will 
overlap with PAs, and the management regime for such protection zones are compatible 
with PA management.  This will be confirmed during preparation of the feasibility 
studies and detailed designs, and the updated EMPs will include any required mitigation 
measures to ensure that local biodiversity is not adversely affected.  
 
The OP/BP 4.36 Forestry is not triggered, although a few trees must be removed from 
the future reservoir basins once civil works begin, these trees are sparse and scattered, left 
over from vegetation clearing years ago during the initial dam construction, and do not 
Page  8
constitute a forest. Near the crest of Luda Yana dam, about 0.6 ha of trees will be 
removed when dam construction resumes.  
 
OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources policy is not triggered because the investigations 
conducted during EDD and EIA preparation process raised no concerns regarding 
potential chance finds of cultural properties at the proposed dam sites.  However, the 
EMPs include provisions for cultural heritage and archeology if chance finds occur 
during construction works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Completion of the dams with associated site restoration and water regulation will result in 
a
significant improvement over existing environmental conditions, which continue to 
reflect impacts of previous construction. Potential long-term environmental changes 
could appear in relation with the creation of lakes upstream of the dams where the water 
would be stored and with the release patterns from these reservoirs. Associated impacts 
might affect local resources such as fish, recreation and hydropower activities. However, 
the anticipated reservoir areas do not include critical habitats and the retention volumes 
and reservoir areas are not expected to be significant enough to create significant 
environmental damage (Plovdivtsi dam - 2.45 mln. m3; Neikovtsi dam - 4.80 mln. m3; 
and Luda Yana dam - 19.94 mln. m3). The possibility of developing hydropower plants 
around these dams is not excluded and this could trigger further indirect impacts. Also, 
once the dams are built, its modern automatic technology and operation demands a 
relatively small number of employers, which must have special training and technical 
expertise.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Because a significant amount of construction has already taken place at each of the three 
dam sites (up to 70% completed) it is not practical to consider alternative sites.  The EIAs 
summarize options that were considered in the original feasibility studies and designs, 
such as rehabilitation of existing water supply sources, alternative sites for the dams, 
types of dam walls and related facilities, etc. and the reasons for the choices which were 
made.  The EIA noted that the "no-project" alternative (leaving the partially completed 
dams in place with no further investment) is undesirable for two reasons.  On the one 
hand, because of the urgency of addressing the acute shortage of drinking water for 
affected populations (some 80,000 people) and, on the other hand, because in the absence 
of further investment the construction and reservoir sites would be left in their present 
damaged condition and would not be remediated.   However, the updated feasibility 
studies will confirm whether the completion of these dams remains the most economical 
way to meet the areas' water supply needs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Current Bulgarian legislation requires preparation and approval of EIAs for new dam 
construction. Since constructions at 2 dam sites (Luda Yana and Neikovtsi) started more 
Page  9
than 10 years ago and under a different Water Law, no EIAs for these works were 
required and there was no requirement under current Bulgarian EIA legislation to prepare 
them at this time. However, in order to meet the OP/BP 4.01 requirements, these EIAs 
have been prepared (October 2008). For the Plovdivtsi Dam, an EIA was approved by 
Ministry of Environment in 2000, based on which construction permit was issued, 
however there were some gaps with respect to requirements for a Category A EIA under 
OP 4.01 and a Supplemental EIA document has been prepared to fill these gaps. The 
environmental and social safeguards disclosed during project preparation are: 
Environmental Due Diligence Reports (2007); Social Due Diligence Reports (2007); 
updated Land Acquisition Policy Framework (2009); draft Luda Yana and Neikovtsi 
EIAs and the Plovdivtsi Supplemental EIA have been disclosed in local language and 
discussed in public meetings ( February 2009). The final EIA documents were disclosed 
in country and Infoshop (replacing the existing draft versions), and the Executive 
Summaries were submitted to Board on May 12, 2009 (before project appraial).  
 
The implementing agency will be the Ministry of Regional Development and Public 
Works (MRDPW).  The ministry has the institutional capacity in Sofia and in the regions 
to implement the project satisfactorily, including addressing safeguard issues. Within the 
MRDPW, the PIU newly established within the Water and Sewerage Department will be 
responsible for day to day implementation of the project and will include a technical 
expert responsible for safeguards due diligence; overall, the PIU will ensure that the 
institutional and financial capacities of the ministry are used to address and manage 
environmental issues of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the project-affected population, relevant NGOs, dam safety 
and ecology protection experts, municipalities of the 3 project dam sites, representatives 
of GoB including MRDPW and MoF.  
 
In October 2007, public consultations were held on EDD and SDD reports at the project 
sites where the dams would be finalized.  The local population is supporting the 
completion of the dams as the project activities had ceased since 2001 without yielding 
the benefit of provision of uninterrupted supply of quality drinking water.  Local 
residents mentioned that they face water rationing and look forward to the completion of 
the dams.  A national level consultation, including non-government groups and various 
stakeholders, was also carried out on December 12, 2007 where the participants 
expressed interest in the project and to date there has been no opposition to the proposed 
dam investments.  
 
Furthermore, the results of the EIAs for Luda Yana, Neikovtsi and Plovdivtsi were 
presented to the affected population at national and local level during February 2 - 13, 
2009. Public views were solicited regarding employment opportunities during 
construction and operation of the dams, planning of restoration activities at the local 
quarries and construction sites, environmental effects during possible detonation 
activities,  transportation of materials from quarries to the dam sites (specially in the case 
Page  10
of Neikovtsi dam located partially in a protected area), impacts from project related 
access roads, measures taken against erosion and risks from earthquakes and floods. 
Disclosure of final EIA documents for all three dam investments took place in country 
and at the Infoshop on May 12, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/07/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/12/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/12/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/27/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/24/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  11
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gabriel Ionita 
05/13/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
05/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
03/30/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
05/18/2009 
Comments:   
