Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3573
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P110642 
Project Name:  Basic Education Sector Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Joseph Kamano 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (36%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (20%);Tertiary 
education (20%);General public administration sector (14%);Health (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Gender (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Child 
health (S);HIV/AIDS (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to assist the Recipient in its efforts to implement the 
Program, designed to: (i) improve the access to, and quality of, basic education; (ii) 
strengthen the education sector’s financial sustainability; and (iii) enhance the financial 
management, budgeting, procurement, monitoring, evaluation and donor coordination of 
MEBA.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of the carrying out of Annual Work Programs for the 
implementation of the Program, including::  
 
a) 
Improving access and expanding coverage of basic education through scaling up 
ongoing activities such as school construction, and updating facilities in existing schools 
to provide latrines and water, as well as kindergarten facilities in 40 rural communities 
(Bisongo). The additional financing will have a focus on encouraging girls’ education 
and mothers’ associations as well as providing nutritional safety net for 200,000 children 
through school canteens, particularly for students from poor families and rural areas in 15 
Page  2
provinces for two school years (2008-2009 and 2009-2010). It is expected that School 
canteens will receive half of the additional financing.  
 
b)
Improving quality, efficiency, and relevance of basic education through 
curriculum enhancement, teacher training and teaching materials, support to 500 projects 
on school-based quality improvement as well as for lower secondary schools in the 15 
provinces to be covered by the school feeding program, and textbooks provision for pre-
K
schools. Since MEBA has acquired and distributed more than 8 million textbooks for 
primary education, the focus will be on printing and distributing Pre-K school teaching 
material produced locally.  
 
c) 
Strengthening sector management and monitoring in the context of 
decentralization of basic education services through supporting decentralized 
management, upgrading materials, and strengthening data collection and analysis. 
Inspectors in the  circonscription d’education de base (CEB) of the 15 provinces will be 
enabled to provide better pedagogic support and direct control to school headmasters and 
teachers.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover the entire country with particular attention given to rural and to the 
poorest areas of the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has triggered OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment due to the potential 
negative environmental impacts related to school constructions. The parent project has an 
EIA and ERP. The Government has updated the Environmental Impact Assessment 
Page  3
Report for the Education sector in 2006 while preparing the Post Primary Project. All 
these reports have been re-disclosed.  
 
In addition, the additional financing is using the same components as the original project 
and the geographical area of both projects are the same.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no potential indirect and or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government cadastral map has reserved spaces for community and religious 
infrastructures (School, health centers, markets, mosques, churches etc.). Any adverse 
impacts due to construction activities will be addressed in line with provisions included 
in the 2006 EIA and ERP, as well as in national laws.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Policy 4.12 related to population resettlement does not need to be triggered because the 
population is not negatively affected by the project. There are no nomadic or pastoral 
communities involved as such in the intervention area and Tuareg groups are not 
involved in this project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project does not triggered Pest management nor Cultural Property.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Joseph Kamano 
04/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
04/23/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
04/23/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maurizia Tovo 
04/23/2008 
Comments:   
