Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2008 
Report No.:  AC3601
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P110815 
Project Name:  Health Sector Support and AIDS project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Tshiya Subayi-Cuppen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Health (70%);Other social services (30%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (P);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project development objective, which remains unchanged, is to support 
implementation of the Borrower’s health sector and multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS strategies.  
 
The proposed additional financing will support: (i) subprograms for the implementation 
of essential health and nutrition actions at family and community level.  The community-
based nutrition activities will be implemented in at least five out of the 13 regions over a 
period of four years reaching a minimum of 15% of the total population of rural children 
under five. This will be achieved by contracting out capacity building activities and 
implementation to non-governmental organizations (NGO) and community-based 
implementing organizations (CBIO); and (ii) contribute to the prevention of epidemics 
such as meningitis.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional financing of $15.0 million for project restructuring will support 
(i) the implementation of essential health and nutrition actions at community level, (ii) 
the development of a community health and nutrition strategy which recognizes the need 
for decentralization, contracting out with civil society organizations, consolidation of 
implementing agencies, and capacity building in management and implementation and 
(iii) the purchase of vaccines to face the recurrent outbreaks of meningitis.  The 
Page  2
additional financing will result in (i) the scaling up and harmonization of activities for 
health and nutrition at community level, (ii) strengthened leadership and capacity to 
engage in community health and nutrition strategies by generating results towards the 
improvement of health and nutritional conditions and indicators, and (iii) enhanced 
impact of the PDO.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be developped and implemented at the local communities   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no safeguard issues and negative impacts associated with the proposed project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term impacts due to the anticipated future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Category is C. The proposed implementing agency is the Ministry of 
Health.  During HSSMAP preparation, the Government of Burkina Faso developped a 
Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP), in compliance with National and World 
Page  3
Bank Safeguard Policies.  This study has been conducted in order to assess potential 
negative impacts resulting from Program-related activities and to determine mitigation 
measures that would minimize those negative impacts.  The activities of the nutrition 
component will not trigger any environmental or social safeguard policy issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Policy 4.12 related to population resettlement does not need to be triggered because the 
population is not negatively affected by the project   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Project doesn't trigger any Pest Management and/or Cultural Property.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  4
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tshiya Subayi-Cuppen 
04/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
04/29/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
04/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maurizia Tovo 
04/29/2008 
Comments:   
