Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3457
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P108791 
Project Name:  International Institute for Water and Environmental Engineering 
Task Team Leader:  William Experton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (70%);Vocational training (30%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
33.00
38.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the 2IE project is to support the development of 2IE as a regional center 
of excellence with the aim to increase the number of highly skilled professionals in the 
areas of water, energy, environment and infrastructure engineering. It will do so by:  (i) 
further increasing the capacity of the 2IE campuses in Kamboinse and Ouagadougou to 
train and board students ; (ii) improving the quality of training and research programs, 
particularly at master and doctorate levels; and (iii) 
improving the institute’s management 
and communication capacity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components.  
 
I. increasing the capacity of the 2IE campuses rom 600 students to 1000 students (IDA 
contribution of US$3.9 million) by: (i) expanding the overall infrastructure of the 2IE 
campuses, including boarding facilities and student life facilities; (ii) improving the 
pedagogic and research capacity with a main scientific building hosting research 
laboratories, researchers offices and experimentation facilities, two adjustable pedagogic 
Page  2
halls (500 et 400 seats), a conference hall (250 seats) and classroom facilities; and (iii) 
rehabilitating existing infrastructure in the two campuses, in particular for electrical and 
fire safety.  
 
II. improving the quality of training and research programsby: (i) Equipping world class 
scientific laboratories in key areas: pollution control and water treatment in tropical 
environment, water and irrigation in Sub-Saharan environment, biomass energy and bio-
fuel, interdisciplinary mathematics modeling, environment and eco-health and building 
eco-materials, improving language learning and developing e-learning; (ii) Developing 
postgraduate diplomas and strengthening the capacity of teaching staff and developing 
international partnerships;  increasing the dissemination of knowledge and technology in 
the areas of water and environment and strengthening the partnership with the  private 
sector and employers.  
 
III. by: (i) strengthening 2IE’s outreach towards non-Francophone students and 
countries, Anglophone teachers (to implement bilingual programs) and African higher 
education institutions (to ensure greater cooperation); and (ii) strengthening 2IE’s 
management capacity for project monitoring, including the technical supervision of 
construction, as well as improving 2IE’s financial sustainability through a stronger 
internal control and auditing process.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
2IE has one existing campus in Ouagadougou.  This campus will be rehabilitated with 
Modern conference room, cafeteria, scientific bloc and accommodations for students.  
 
The second campus will be built in Kamboinse. The site was given by the Government 
of Burkina to 2IE and will help accommodate more students.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has triggered OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment due to the potential 
negative environmental impacts related to the extension of the campus in Kamboinse.  
The project has prepared an ESMP to address these potential negative impacts.  This 
report has been reviewed and finalized by the Bank’s safeguards team, has been disclosed 
at the Bank’s InfoShop and will be disclosed in the country prior to appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no potential indirect and or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESMP includes the following measures, some of which have already been completed 
during the first phase of the 2IE expansion: (i) the conservation and utilization of rain 
water for irrigation; (ii) the optimization of water consumption based on simplified 
systems; (iii) the natural treatment of sewage; (iv) the construction of student boarding 
facilities in local materials; (v) the sustainable waste management and utilization for 
agriculture; and (vi) the development of an arboretum adapted to Sahelian climate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
social analysis has been carried out after the identification stage, during which the local 
community has been consulted. The social analysis has concluded that Policy 4.12 related 
to population resettlement does not need to be triggered because the population is not 
negatively affected by the project. In particular, the conclusions of the social analysis are 
the following: (i) the new land given in March 2006 by Burkina Faso was administrative 
and not been used for agricultural purpose; (ii) only three persons were concerned during 
the first phase of the expansion of 2IE: the two teachers have been redeployed and given 
new accommodation by the Ministry of Agriculture and the guard is employed by 2IE at 
a
higher salary than before and has found accommodation in the village of Kamboinse; 
(iii) the track that is crossing the Kamboinse Campus on a 200 yards land will be 
modified to run in parallel to the campus border; (iv) the community is benefiting from 
the expansion of the campus through new opportunities (small shops, food services for 
students, etc.);  and (v) a permanent consultation group between 2iE, local administrative 
authorities, and village traditional authorities has been set up and will develop joint 
projects benefiting the local community.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project doesn't trigger Pest Management or Cultural Property.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
No 
Page  5
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Experton 
02/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
02/15/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
02/15/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
 
Comments:   
