Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3499 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/28/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P110642 
Project Name: Basic Education Sector Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Joseph Kamano 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (36%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (20%);Tertiary 
education (20%);General public administration sector (14%);Health (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Gender (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Child 
health (S);HIV/AIDS (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective  , which remains unchanged, is to assist the Borrower in its 
efforts to implement its Basic Education Ten-Year Program (the Program), which includes: (a) 
improving the access to, and quality of, basic education; (b) strengthening the education sector’s 
financial sustainability; and (iii) enhancing the financial management, budgeting, procurement, 
monitoring, evaluation, and donor coordination of the Ministry of Basic Education and Literacy 
(Ministere de l’Education de Base et de l’Alphabetisation- MEBA).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The activities to be financed under the additional financing will be included in the annual work 
program (AWP), and include: (a) improving access and expanding coverage of primary 
education through school construction and updating facilities in existing schools to provide 
latrines and water, with a particular focus on encouraging girls’ education and mothers’ 
associations; (b) improving quality, efficiency, and relevance of basic education through 
curriculum enhancement, teacher training, teaching materials and textbooks provision; and (c) 
strengthening sector management and monitoring in the context of decentralization of primary 
Page  2
education services through supporting decentralized management, upgrading materials, and 
strengthening data collection and analysis.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover the entire country with particular attention given to rural and to the 
poorest areas of the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The environmental and safeguards category for the requested additional financing is B as under 
the original IDA Credit. The Government has updated the Environmental Impact Assessment 
Report for the Education sector in 2006 while preparing the Post Primary Project.  The 
implementing agency is the Ministry of Basic Education and Literacy and is already familiar 
with Environmental guidelines and procedures. Guidance is sought to use the Post Primary EA 
or others used in the sub-sector after which ASPEN clearance will be sought out.  This process is 
expected to be completed by end of March 2008.  
 
In light of the Africa Region's experience with similar projects, it was agreed that completion of 
a
separate environmental analysis during project preparation was not required. Instead, the 
project component designed to improve access to basic education will draw on Burkina Faso's 
technical standards and capabilities for the construction of classrooms and the provision of water 
and sanitation and apply environmental guidelines during construction activities. In the event 
that significant environmental and social impacts due to construction activities are expected, the 
project will make provisions for the completion of additional environmental work to address 
emerging issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The parent project has an EIA and ERP. The Government has updated the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Report for the Education sector in 2006 while preparing the Post Primary 
Project. All these reports are ready to be re-disclosed.  
 
In addition, the additional financing is using the same components as the original project 
and the geographical area of both projects are the same.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
There are no nomadic or pastoral communities involved as such in the intervention area of 
the project. Tuareg groups are not involved in this project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The Government cadastral map has reserved
spaces for community and religious 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
infrastructures (School, health centers, markets, mosques, churches etc.). Any adverse impacts 
due to construction activities will be addressed in line with provisions included in the 2006 EIA 
and ERP, as well as in national laws.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/28/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The parent project has an EIA and ERP. The Government has updated the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Report for the Education sector in 2006 while preparing the Post Primary 
Project. All these reports are ready to be re-disclosed in the country and at the Bank Infoshop 
prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Joseph Kamano 
03/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/28/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
03/28/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
