Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3498 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P110815 
Project Name: Health Sector Support and AIDS project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Tshiya Subayi-Cuppen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Health (70%);Other social services (30%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (P);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The additional financing will support achievement of the Project Development Objectives 
through: (i) coordinating multisectoral nutrition action, (ii) scaling up essential health and 
nutrition actions at all levels, (iii) implementing effective community mobilization strategies 
through the dense network of local associations, and (iv) strengthening of the nutrition 
surveillance system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing will support a new component comprised of essential health 
and nutrition actions at family and community level.  This component will support (i) the 
implementation of direct nutrition action at community level,  and (ii) policy and program 
coordination, and monitoring and evaluation of direct nutrition action.  The community-based 
activities will be implemented in five out of the 13 regions over a period of four years, reaching 
between 15-20% of the total population of rural children under two (40-50% in the five selected 
regions). This will be achieved by contracting out implementation to NGOs and CBOs. This 
component will: (i) harmonize and scale up activities for health and nutrition at community level; 
(ii) build on the current political momentum to engage in community health and nutrition 
Page  2
strategies by generating results towards the improvement of health and nutritional conditions and 
indicators; and (iii) enhance the impact of the PDO.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be developped and implemented at the local communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed implementing agency is the Ministry of Health. During Health Sector Support and 
AIDS Project preparation, The Government of Burkina Faso developped a Medical Waste 
Management Plan (MWMP), in compliance with National and World Bank safeguard policies. 
This study has been conducted in order to assess potential negative impacts resulting from 
program-related activities and to determine mitigation measures that would minimize those 
negative impacts.  
 
The activities of the nutrition component will not trigger any environmental or social safeguard 
policy issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/28/2008 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
There are no safeguard-related studies planned.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tshiya Subayi-Cuppen 
03/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/18/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
03/18/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
