Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/26/2009 
Report No.:  AC4187
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P106909 
Project Name:  Urban Water Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Matar Fall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.92
12.92 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the project is to increase sustainable access to water and 
sanitation services in targeted urban areas. This would contribute to the achievement of 
the water and sanitation MDGs.  The project would achieve the objective through: (a) 
facilitating access to services through programs for constructing social water service 
connections, public standpipes and on-site sanitation facilities; and (b) consolidating the 
achievements of the reform of the urban water supply sub-sector and strengthening 
capacities to deliver and manage services. The project will help to provide clean water 
supply to 527,000 additional people and 246,000 accesses to improved sanitation 
services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would comprise four components: (i) urban water supply in four 
urban centers (Ouagadougou, Bobo Dioulasso, Koudougou and Dedougou); (ii) urban 
sanitation in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso; (iii) capacity strengthening to improve 
the sub-
sector’s performances and to warrant the efficiency of investments; and (iv) 
environmental management.  
 
Page  2
Component 1 - Urban water (US$52.78 million).  This component includes the 
following activities:  
 
•
Ouagadougou (US$13.33 million).  This subcomponent would be implemented by 
DMOZ, ONEA’s department on charge of Ouagadougou works.  It would help to:  (i) 
expand the distribution networks by 145 km; (ii) expand access by installing 25,000 
household connections and 50 standpipes.  
 
•
Bobo-Dioulasso (US$29.63 million).  This subcomponent would be implemented 
bythe Department of Investment Programming (DPI), ONEA’s department in charge of 
water investments outside of Ouagadougou.  It would help to (i) expand the water 
production and storage capacity (two new production boreholes, one new treatment unit 
and two elevated water tanks); (ii) expand the distribution system (new pumping stations 
and 374 km of distribution pipes); and (iii) expand access by installing 28,000 household 
connections and 30 standpipes.  
 
•
Koudougou (US$6.25 million). This subcomponent would be implemented by 
DPI and would help to (i) reinforce the water production and storage capacity (new 
electricity supply line and one elevated water tank); (ii) expand the distribution system 
(58.6 km of distribution networks); (iii) expand access by installing 2,580 household 
connections and 10 standpipes.  
 
•
Dedougou (US$2.53 million).  This subcomponent would be implemented by DPI 
and would help to (i) expand the water production and storage capacity (two new 
production boreholes, one new filtration unit and one elevated water tank); (ii) expand the 
distribution networks by 18.6 km; and (iii) expand access by installing 590 household 
connections and 16 standpipes;  
 
•
Preliminary Studies (US$1.04 million).  This subcomponent, carried out and 
funded by ONEA prior to effectiveness, would finance: (i) detailed design studies of all 
sub-components; (ii) the preparation of environmental and social studies (ESMF and 
RPF); (iii) the update of the financial model; and (iv) monitoring and supervision.  
 
Component 2 - Access to sanitation (US$35.56 million): This component would be 
implemented by the Sanitation Department of ONEA (DASS) and include the following 
activities:  
 
•
Ouagadougou (US$18.11 million).  This subcomponent would help to: (i) expand 
access by installing 18,000 household latrines and 27,000 household wastewater disposal 
facilities; (ii) provide improved water and sanitation in 250 schools by connecting them 
to the water system and installing blocks of latrines; and (iii) provide adequate disposal of 
effluents by installing one sludge treatment plant.  
 
•
Bobo-Dioulasso (US$11.15 million).  This subcomponent would help to: (i) 
expand access by installing 10,000 household latrines and 30,000 household wastewater 
disposal facilities; (ii) provide improved water and sanitation in 100 schools; and (iii) 
provide adequate disposal of effluents by installing one sludge treatment plant.  
 
•
Technical Assistance (US$6.31million).  This subcomponent would help to: (i) 
mobilize the population, manage contracts and supervise works through NGOs and other 
private partners; (ii) train local masons and contractors; and (iii) support activities with 
media campaigns, hygiene education and training in maintenance of facilities.  
 
Page  3
Component 3 - Institutional support and capacity building (US$3.93 million): This 
component would be implemented by the Human Resources Department of ONEA 
(DRH) and include the following activities.  
 
•
Institutional Support (US$0.54 million).  This subcomponent would help to: (i) 
assess the performances and viability of ONEA (technical audits and assistance to the 
implementation of the financial model); and (ii) review the impact and suitability of 
access options proposed to households (mid-term surveys and assessments of pilot 
programs).  
 
•
Strengthening of capacities (US$3.39million).  This subcomponent would help to: 
(i) improve reliability and accountability (strengthening the Internal Audit Department); 
(ii) improve customer management (technical assistance and procurement of advanced 
technologies (portable billing stations, remote metering and prepayment)); (iii) transfer 
know-how (twinning arrangements with performing utilities); and (iv) improve staff 
skills (training in project management, procurement and technical management).  
 
Component 4 – Environmental Management (US$0.64 million): This component would 
be implemented by the Environmental Unit of ONEA and include the following 
activities.  
 
•
Land Acquisition and Compensation (US$0.38 million).  This subcomponent 
wouldhelp (i) to purchase land required for the few facilities which would not be located 
on ONEA’s existing premises or which would not use existing rights of way;and (i) help 
to compensate losses of property and revenues  
 
•
Monitoring and Strengthening of Capacities (US$0.26 million).   This 
subcomponent would help to coordinate and monitor the execution and the action plans.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
For urban water supply, the project will focus on four cities, namely the capital city 
Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou and Dedougou.  As regards urban sanitation, 
the project will focus on Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso. However, specific areas of 
intervention in the said cities will be determined by technical studies.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project activities are expected to substantially improve the living conditions and 
environmental health of the population in the target urban centers; however the 
construction phase of some of project activities may cause adverse environmental and 
social impacts in these communities.  However, those impacts are expected to be 
minimal, site-specific and manageable to an accepted level. It is expected that the sludge 
treatment plants would not have significant environmental impacts. The water 
infrastructure sub-projects are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or significant 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential impacts of the sludge treatment plants are expected to be relatively minor. 
However, as ONEA is not yet familiar with these sludge treatment systems that would be 
introduced with the project, it has (i) contracted technical assistance from a specialized 
international NGO; and (ii) entered in partnerships with other African sanitation utilities 
(ONAS of Senegal and Tunisia), which would provide know-how and experience on 
technical issues, as well as lessons on dealing efficiently with sludge haulers.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not including the construction of the sludge treatment systems in the project would have 
been a worse scenario according to the growing quantities of sludge from latrines being 
disposed in the environment without treatment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The guidelines to be followed and measures to be taken to mitigate adverse impacts of 
project activities are detailed in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared by ONEA as part of the 
Page  5
preparatory activities financed by the Borrower.  Appropriate consultation has taken 
place for the development of the ESMF and the RPF as per the guidelines and the level of 
consultation is commensurate with the two instruments. Concerned populations and local 
Governments were informed of the objectives, the scope and potential impacts of the 
project and their views have been fully reflected in the documents.  The ESMF provides 
environmental guidelines and a screening mechanism to ensure that construction, waste 
disposal and subsequent operation and maintenance of the WSS infrastructure works are 
carried out in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner.  The RPF outlines the 
principles and procedures to be followed in the event of land acquisition, impact on assets 
and/or loss of livelihoods.  Both frameworks identify procedures to be followed during 
the planning, design and construction phase of project activities, together with measures 
to mitigate and monitor such impacts, including a screening process for sub-projects 
setting  criteria for triggering specific Environmental Assessments (EAs) and specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).  It has been agreed with the Recipient at appraisal 
that the preparation of specific EAs/RAPs is a condition of disbursement for each sub-
project requiring them.  
 
Given its prior experience, the Environmental Unit of ONEA which has already 
implemented successfully the previous Ziga project (category A), will be responsible for 
the implementation of the EMP and the RAP of the proposed project. The unit is well 
experienced with Bank safeguard instruments and procedures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Appropriate consultation has taken place Dec 14 
–
31,
2008
for the development of the 
ESMF and the RPF as per the guidelines and the level of consultation is commensurate 
with the two instruments. Affected populations and local Government were informed of 
the objectives, the scope and potential impacts of the project and their views have been 
fully reflected in the reports. The ESMF and the RPF were approved by the Bank and the 
Government and have been widely disclosed in Burkina Faso on January 30, 2009 and 
made available to the public at the World Bank’s Info Shop on February 6, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2009 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  7
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matar Fall 
03/26/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
03/26/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
03/26/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/26/2009 
Comments:   
