Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4591 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/27/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burundi 
Project ID: P107343 
Project Name: BI - Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Bleoue Nicaise Ehoue 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Agro-industry 
(25%);Micro- and SME finance (15%) 
Theme: Other rural development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
43.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to increase productivity, production and value of selected 
crops and livestock. This objective would be achieved through (i) scaling up agricultural 
technology transfer and dissemination; (ii) strengthen the capacities of stakeholders to manage 
the variability of food supply at local and national level and (iii) improve the provision and 
efficiency of core public and private services and a better knowledge of the market context. The 
possible intermediate outcomes indicators are:  
 
(i) 
Incremental volumes of food production and marketed proportion of selected products in 
the target zones  
 
(ii) 
Irrigated hectares developed, rehabilitated or secured due to project intervention   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would basically cover geographic areas where PRASAB is being 
implemented. However, the possibility of selecting additional areas would be explored during 
project preparation in accordance with the government development strategy and based on 
synergic approach with other development partners to avoid duplication of interventions. The 
Page  2
selection criteria would be based on food, livestock, horticulture and coffee growth potentials, 
access to domestic market, natural resource endowment, institutional capacity, and beneficiary 
engagement. Similarly, the project would select crops and livestock with good performance 
during PRASAB implementation.  
 
During the identification phase, rice, off season vegetables from rehabilitated marshlands, 
livestock and milk consumed domestically and coffee value chain were considered. Selection 
and interventions would be specified during the preparation process. The project would support 
beneficiaries : (i) in strengthening their ability to plan and implement sound production, 
processing, and marketing strategies on demand-driven and/or targeted bases; and (ii) in 
improving the provision and efficiency of core support services. Competitive matching grants 
will be promoted to contribute to finance beneficiaries# micro-projects with the possibility to 
explore financial and microfinance institution intervention if opportunities exist.  
 
The project will be implemented through government and non government institutions and 
community-led initiatives. Key government institutions will be the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock (MINAGRIE) and the Ministry of Finance (MINIFIN). Other ministries or agencies 
will be involved. Given its decentralized approach, producers and their organizations, NGOs, 
private sector and their organizations, financial and microfinance institutions will also be 
involved. The project design and implementation approaches will be participatory with a strong 
focus on ownership and social accountability  
 
Component 1: Improving on farm activities and Markets accessibility.  
 
The component#s objective would be to increase agricultural and livestock productivity and 
quality by expanding the outreach and relevance of the advisory system (strengthening research-
extension links), improve access to technologies, foster the use of high-quality seed and 
fertilizer, and improve the management of livestock. It would also support producers and their 
organizations, build capacity of public and private institutions and service providers, develop 
efficient linkage and contractual relationship between producers, processors, and to facilitate 
market through identified activities. It would promote a competitive co-financed grants program 
available primarily for production, post harvest and market development where opportunities 
exist.  
 
Component 2: Development of irrigation and market infrastructure.  
 
This component would complement #on farm activities#. It would aim at improving irrigation 
and watershed management and provide market infrastructure. Through its sub-components, this 
component would: (i) consolidate and scale up two irrigation-scheme approaches supported by 
the Agricultural Rehabilitation and Sustainable Land Management Project (PRASAB) consisting 
of supporting small scale private irrigation schemes, the rehabilitation of marshlands, build 
capacity of water user associations  and assist Government in updating the sustainable national 
irrigation investment plan to facilitate future investments, and (ii) upgrade and/or rehabilitate 
feeder roads identified as critical and vital to access markets .  
 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (PCMU)  
 
This component would finance the operations of the project. The project will be implemented 
by a small coordinating unit located in the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock. The PCMU 
would coordinate project interventions and be responsible for monitoring and evaluation, 
procurement, financial management, environment and social safeguards, and communication. 
Based on the acknowledged excellence performance of PRASAB team and given that PRASAB 
closes in October 2010 (its activities expected to be completed by March 2010), this team will 
Page  3
coordinate project preparation and possibly implement the proposed project. PRASAB staffs are 
currently in place and are well qualified and subject to regular performance evaluations. 
However, the team will be reinforced with additional skills as needed. Their roles will be 
adjusted to take into consideration the mandates conferred to them in accordance to requirements 
from public and private institutions and organizations involved in agriculture and livestock 
production and export of coffee and environmental management   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would basically cover geographic areas (provinces of Bubanza, Bururi, 
Cankuzo, Kirundo, Makamba, Muramvya, Mwaro, Muyinga, Ngozi, Rutana)covered under the 
Agricultural Rehabilitation and Sustainable Land Management Project (PRASAB)as well as 
geographic areas selected in accordance with the government development strategy and based on 
synergic approach with other development partners to avoid duplication of interventions. 
Moreover, the selection of areas would be based on criteria such as food, livestock, horticulture 
and coffee growth potentials, access to domestic market, natural resource endowment, 
institutional capacity, and beneficiary engagement. Similarly, the project would select crops 
during project preparation.   
 
E.  Bor
rower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has already gained experience in the implementation and supervision of Bank 
safeguard policies during the implementation of the PRASAB and through other Bank-financed 
projects in the country. For example, under PRASAB (i) extensive training was provided to 
producer organizations, community-based organizations and private sector service providers in 
the areas of pest management; agro-forestry/soil conservation; environmental and social 
screening of sub-projects; marshland and irrigation management as well as watershed and 
irrigation parameter management; and (ii) as necessary, PRASAB has hired qualified 
environmental consultants to carry out, among other things, EAs for sub-projects dealing with 
marshland management and small-scale irrigation infrastructure. Thus, the PCU has the capacity 
to manage environmental and social issues and arrange for the preparation of the required 
safeguard documents for the proposed project. In light of the planned investments, the proposed 
project will continue to strengthening the environmental and social management capacity of PCU 
staffs and sub-projects beneficiaries through the provision of environmental and social 
safeguards training, including safe pest management, safe management of small dams, 
implementation of the environmental and social screening process outlined in the ESMF, and 
implementation of ESIA recommendations. Towards this end, the project will ensure that 
following qualified Consultants are hired on temporarily basis : (i) a qualified Environmental 
Consultant to oversee the implementation and supervision of both the ESIA and ESMF, arrange 
for environmental training, and assist project beneficiaries as necessary; (ii) a qualified Social 
Consultant to oversee the implementation of the RPF, and, as necessary, the preparation,  
implementation and supervision of RAPs, as well as the implementation and supervision of the 
IPDP, including arranging for social safeguard and social development training.  He/She will 
also liaise with the Environmental Consultant to oversee the social dimensions involved in both 
the ESIA and ESMF; and (iii) a Communication Consultant will be hired as necessary to ensure 
the social marketing of the project as well as foster project visibility and responsiveness to 
beneficiary needs.   
 
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered due to the construction/rehabilitation of irrigation-related infrastructure, 
market infrastructure, and improved livestock production. A separate Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA), including an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
will be prepared for irrigation investments, marshland management as well as agricultural and 
livestock production. Since the exact locations of the market infrastructure investments cannot be 
determined prior to appraisal, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) for market infrastructure sub-projects. Both safeguard 
documents (ESIA & ESMF) will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The ESIA report will determine whether natural habitats are likely to be affected by the 
proposed project. The ESMF will indicate the extent to which natural habitats might be affected 
by the market infrastructure investments and thus will provide appropriate guidance for sub-
project implementation. The ESMF and ESIA will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at 
the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The ESIA report will determine whether forests are likely to be affected by the proposed 
project. The ESMF will indicate the extent to which forests might be affected by the market 
infrastructure investments and thus will provide appropriate guidance for sub-project 
implementation. Both safeguard documents (ESIA & ESMF) will be publicly disclosed both in-
country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
OP 4.09 is triggered because the project aims to increase agricultural production which will 
require increased use of inputs, including pesticides. To ensure safe pest management, the project 
will prepare a Pest Management Plan (PMP) for Sub-Projects, building on experience gained 
under the previous operation (PRASAB). The PMP will be included in the ESIA report and 
publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
As the program would support infrastructure development, the ESMF would screen and 
develop minimum procedures and measures to be taken in the event chance find, and/or that 
culturally significant material are discovered during land clearing and excavations in either 
existing or fallow land. The ESIA report will determine whether physical cultural resources are 
present in the project areas. The ESIA and the ESMF will be publicly disclosed both in-country 
and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
This policy is triggered with respect to the Batwa minorities as the project will have the same 
coverage than PRASAB and consequently impact the livelihoods and livestock of Batwa 
communities in these 10 provinces. Consequently, as suggested by the policy guidelines, the 
Bo
rrower will prepare a focused Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) drawn from a 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
comprehensive Social Assessment (SA) that includes a Gender Analysis to further assess the 
extent and level of the project impacts on these vulnerable communities. This IPDP would have a 
detailed set of activities and budget for their implementation. Once revised and approved by both 
the GoB and the World Bank the document will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at the 
World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The OP4.12 policy has been triggered due to the fact that the project plans to upgrade and/or 
rehabilitate and build new productive and marketing/commercial infrastructures as well as 
irrigation schemes which may lead to involuntary taking of land resulting in (i) relocation or loss 
of shelter; (ii) loss of assets or access to assets; or (iii) loss of income sources or means of 
livelihoods, whether or not the affected persons must move to another location. Since the exact 
locations of the proposed agriculture investments including their potential localized adverse 
social and environmental impacts can#t be determined prior to project appraisal; the Borrower is 
suggested to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Once the exact sites and locations 
are known, the Borrower will then prepare either one Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the 
whole project or for each of the proposed sub-projects. Both the RPF and the RAP will be 
reviewed and respectively approved by the GoB and the World Bank, and subsequently disclosed 
publicly both in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
This policy is triggered because the project will support the construction and rehabilitation of 
small dams. To ensure their safe management, a generic dam safety analysis will be prepared as 
part of the ESIA report to be disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to 
appraisal.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
This policy is triggered due to the use of water for small-scale irrigation purposes as well as 
the potential for water pollution. Consistent with this policy, Burundi#s riparian neighbors will 
be officially informed about the project and their comments will be requested. The notification 
process will be completed prior to appraisal.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered because the project would not support activities in disputed areas.  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/16/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
#
Environmental and Social Management Framework for Market Infrastructure: July-
October 30, 2009 (before Appraisal)  
 
#
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for irrigation related investments 
and livestock production: July- October 30, 2009 (before appraisal)  
 
#
Pest Management Plan (part of the ESIA): July-end October 30, 2009 (before Appraisal)  
 
#
Generic Dam Safety Analysis (part of the ESIA): July-October 30, 2009 (before 
Appraisal)  
 
#
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (a Comprehensive Social Assessment with a 
detailed IPDP and a Gender Analysis will be prepared): July-October 30, 2009 (before 
Appraisal)  
 
#
Resettlement Policy Framework: July-October 30,2009 (before Appraisal)  
 
Riparian notifications will be sent out to all riparian countries and the process will be 
completed before Appraisal.  
 
With the exception of the riparian notifications, the above mentioned safeguard documents 
will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bleoue Nicaise Ehoue 
08/27/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/27/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
