Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3965 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burundi 
Project ID: P101160 
Project Name: Burundi : Health Sector Support 
Task Team Leader: Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Population and reproductive 
health (P);Nutrition and food security (S);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Although the proposed operation will contribute to achieving the higher-order objectives 
reflected in government’s PDS(Plan de Developpement Sanitaire : national Health Development 
Plan), the project’s limited size requires adoption of a realistic and specific development 
objective for the project itself.  The proposed PDO of the IDA-financed operation is therefore to 
increase the use of a defined package of health services by pregnant women and children under 
five. The Memorandum Of Understanting (MOU) signed by all the donors and the PDS include 
specific indicators for these objectives, which will be included in the Project Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M & E) framework. A final agreement on key indicators and the means to measure 
them will be agreed upon before appraisal, and they will include measures of the increase in the 
use of key services, as well as service user satisfaction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Specifically, the Project will include the following components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1. Increased coverage of a redefined “Free Mother to Child Service Package”, and 
introduction of procedures to facilitate and improve the transparency of the existing 
reimbursement mechanism (US$18 million). Resources under this Component will finance part 
of the reimbursement of the services provided under the package of “free services”, as well as 
the additional administrative cost ofmanaging such a system and making it more accountable.  
 
A
social assessment study will be completed before appraisal.  
 
Subcomponent A: Financing of package of services. The Component funds will supplement the 
Government’s own resources, thus allowing for increased use of those services by the 
population. In addition, preparatory activities aim at simplifying the current reimbursement 
mechanisms. Activities under this component build upon and improve the already existing 
government-financed reimbursement of health services that fall under the free package of 
services.  
 
Flow of funds: Initially, IDA resources will be disbursed as a per capita advance to the National 
Directorate of Resources (DGR) within the MOH. The DGR will then distribute the resources to 
the health facilities’ existing bank accounts. The initial advance will finance 100% of the costs 
(except human resources) of the defined basic package for three months. The advance will be 
calculated as the agreed per capita fee schedule for each service multiplied by the estimated 
coverage.  
 
After the initial advance, IDA resources will be disbursed against a certified list of services 
provided, up to an upper limit set by the estimated population figures. The central purchasing 
agency will follow the exact same procedures for the advance to service providers. After that the 
purchasing agency will reimburse the facilities on the basis of services provided to pregnant 
women and children under five. The package of services will be defined including preventive 
measures, community-based services, and a set amount for supervision from the provincial 
bureaus. The reimbursement will be done according to an agreed fee schedule. This will 
substantially simplify reimbursement.  
 
Subcomponent B. This Component will build upon and seek synergies with the work of the 
IDA-financed Community Development Project. The subcomponent will finance communication 
activities to ensure that communities and individuals know what they are entitled to, and will 
subsidize birth certificates. It will also support TA to help the development committees verify the 
activities and the accounts of the health facilities, and receive and channel user complaints about 
health services.  During preparation the government will also explore the possibility of having 
the development committees co-manage health facility resources.  
 
Component 2. Strengthening MOH Management Capacity Including Monitoring and 
Evaluation (US$7 million). This component aims at: (i) increasing the number of skilled 
personnel that is present in health facilities outside Bujumbura; (ii) increasing the capacity of the 
Ministry to manage budget resources; and, (iii) putting in place a system to monitor and evaluate 
the use of services offered under Component 1.  
 
Page  3
Specifically the Component will support the development and implementation of a human 
resources policy for health personnel, including task shifting and harmonization of community 
health workers, training of community health workers, short term skill training of health 
personnel for task shifting, and supervision. It may also include support for basic training of key 
personnel such as midwives. The Component funds will finance capacity building for the 
General Directorate of Resources of the MOH in the areas of budget (including IDA funds), 
procurement, and personnel management, including recurrent costs, technical assistance and 
hardware. It will also finance capacity building and recurrent costs for the General Directorate of 
Health, in the areas of planning, service purchasing, sector financing, monitoring and evaluation. 
I
n
addition, it will finance external technical and financial audits of the activities under 
Component 1 and general management and financial audits of the whole grant. Finally the 
Component would finance the studies needed to establish a base-line of service use and quality 
before and after the interventions supported by the Project.  
 
At the moment, no component includes construction or rehabilitation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will cover the whole country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Burundi MOH's current capacity for environmental and social management is very limited. 
Therefore, the proposed project will fund environmental training to ensure effective 
implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). If works are 
identified as eligible for Project financing, the ESMF will, among other things, include 
environmental guidelines for contractors. These guidelines will be disclosed as part of the ESMF 
prior to appraisal, and later on, they will be attached to the bidding documents so as not to slow 
down project implementation.  
 
In addition, the project will support the implementation of relevant medical waste management 
measures as per National Medical Waste Management Plan.  
 
The team considers that a social assessment is needed to ensure the advocacy of the community 
mobilization and communication activities under Component 1.  The team will discuss with 
government the need to carry out said social assessment.  
 
Training in biohazardous waste management and implementation of waste disposal in 
agreement with the WMP was initiated under the first HIV/AIDS Project and will be continued 
under the recently approved Project. The Health Project will include capacity building as 
determined by the environmental specialist and the social assessment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Jean J. Delion (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will (a) implement the relevant provisions of the existing National Medical 
Waste Management to address medical waste management issues; and (b) prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address environmental and social 
issues related to the construction/rehabilitation of health care facilities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will prepare an Action Plan to ensure that indigenous groups benefit from the 
project's support.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Project will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential 
adverse social impacts related to the construction/rehabilitation of health facilities   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/12/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project will (a) implement the provisions of the existing National Medical Waste 
Management Plan; (b) prepare an ESMF and an RPF; and (c) prepare an Action Plan for 
indigeneous groups. The afore-mentioned documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal. The 
above-mentioned documents will be disclosed in October 2008 in the country as well as in 
the Bank Info shop prior to Appraisal in January 2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
10/04/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
10/08/2008 
Comments:   
