Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC4211
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P112998 
Project Name:  Public Works and Urban Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sylvie Debomy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (25%);General education sector (21%);Roads and highways (21%);Water 
supply (21%);Sub-national government administration (12%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban development 
(P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.60
1.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective of the proposed Public Works and Urban 
Management Project (PWUMP) is to increase access to basic socio-economic services in 
target areas and to short-term employment opportunities.  This would be achieved 
through the combination of demand-based and trunk infrastructure investments programs 
covering urban centers of all provinces and targeted municipal support programs to 
strengthen municipal management and fiscal performance at the local level in the three 
main cities, Bujumbura, Gitega, and Ngozi.  
 
The following results are expected:  
 
(i) 
Increased access to selected infrastructure (paved roads, water supply and 
sanitation, schools and health centers, economic facilities such as markets and bus 
stations);  
 
(ii) 
Improved municipal infrastructure maintenance measured in terms of allocation 
and execution of maintenance budget;  
Page  2
(iii) 
Improved municipal financial management system as measured by administrative 
and management accounts produced on a yearly basis (%); and  
 
(iv) 
Increased employment measured by the number of person-days of short term 
employment created.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is a logical continuation of the Public Works and Employment 
Creation Project (PWEPC)especially with regard to the execution of demand-driven sub-
projects through labor intensive approaches for job creation. In addition, the project will 
also focus on selected cities (Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega) to address the need for 
focused and gradual institutional development in terms of municipal management and to 
prepare for decentralization. Therefore this follow-up operation will address the huge 
demand for basic and economic infrastructure at the country level as well as support the 
nascent decentralization process, by focusing on strengthening local resource 
mobilization. The aim is to increase municipal revenues in order to support investments 
expenses but also to finance operation and maintenance of these assets.  
 
The project cost will amount to US$45 million funded by IDA Grant. Beneficiaries are 
expected to contribute to 2 to 5 percent of the investments costs upfront and communes 
will commit to allocate and execute a percentage of the budget for maintenance. It will be 
implemented over a five-year period.  
 
The project will include three components: (i) an infrastructure component; (ii) a 
municipal development program; and (iii) an institutional development component.  
 
Component A.  Infrastructure (US$38 million)  
 
This component will support the rehabilitation and expansion of community-demand 
driven and economic infrastructure in all urban communes of the country.  This 
component will typically finance:  
 
(i) 
Communal and community demand-driven investment programs such as roads, 
markets, water supply and sanitation infrastructure, municipal halls, schools, health and 
social centers, erosion control and environmental works, quarry rehabilitation pilot 
projects etc. using the same successful approaches developed during the previous project 
(PWECP).  These subprojects would have been identified through the participatory Local 
Development Plan.  
 
(ii) 
City level trunk infrastructure in Bujumbura, Gitega, and Ngozi. In order to 
strengthen local economic development, the three main cities will be eligible for an 
increased funds allocation for trunk infrastructure (roads, central market, bus stations, 
etc.). These subprojects would have been identified through the urban audit methodology 
to be prepared the first year of the project.  
 
(iii) 
Fees of ABUTIP who will procure all infrastructure investments contracts through 
a
delegated Contract Management Agreement signed with the beneficiary communes.  
 
Component B.  Municipal and Urban Management (US$4 million)  
Page  3
This component would target in priority the three main cities of Burundi (Bujumbura, 
Gitega and Ngozi) to improve governance, municipal management and fiscal 
performance through the provision of technical assistance, training, equipment for (a) 
increasing the technical capacity of municipal staff to develop and implement 
infrastructure programs and their maintenance, (b) supporting the development of 
municipal planning and programming tools, (c) increasing resource mobilization, through 
better tax payer identification and better management of revenue-generating facilities, 
and (d) improving budgeting procedures and strengthening financial management.  This 
component will be implemented by the communes under the supervision of the Technical 
Secretariat and the Directorate in charge of Communal Development.  
 
Component C.  Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$3 million)  
 
This component will finance (i) training and studies related to the definition of the 
decentralization framework in particular on local taxation and intergovernmental 
transfers; (ii) technical assistance, surveys, impact and beneficiary assessments and audits 
in addition to monitoring of project results; and (iii) limited logistics support to Technical 
Secretariat of the Ministry of Public Works and Equipment and the Ministry in charge of 
Decentralization to better support the development of local governments and 
development of monitoring and evaluation tools.  This component also includes training 
programs for local SMEs in business management and relevant technical skill, training 
for the management of WSS systems, and support to HIV/AIDS prevention programs. 
This component will be implemented under the supervision of the Technical Secretariat.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project will support sub-projects in the urban centers of the 16 provinces 
including Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega.  In terms of municipal management, a light 
program will be provided to all urban communes in terms of assets maintenance but the 
strong emphasis will be put on Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega, the three main cities of the 
country. The Government requested increased support to these three cities in order to 
enhance their economic potential.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is likely to incur environmental and social impacts due the planned 
construction/rehabilitation activities. Likely adverse impacts include air, soil and water 
pollution, loss of vegetation, soil erosion, traffic accidents, generation of medical waste at 
the planned health centers, and potential loss of livelihoods and/or land required for 
future infrastructure investments. The proposed project has prepared an environmental 
and social screening process which will be applied by qualified personnel at the planning 
stage of future investments. Therefore, there will be no irreversible and/or significant 
impacts due to future infrastructure sub-projects.  
 
Given the poor quality of existing water supply in the country, and taking into account 
the experience from the previous project, it is possible that a number of sub-projects will 
involve water supply systems. These systems could use either surface water, ground 
water, but mostly gravity systems. To comply with the requirements of the Bank's OP/BP 
7.50, Burundi's riparian neighbours are being notified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The future infrastructure sub-projects will not incur any potential indirect and/or long 
term impacts because appropriate institutional arrangements for environmental and social 
management will be implemented throughout project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given that this project is a continuation of the successful PWECP, project alternatives 
that would not rely on demand-based approach and involvement of beneficiaries, were 
not considered.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the exact physical locations of future infrastructure sub-projects as well as their 
potential localized adverse environmental and social impacts could not be identified prior 
to the appraisal of the proposed project, the Borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF). The RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in the event that 
resettlement action/compensation plans will need to be prepared to mitigate potential 
adverse social impacts due to land acquisition. The ESMF outlines an environmental and 
social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are environmentally 
and socially sound and sustainable. The ESMF also includes (i) provisions for public 
consultations and participation among relevant stakeholders, including potentially 
affected people; (ii) Environmental Guidelines for Contractors; and (iii) a medical waste 
management plan for the health centers to be funded under the proposed project.  
 
Although the Borrower has gained experience for environmental and social management 
during the previous PWECP, it will be important that the proposed project include 
appropriate social and environmental safeguards training for the relevant personnel to 
ensure effective implementation of both the ESMF and the RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include beneficiary municipalities and communities, the Technical 
Secretariat, the Environment and Social Department of the Ministry of Environment and 
Public Works, ABUTIP and the private construction sector. Public consultation and 
participation during the project preparation were conducted by the project team and 
included various field visits to the three cities and meetings with relevant representatives 
of the ministry in charge of environment, governors, communal administrators and 
councils, technical municipal services, local maintenance committees, potential 
beneficiary Community Development Committees, direct potential beneficiaries (markets 
vendors, people along roads susceptible to be paved, schools director, potentially affected 
people..).  The public consultations and participation confirmed the high expectation 
raised by the project among beneficiaries and the satisfaction with the participatory 
process being implemented to identify priority development subprojects and ultimately 
prepare local development plans.  During project implementation, the project will carry 
out participatory annual impact evaluation and beneficiary assessments. In case RAP 
would be necessary, a review at implementation and two years after implementation will 
also be done. Mechanisms to monitor both environmental and social aspects will be 
established and further strengthened throughout the project cycle. A yearly participatory 
impact monitoring and evaluation survey will be carried out on all sub-projects.  
 
The Technical Secretariat will be responsible for (i) the official disclosure of sub-project 
EIES, RAP, annual assessments and other eventually updated safeguards documentation 
in country media and location accessible to beneficiaries, (ii) the implementation of 
communication and sensitization campaigns on programs financed by the project before, 
Page  6
during, and after the works, as part of the information, education and communication 
activities financed under the proposed project.  
 
The draft ESMF and RPF have been disclosed in-country and on the World Bank 
Intranet at the Bank's Infoshop in Washington D.C. A revised final ESMF will be 
disclosed at the end of appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  7
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
03/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
03/10/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
03/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
