Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/28/2009 
Report No.:  48667
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P113506 
Project Name:  Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Marcelo Jorge Fabre 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTCS 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Single Purpose Trust Fund 
7.50
7.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to support the efforts of the Recipient to: (i) demobilize 
members of the National Liberation Forces and the National Liberation Forces - 
Dissidents; and (ii) provide socioeconomic reintegration support to said members 
following demobilization, as well as to Ex-Combatants demobilized under the 
Emergency Demobilization, Reinsertion, and Reintegration Project, with a particular 
focus on the provision of such support to such female, child, and disabled Ex-
Combatants.  
 
The project would thereby contribute to consolidation of peace and stability in Burundi 
and improve security in the Great Lakes region though:  
 
#
Preserving the capacity of GoB to demobilize and reintegrate combatants of the 
FNL.  
 
#
Demobilizing eligible combatants from the FNL and FNL-D and supporting their 
reinsertion, as well as supporting for a small remaining caseload from the EDRRP.  
 
#
Providing transitional socio-economic reintegration support to all demobilized 
FNL and FNL-D ex-combatants, as well as a small remaining caseload from the EDRRP.  
Page  2
#
Providing specialized socio-economic reintegration and medical support to 
vulnerable groups, including children associated with the armed forces, women and the 
disabled.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project includes the following four components:  
 
(i) 
Demobilization of FNL and FNL-D forces, including encampment, sensitization, 
validation of  combatant status, registration, socio-economic profiling of ex-combatants, 
surveying expectations for reintegration, pre-discharge orientation programs, medical 
triage, voluntary counseling and testing for HIV/AIDS, and transport support to 
communities of return.  
 
(ii) 
Reinsertion support of new demobilized ex-FNL and ex-FNL-D, including 
resettlement kits and a monetized unconditional cash transfer allowance (known as 
transitional subsistence allowance) as well as extensive counseling and orientation during 
the pre-discharge orientation (PDO) process. A small caseload from the previous project 
will also receive the outstanding payments of their reinsertion support.  
 
(iii) 
Transitional socio-economic reintegration support for all demobilized adult ex-
combatants, as well as a small pending caseload from EDRRP, which will support the 
beneficiaries# selection of their personal reintegration path. Transitional economic 
reintegration includes a range of interventions such as the provision of scholarships, 
employment opportunities, vocational and skills training, and microenterprise generation 
and promotion (including training on basic business development, accounting skills and 
promotion of associations). Transitional social reintegration will include the provision of 
information and sensitization events with ex-combatants and communities, fostering 
reconciliation, psycho-social trauma counseling and HIV/AIDS counseling and referral.  
 
(iv) 
Support to vulnerable groups. The project would provide specialized support 
and/or additional protection to vulnerable groups. Particularly vulnerable groups under 
the project would be those who are unable to fully utilize program benefits due to age, 
gender, physical or mental disability or any other factor, and therefore require specialized 
assistance.  Traditionally vulnerable groups include children associated with armed 
forces, female combatants and the disabled. However the project would develop clear 
criteria to assess vulnerability and identify any other group that may require specialized 
support, including special cases of civilians in the communities of destination.  
 
The expected outcomes to be achieved se include:  
 
#
Approximately 1,500 ex-combatants from the previous project receive the 
remainder of their transitional socio-economic reintegration support.  
 
#
Approximately 1,500 disabled ex-combatants demobilized under the EDRRP 
receive or complete rehabilitation and prosthetic support.   
 
#
5,000 combatants from the FNL and 1,560 FNL-D are demobilized, and receive 
reinsertion payments and transitional socio-economic reintegration support.  
 
#
All children associated with the FNL and FNL-D are separated from those groups, 
reunited with their families or placed in care, and receive full reinsertion and 
reintegration support as appropriate to their status as minors, including completion of 
reinsertion and reintegration support to approximately 250 children from the previous 
project.   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Demobilization will take place through one or two demobilization centers, including 
Gitega, and possibly in diverse locations through mobile teams that will be placed 
wherever combatants may assemble for demobilization.  Reintegration will take place 
throughout the country, wherever ex-combatants choose to settle and launch sub-projects 
for income generation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed operation is likely to have limited localized adverse environmental and 
social impacts due to the implementation of micro-projects promoting income generation 
and other investments to be funded under component (iii) as well as waste generation at 
the demobilization centers.  
 
Demobilization will take place at a Demobilization Center in Gitega Province and 
possibly Muramviya province.  These sites are already in existence and were used for the 
last project.   The Gitega Center houses an average of 700 ex-combatants at a time. 
Adequate arrangements for the management of human, water, food or medical waste will 
be included in the Program implementation manual as was the case in the past project.  
Mobile teams may also be added if discrete groups of combatants need demobilization in 
situ without camps.  These will not have social or environmental impacts given their 
temporary and transient nature.  
 
The project includes reintegration activities that primarily take the form of micro-
projects promoting income generation. While many of these micro-projects will have no 
environmental or social impacts, some agriculture, animal husbandry, brick-making and 
Page  4
other similar activities could be financed. These are on a very small scale (micro-project 
grants are worth approximately $600) and widely dispersed and so would have marginal 
environmental impact and no cumulative effect. No land will be acquired for the micro-
projects.  
 
The project includes medical rehabilitation of disabled ex-combatants. Adequate 
arrangements for disposal of medical waste will be included in the Program 
Implementation Manual as was the case in the past project.  
 
With regards to social impacts, ex-combatant reintegration is expected to be ultimately 
positive.  However, the return of ex-combatants to families and communities, sometimes 
after long absences, could cause certain tensions in the short term. Reclaiming of 
personal property can be an issue, although the last project found little instance of this in 
its regular beneficiary surveys.  Communities may initially mistrust ex-combatants, and 
hold them responsible, directly or indirectly, for past conflict and acts of violence.  Ex-
combatants may feel excluded.  They may also be resented for the material support they 
receive.  That said, negative social impact should be very low, and tensions manageable.  
Furthermore, given the guerilla nature of the FNL, most of its combatants have been 
based in their communities when they are not on active duty, making most of the above 
considerations irrelevant.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any long-term or indirect negative social and/or 
environmental impacts.  As described above, demobilization centers and medical 
rehabilitation of disabled ex-combatants may have some human, water and/or medical 
waste issues that will require management.  Some individual reintegration sub-projects 
may have potentially marginal negative environmental impacts and no cumulative effect.  
Negative social impacts will be negligible and of short duration.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
to mitigate potential environmental and social impacts due to the implementation of 
micro-projects and wastes generated at the demobilization centers. As the project is being 
processed under OP/BP 8.00, a final ESMF would be required within six months of 
project effectiveness. This ESMF will include, among others: (i) a summary of the Bank's 
safeguard policies and relevant Burundian legislation; (ii) a detailed environmental and 
social screening process for sub-projects; (iii) a review and clearance process for sub-
projects;(iv) adequate arrangements for the management of human water, food or medical 
waste from the demobilization centers; (v) guidelines for medical waste management at 
health centers; (vi) capacity building and training needs; (vii) a monitoring plan; (vii) a 
Page  5
few, relevant social and environmental monitoring indicators to be incorporated into the 
M&E Program; and (ix) Environmental Guidelines for Implementation Partners to be 
attached to the bidding documents to ensure they apply environmentally and socially 
sustainable construction techniques.  
 
The ESMF will reflect current environmental and social management capacity in the 
country and build upon ESMFs developed for World Bank operations in Burundi, 
especially the recently developed ESMF for the Public Works and Urban Management 
Project II (P112998,) expected effectiveness date September 13th, 2009, as well as the 
Community Social Development Project (P095211) and the Burundi Agricultural 
Rehabilitation and Sustainable Land Management Support Project (P110940). In 
addition, the ESMF will build upon the social and environmental framework developed 
for the MDRP by the Africa Region#s Social and Environmental Safeguards unit 
(ASPEN) in collaboration with the MDRP Secretariat. Relevant procedures and measures 
will be detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  
 
Certain routine measures are already expected before the ESMF will be in effect.   
Implementing partners for reintegration sub-projects will receive sensitization concerning 
projects that may have a small negative environmental impact, so that they may assess, 
identify and mitigate them at the sub-project/beneficiary level.  The past project used an 
individual project screening mechanism for this purpose that can be reinstituted in the 
current program, if appropriate. Certain income-generating activities that require 
significant amounts of wood, such as charcoal making, or other natural resources, will be 
automatically rejected.  
 
In order to attenuate or eliminate negative social impacts, the project will carry out 
sensitization of ex-combatants in the Demobilization Center concerning civilian life, 
norms and expectations.  In parallel, sensitization will be carried out with families and 
communities of return concerning the program and its rationale, conflict management and 
reconciliation.  As the project advances, continuing efforts will be made to encourage ex-
combatant-community interaction, for example, through social and economic 
associations.  
 
The Project would also embed safeguards considerations within its monitoring and 
evaluation mechanisms.  Annual evaluations will include an assessment of, among others, 
the proper use of procedures to screen sub-projects; the occurrence of involuntary 
displacement or resettlement; the degree of community acceptance; the degree of family 
acceptance; the existence of discrimination on the basis of gender or previous military 
affiliation; the perceived level of personal security of ex-combatants; and the impact of 
reintegration on ex-combatants# family members. These evaluations, included as 
elements of the overall program independent evaluations, would help to identify social 
and environmental impacts, determine the appropriateness of procedures and processes, 
and make recommendations for improvements where necessary. The project would also 
embed safeguards considerations within its monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.  
 
Page  6
A
streamlined and flexible project Technical Coordination Team (TCT) will serve as the 
executing agency and recipient of the Government program. With support from a 
qualified Environmental Consultant as needed, the TCT will be responsible for the 
implementation of the ESMF and monitoring of safeguard issues globally in the project, 
including ensuring that implementation partners account for these issues when 
implementing their activities. The implementation partners will be responsible for 
screening sub-projects according the environmental and social screening process for sub-
projects procedures developed in the ESMF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultation with government officials at relevant levels, UN partners, local and 
international NGOs, communities and civil society groups will be undertaken during 
ESMF preparation. Upon review and approval by the government and the Bank, the 
ESMF will be disclosed by the government in a form and language understandable to 
project-affected groups and NGOs in publicly accessible places in Burundi, and by the 
Bank in the Infoshop within 6 months of project effectiveness.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/15/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
As per OP 8.00, a final ESMF would be requried withing 6 months of project 
effectiveness.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcelo Jorge Fabre 
05/28/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
05/28/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pia Peeters 
05/28/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
05/28/2009 
Comments:   
