Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/20/2008 
Report No.:  AC3201
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P097974 
Project Name:  Multi-Sector Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ventura Bengoechea 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (60%);Water supply (40%) 
Theme:  State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is to (a) increase access to water supply 
services in peri-urban areas of Bujumbura; (b) increase the reliability and quality of 
electricity services; (c) increase the quality and reliability of water supply services, with 
primary focus on
 Bujumbura; and (d) strengthen REGIDESO’s financial sustainability.  
The project will accomplish this by helping REGIDESO to restore its financial and 
commercial viability and the quality and continuity of services in the face of the 
increasing demand from individual consumers and economic agents.  The project has 
been designed to provide a balance between immediate needs and medium- to long-term 
planning.  It addresses to the urgent need to fill the current gaps between supply and 
demand in both electricity and water supply.  At the same time, the project supports long 
term planning activities and studies, as well as the strengthening of the operational 
capacity of the main sector institutions in order to avoid or effectively reduce future gaps.  
 
As noted above, the project will contribute to the higher level objectives described in the 
ISN.  Indeed, better electricity service will prompt economic growth and diversification 
by allowing current commercial and industrial users to function better and prospective 
entrants (domestic and foreign) to establish themselves in Burundi more readily.  
Page  2
Improved and expanded water services will contribute to public health and social 
stability.  By rapidly improving access to basic water service for thousands of 
bene
ficiaries in the capital’s outskirts, where the population is predominantly of low- and 
very low-income.  The improvement of service coverage will indeed contribute to long 
term human resources enrichment and economic growth by allowing children to attend 
school, and adults (especially women) to engage in additional productive activities 
instead of spending several hours each day searching for water.   
 
3. Project Description 
The credit instrument will be a Specific Investment Loan (SIL).  
 
The proposed project would comprise three components: (i) Electricity component, 
which will support emergency investments to rehabilitate the electricity supply system 
and reduce the supply/demand gap; (ii) water component, which will support urgent/short 
term investments to increase access to water supply, reduce losses and reinforce the 
capacity of the supply and distribution system; and (iii) Institutional component, which 
will support the strengthening of the capacities of both REGIDESO and MWEM.  
 
The proposed implementation period is 5 years; the tentative amount of the IDA grant 
would be US$50 million.  The allocation of funding between the components would be 
the following: US$31 million for the electricity component, US$15 million for the water 
supply component; and US$4 million for the capacity strengthening component.  These 
amounts will be confirmed during the appraisal mission.  
 
Component 1 - Electricity (US$ 31.0 million).  This component will focus on restoring a 
quality electricity supply by financing major rehabilitation of the backbone transmission 
and distribution grid and increasing generation capacity while financing demand side 
activities to increase efficiency and reduce consumption at peak hours.  In addition, the 
component will address medium to long term energy needs by supporting technical 
studies on alternative energy sources and the preparation of bidding documents for the 
next increments of small and large sized hydropower plants.  
 
Component 2 - Water (US$15 million). This component will focus on reducing leakage, 
selectively rehabilitating and expanding production facilities and networks, extending the 
service to unserved peri-urban areas of Bujumbura and preparing technical studies and 
tender documents for some secondary centers.  An update of Bujumbura’s water master 
plan, which was done as part of project preparation, will guide the implementation of the 
sub-components below.  In addition, the project will fund a study to support the 
development of improved sanitation in urban areas.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional (US$ 4 million).  The objective of this component is to 
enhance the ability and effectiveness of the public-public partnership between 
REGIDESO and the Government to deliver improved electricity and water services.  
Specifically, the component will help REGIDESO to (i) meet specific performance 
indicators to improve operational and financial performance, through the execution of a 
performance contract with the State; (ii) assist REGIDESO in launching a delegated 
standpost kiosk management program in the periphery of Bujumbura to improve service 
Page  3
delivery at existing and new standposts; and (iii) improve the planning and monitoring 
capacities of the MWEM and its ability to provide support to REGIDESO when needed.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be in Bujumbura especially in the Northern area of the city.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No long term adverse impacts were identified in the Environmental Assessment 
instrument: Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  This project will 
not fund activities that would cause an adverse effect on the environment or any form of 
land acquisition or restriction of access to sources of livelihoods.  The potential 
environmental and social impacts of sub-projects under components 1 and 2 will be 
small-scale and site-specific; and thus easily remediable typical of category B projects. 
Where project activities will potentially impact negatively on people living and/or 
working on or near the project areas, the procedures as described in the resettlement 
policy framework will become applicable. Accordingly, people will be compensated 
and/or resettled for any loss that they may incur due to project activities. Likewise, no 
project activities will be implemented until a resettlement plan has been prepared, 
approved of (by the government as well as by the World Bank) and disclosed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term adverse impact is anticipated.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Prior to appraisal, the borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The two reports have 
been reviewed and final versions disclosed in country and at the Bank’s Infoshop. The 
PIU has already designated an environmental and social specialist who will be 
responsible for following up safeguards issues as and when they arise during project 
implementation. Capacity building sessions will be provided by the team or consultants 
to insure smooth implementation and safeguards compliance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The PIU, private enterprises, REGIDESO, ministries of mines and energy, public works 
and environment and NGOs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ventura Bengoechea 
03/19/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
03/19/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
03/19/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/19/2008 
Comments:   
