Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2009 
Report No.:  AC3992
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P101160 
Project Name:  Health Sector Development Support 
Task Team Leader:  Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Population and reproductive 
health (P);Nutrition and food security (S);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the IDA-financed operation is to 
increase the use of a defined package of health services by pregnant women and children 
under the age of five. In that regard, the proposed project is fully consistent with both the 
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) as 
it aims to increase the access of the population, especially the most vulnerable ones, to 
basic health services. As far as possible, the project indicators included in the monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) framework will be the same as those included in the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed in November 2007 between donors, some 
NGOs, Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) and the government. This choice of 
indicators is likely to increase the project’s visibility in the sector, ensure that the project 
is in harmony with the sector M&E framework that is being developed in parallel with 
this project, and ensure regular reporting follow-up by all parties involved in the MoU. A 
final agreement between the Ministry of Health and IDA on the key project indicators 
and means to measure them is presented in the Annex 3 of the Project Appraisal 
Document.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will be closely integrated with the ongoing decentralization policies 
and strongly district focused. It will achieve its development objectives of increasing the 
use of a defined free package of health services by pregnant women and children under-
five. The project has 2 main components:  
 
Component 1. Increased financing of a redefined “Free Mother to Child Service 
Package”, and introduction of procedures to enhance the speed and transparency ofthe 
existing reimbursement mechanism. (US$20 million).  
 
This component aims to increase the use of a package of health services targeted mostly, 
although not exclusively, at pregnant women and children under the age of five. It would 
increase both the supply (Subcomponent A) and demand (Subcomponent B) of cost-
effective health services. The design of this component integrates lessons learned from 
the government’s experience with the FPS reimbursement mechanism, as well as 
elements of the results-based financing schemes now being implemented.  
 
-
Subcomponent A: Financing of the Free Package of Services (FPS)(US$ 18.5 million). 
This Subcomponent supplements the government’s own resources to fund the 
reimbursement of a revised FPS consisting of about 25 services (both preventive and 
curative) as well as performance bonuses for health facilities.  
 
-
Subcomponent B. Capacity building of community health actors. (US$1.5 million). 
Resources from this Subcomponent would be used to finance a few national NGOs to 
build the capacity of local health committees (COSAs), community based-organizations 
(CBOs), and “Health Promotion Agents” (TPSs). Increasing the capacity and skills of 
these community health workers will then contribute to achieving the health centers’ 
performance targets.  The National Directorate of Health Promotion, Hygiene, and 
Sanitation (DPSHA) of the MSP, which is responsible for community health, will lead 
this sub-component. The capacity of DPSHA will be strengthened by activities included 
in Component 2.  
 
Component 2. Strengthening the capacity of the MSP in the area of M&E, resource 
management, and the purchasing of health services. (US$6 million).  
 
This component aims to increase the capacity of the MSP to: (i) manage financial 
resources (ii) purchase goods and health services and (iii) monitor and evaluate the use of 
services offered under Component 1. It will also finance the external concurrent technical 
audit to provide external verification of whether health facilities have indeed provided the 
services for which they are seeking to be reimbursed. If needed, the component will also 
finance activities complementary to those financed by the Swiss Cooperation, such as 
short-term skills training for health personnel and basic training of key personnel for 
example.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project activities will cover the whole country, targeting the most vulnerable groups 
neighborhoods.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Magda de Moura Lara-Resende (AFTH3) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The pre-appraisal mission found that the project has no land acquisition or physical 
displacement of beneficiary communities (no new construction, rehabilitation or 
extension works) and the project is expected to cause no or limited social and 
environmental impacts that would be local and readily managed, using known methods. 
OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.10 have been triggered to ensure that these methods are applied 
as needed. Given the types of activities to be financed under this project (primary health 
care and preventive services for pregnant women, delivery and post-partum care, care for 
children under the age of five, family planning services, first-line TB and malaria 
treatment for everyone, and male circumcision), and to further ensure that proper 
measures to avoid or minimize any potential adverse social and environmental effects 
from proposed activities in Component 1-B are taken, a Medical Waste Management 
Plan (MWMP) and a comprehensive SA with an abbreviated Indigenous People Plan 
(IPP) for the Batwa population have been prepared by the Government of Burundi. Final 
drafts of both safeguard instruments have been already endorsed by the government and 
approved by the World Bank. Both documents have been disclosed publicly both in-
country and at the Inforshop in Washington and the the World Bank intranet prior to 
appraisal and the Board date.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will have no negative effects on the population as it will finance a focused 
healthcare service package for mothers and children under-five; consultancy services to 
mobilize community demand for health care, and capacity building for the MSP. Because 
of the triggering of OP/BP 4.10, a comprehensive SA with an abbreviated IPP for the 
Batwa population has been prepared by the Government. The final draft was thoroughly 
discussed with and endorsed by representatives of the Batwa population. It was  approved 
by both the Government and the World Bank, respectively, and publicly disclosed. The 
MWMP also was also approved by both institutions. Both the SA with the abbreviated 
IPP and the MWMP have been simultaneously disclosed publicly  in-country and on 
Intranet and at the Infoshop of the World Bank in Washington, DC prior to appraisal and 
Board date.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During the project preparation phase, the government and IDA teams have held 
transparent, inclusive and participatory public consultations with local beneficiary 
communities, particularly with the poorest and vulnerable groups such as the Batwa 
throughout Burundi, which yielded several ideas that are now been included in the 
project. For example, the need for facilitating agencies became clear as a result of these 
public consultation and participation forum. These agencies are already being used in the 
PRADECS and PRASAB projects and in other non-IDA projects. The facilitating 
agencies will enable beneficiary local populations to better participate in improving their 
own health status by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the health committees (COSAs); 
(ii) stimulating community participation and engagement in behavioral change activities 
within the community via Results-Based Contracts with the health facilities; and (iii) 
training CBOs in how to channel anonymous complaints from the population about local 
healthcare services.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is classified as B with regard to its potential environmental and social 
impacts. In an effort to protect the public’s health in general and the health of health care 
personnel in particular, the MSP has carried out a study of current medical waste 
management practices in Burundi and made general recommendations for improvements.  
 
The study noted that health care professionals have a limited understanding of the 
dangers of medical waste and that current public information campaigns via radio and 
other channels do not highlight the risks of poor medical waste management. The most 
serious risk is the potential spread of Hepatitis B and HIV/AIDS due to improperly 
handled and disposed medical waste (such as blood, urine, syringes, sharps, bandages, 
and laboratory waste). The study’s main recommendations stressed the importance of 
training health center personnel (such as midwives) in safe medical waste management 
and of ensuring the safe disposal of medical waste.  
 
Page  5
The appraisal mission discussed the recommendations of the MSP study with 
representatives of the DPSHA of the MSP and of the Ministry of Environment. So far it 
has been determined that the proposed project will fund the following activities under 
Component 2 (total cost estimate: $105,500):  
 
(a) 
Updating the norms and standards for health facilities to include safe medical 
waste management practices;  
 
(b) 
Identifying, quantifying, and describing the materials needed for safe medical 
waste management in health centers;  
 
(c) 
Preparing a training module on safe medical waste management;  
 
(d) 
Disseminating the training module to about 600 health centers throughout the 
country;  
 
(e) 
Training health center personnel and midwives;  
 
(f) 
Acquiring protective gear and equipments for health care personnel for safe 
medical waste management.  
 
The MSP will be responsible for supervising these above measures.  
 
The project will not fund any new construction, extension or rehabilitation activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project operations target all Burundians, with a particular attention given to women, 
children, poor and vulnerable groups among whom the indigenous people (the Batwa 
population). Hence, during project preparation, the project clearly identifies these 
vulnerable population groups and thus the SA through the abbreviated IPP has defining 
better ways to serving them all, particularly the Batwas. As suggested by OP4.10, a 
comprehensive Social Assessment (SA) study that looked into the specific vulnerabilities 
of these vulnerable groups, particularly the Batwa has been completed by a team of 
International and National Consultants. The report with an abbreviated Indigenous People 
Plan (IPP) indicates the specific measures needed to help them better access health 
services as well as participate more inclusively and effectively in the sustainable 
management of health services. Moreover, the abbreviated IPP has defined a relatively 
moderate - but specific to the Batwas - package of small scale activities to further 
encourage and facilitate their sustainable participation and accessibility to basic 
healthcare services. The SA study along with the IPP was thoroughly discussed with 
various stakeholders, particularly the Batwa communities representatives and endorsed 
by them. The report has been approved simultaneously by both the Government and the 
Bank and subsequently disclosed publicly in Burundi and at the World Bank InfoShop 
(and Intranet) in Washington, DC.  
 
During the whole project preparation phase, the government and IDA teams have held 
transparent,inclusive and participatory consultations with local beneficiary communities 
throughout Burundi, which yielded several ideas that are now been included in the 
project.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/01/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/13/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/13/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  7
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
04/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Magda de Moura Lara-Resende 
04/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
04/23/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
04/28/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
04/23/2009 
Comments:   
