Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3882 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burundi 
Project ID: P112998 
Project Name: PUBLIC WORKS & URBAN MANAGEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Sylvie Debomy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (25%);Water supply (21%);General education sector (21%);Roads and 
highways (21%);Sub-national government administration (12%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban development 
(P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Burundi has made progress towards reestablishing peace and restoring institutions after a long 
period of civil war and instability. However, the country still faces tremendous challenges in 
terms of infrastructure development and employment creation to sustain stability and allow 
economic growth. The decentralization process is in its very early stage and needs to be strongly 
supported by clear actions at the local level to consolidate this progress.  
 
Based on the results and lessons learned from the Public Works and Employment Creation 
Project (PWECP), the proposed project aims to achieve the following objectives: (i) increase 
access to sustainable urban infrastructures and services; and (ii) generate short term employment 
through labor-intensive public works.  
 
This would be achieved through the combination of demand-based and structured infrastructure 
investments and services, and municipal support programs to strengthen municipal management 
and fiscal performance at the local level.  
Page  2
The following results are expected:  
 
(i)     increased access to selected infrastructure (roads, water supply and sanitation, schools and 
health centers, income-generating facilities, etc)  
 
(ii) 
improved municipal infrastructure maintenance measured in terms of allocation and 
execution of maintenance budget  
 
(iii) 
improved municipal financial management as measured in the timely production of 
administrative and management accounts  
 
(iv) 
increased short term employment measured by the number of person-days of employment 
created  
 
These programs are well within the scope of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 2007-2009 
in its Axis 2: Promotion of a durable economic growth, Programs 2: Creation of job 
opportunities and incomes through a vast program of rehabilitation and expansion of priority 
community-demand driven.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is a logical continuation of the PWECP especially with regard to the 
execution of demand-based community driven sub-projects through labor-intensive approaches 
for job creation and developing capacity of local SMEs to deliver infrastructure works and 
services. It brings an additional focus on selected cities (Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega) to 
address the need for a balanced and coordinated development of infrastructure services to boost 
private sector development and support institutional development.  
 
The project would have three components:  
 
Component 1: Urban Infrastructures and Services (est. US$ m. 40)  
 
This component includes: (i) rehabilitation and expansion of community-demand driven 
infrastructure all over the country (such as schools, sport facilities, health centers, roads, 
drainage, communal facilities, environmental protection, small WSS systems, small markets, etc) 
to be implemented using the same approach and mechanisms as for the previous project ; and (ii) 
trunk infrastructure in the three main cities of Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega (such as roads, 
markets, bus station, WSS systems, and environmental sanitation investments).  
 
The Community infrastructure program will use the same successful approach developed 
during the PWECP and implement part of the large portfolio of sub-projects identified by the 
communities. More than 1,170 requests for sub-projects were recorded on April 30, 2008  by the 
Technical Secretariat of which 122 were financed by the Bank under the PWECP and 48 of them 
by the Africa Development Fund. In addition to the community-based infrastructure, the project 
will finance trunk infrastructure needed to improve the functioning of the major urban centers of 
the country and remove some of the bottlenecks precluding private sector initiatives.  
 
Pursuing the promotion of labor-intensive work programs throughout the country will provide 
an answer to three main concerns of a post-conflict country: (i) rebuilding basic social 
infrastructures for the creation of jobs and incomes; (ii) support to the decentralization process 
Page  3
through improved urban management and (iii) promotion of SMEs and local consulting firms 
through access to contract opportunities.  
 
Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega are the three largest cities in Burundi. The Government has 
requested additional targeted support to those cities  in terms of municipal  management and 
trunk investments as they could have a measurable impact as growth pole for the surrounding 
area.  
 
Component 2: Municipal Management Strengthening (est. US$ m.5)  
 
This component would target the three main cities to improve governance, municipal 
management and fiscal performance through the provision of technical assistance, training, 
equipment for (a) increasing the technical capacity of municipal staff to develop and implement 
infrastructure programs and their maintenance, (b) supporting the development of municipal 
planning and programming tools and environmental management (c) increasing resource 
mobilization, through better tax payer identification and better management of revenue-
generating facilities, and (d) improving budgeting procedures and strengthening financial 
management.  
 
Component 3: Capacity building, Monitoring and Evaluation (est. US$ m. 5)  
 
This component will finance training, sector studies (related to decentralized urban 
development in close articulation with the PREM team), technical assistance, audits, limited 
logistics support to the Ministry of Public Works and Equipment and the Ministry in charge of 
Decentralization to better support and monitor the development of local governments. This 
component also includes training programs for local SMEs in business management, and 
relevant technical skills in addition to monitoring of project results and impacts.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The community driven infrastructure program will be implemented in all urban centers of the 
country. The three largest cities (Bujumbura, Ngozi and Gitega) will also benefit from city-level 
trunk investments to help them play a more important role as growth poles for the surrounding 
areas and a specific municipal support program to enhance urban management and improve local 
resources mobilization.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Capacity for environmental and social management of future infrastructure sub-projects is not 
expected to incur more risks than in the previous project in light of experience gained so far. 
Supervision of safeguards compliance of sub-projects will be carried out by the Technical 
Secretariat environmental specialist in collaboration with the environmental focal point in the 
line ministry. Environmental and social screening checklists will be adequately applied in sub-
project processing, and in all cases each sub-project will have a site specific Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) that will be reviewed by the Bank safeguard specialists.  
 
The environmental and social specialists cell of the Technical Secretariat of the Ministry of 
Public Works and Equipment  will oversee environmental and social review of the project 
components and will take a closer look at both the ESMF and the RAP as well as update them as 
Page  4
needed. The Borrower institutional capacity in addressing both social and environmental 
safeguards issues will be further re-assessed during the preparation mission, and the Government 
team will receive the adequate technical guidance support from the Bank’s social and 
environmentalSafeguards Specialists on the project team. It is expected that, the project will 
support additional environmental and social training and relevant capacity building measures to 
ensure effective implementation of both the ESMF and the RPF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Based on experience gained under the previous operation, potential adverse environmental 
and social impacts are likely to include soil erosion, water and air pollution, noise, traffic 
accidents, and medical waste at the health centers that might be funded under the proposed 
project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some sub-projects might involve land acquisition which could lead to the loss of access to 
economic resources, livelihoods and land, either permanently or temporarily (during construction 
or rehabilitation phases).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/05/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Disclosure  
 
To identify and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social impacts, the project will 
prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) consistent with the 
requirements of OP 4.01, and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with the 
requirements of OP 4.12, to ensure that future sub-projects are implemented in an 
environmentally and socially sustainable manner. The ESMF will also include, as an 
attachment, a Medical Waste Management Plan. In addition to these instruments, a social 
assessment will be carried out during project preparation to ensure that the targeted people do 
benefit from the project. The outcomes of this social analysis will feed into the operational 
manual of the project and the impacts on targeted households captured in the M&E system.  
In preparing the afore-mentioned frameworks, the proposed project will benefit from 
valuable experience gained under the previous operation. Both frameworks will be reviewed, 
approved and publicly disclosed prior to appraisal in both the World Bank Infoshop and in 
Burundi, and in a form and language easily accessible to potentially affected persons (PAP).  
 
As required by Bank operational guidelines, inclusive public consultations and participation 
workshops will be carried out in the context of the environmental and social screening 
process outlined in the triggered safeguard documents. The results will be disclosed to and 
discussed with targeted stakeholders, including potentially project affected persons, and 
ultimately, appropriate and implementable mitigation measures will be incorporated into the 
sub-projects to build ownership and accountability.  
 
The draft Environmental and Social Management Framework and Resettlement Policy 
Framework will be submitted for review by November 15, 2008. Final approved documents 
will be publicly disclosed at both Infoshop and In-country by December 31, 2008 in a form 
and language accessible to all stakeholders, including potential PAP and CSO.  
 
Transfer: The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
09/30/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/30/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
09/30/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
