Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3633 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P109648 
Project Name: Cambodia Trade Development Support Program 
Task Team Leader: Stephane Guimbert 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASPT 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Trade facilitation and market 
access (P);Other trade and integration (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Cambodia Trade Development Trust Fund 
10.08
10.08 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Cambodia multi-donor trust fund for trade-related assistance 
("Trade Development Trust Fund" or TDTF) is to maximize the contribution of trade to 
economic development and poverty reduction in Cambodia. The purpose of the activities to be 
funded by the TDTF is to increase efficiency in policy implementation, transparency in trade-
related transactions, export competitiveness, and institutional and human capacity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The TDTF - a programmatic MDTF - has 2 main components: (i) Recipient Executed investment 
type of operation which includes technical assistance and capacity building initiatives; and (ii) 
Bank Executed component with analytical and advisory services activities and a technical 
facilitating team. The main role of the latter is to provide advisory services to trade-related 
agencies implementing the TDTF and assistance to the TTL on technical aspects of rolling-out a 
comprehensive trade initiative as well as overall TF program management. Recipient executed 
activities will be defined in greater detail on the basis of the Action Matrix approved by the 
government. Indicatively, the areas that will be supported, in cooperation with other 
Page  2
development partners, may include: trade facilitation, including customs reform and 
modernization; improved product quality and compliance with international SPS and TBT 
standards; and prioritized implementation of the RGC's WTO commitments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The program will be implemented nationwide with policy towards achieving maximized 
contribution of trade to economic development and poverty reduction in the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There is no safeguard policy triggered by this operation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Though contribution of trade to economic development can be linked to environmental 
implications positively or negatively depending upon nature of the trade bilateral agreement and 
policy, the project will not finance any activities which may cause adverse environmental 
impacts, but rather capture long-term environment friendly development.  Given to the scope of 
the project, formal environmental assessment is not required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not involve any activities which may cause degradation of natural habitats as 
defined under the safeguard policy. The project will capture the positive opportunities and avoid 
adverse impacts to natural habitats which may result from the project outcomes.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities that involve significant conversion of degradation of 
critical forest areas as defined under the safeguards policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not procure any pesticides nor will it results in an increase use of pesticides.  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
N/A   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
N/A   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
N/A   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not involve or relate to any dam.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not involve or relate to international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project will not be located in any known disputed areas.   
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards related studies have been completed as part of the existing RMRP.  No new 
studies are required as a result of this additional financing; a repeater socio-economic impact 
study will be funded in 2008 in the participating provinces.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephane Guimbert 
06/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
06/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mathew A. Verghis 
06/25/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
