Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3473
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P084787 
Project Name:  Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development 
Task Team Leader:  Steven N. Schonberger 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.30 
 GERMANY: 
BMZ 
1.20
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the pilot program is to improve the process for 
identification and use of newly-settled lands transferred to land recipients through a 
transparent and well-targeted selection process as measured by:  
 
•
the adoption rates of improved land management and agricultural production 
systems in support SLC sub-projects;  
 
•
the effective resolution of challenges to the land recipient selection process 
through program dispute resolution mechanisms.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is being prepared for approval during FY08 and implementation would start 
in FY09.  The project has four main components  
 
1.
Commune-based Social Land Concession planning and land allocation;  
 
2.
Rural development services and investments in SLC areas;  
 
3.
Sustainable and transparent program development for SLCs; and  
 
4.
Project administration.  
 
Page  2
This pilot project will involve initiating and refining the participatory commune based 
SLC approach.  The project is expected to assist an estimated 3,000 landless households 
in 20 communes in establishing sustainable rural livelihoods.  The project has been 
appraised on the basis of its approach to commune based identification of land for SLCs, 
land use planning and land allocation to poor settlers which addresses agro-ecological 
opportunities and constraints within the SLC area, and support for subsequent 
development of livelihoods.  The focus of the project is on the development of a practical 
approach to establish and support SLCs, which can then be replicated by the Cambodian 
government, and which builds capacity, particularly at the commune level, through 
bottom up planning processes, and also at higher levels through assistance to land, 
agricultural and other support services.  
 
There is considerable pressure for access to land in Cambodia owing to the nation’s lack 
of alternative employment opportunities for a growing and relatively young post conflict 
workforce.  Pressure on access to agricultural land is leading to illegal occupation and to 
forest destruction, particularly on better soils along roads and near existing settlements.  
Government recognizes the need to bring the access to land within the framework of the 
Land Law of 2001 and SLC Sub-Decree which provides for allocations of residential 
plots and up to 5 ha of land for agriculture depending on land quality.  Within project 
provinces, three main types of state lands are being considered for allocation to SLCs to 
provide for mainly agriculture and livestock based livelihoods with non timber forest 
product extraction as a community activity.  
 
1.
Areas within canceled or reduced economic land concessions (plantations).  
 
2.
Areas which are part of lands recovered by Government from illegal 
encroachment.  
 
3.
Areas of degraded forest which are under high pressure and are likely to be 
(further) encroached illegally for agricultural expansion.  
 
Given that much of Cambodia’s arable land areas include some forest (from highly 
degraded to intact) and illegal occupation by smallholders is widespread, careful 
screening and planning will be required in relation to Bank safeguard policies.  Processes 
which combine participatory planning with communities and the best possible access to 
information on soils, existing and past land use, topography, and water resources will be 
needed to develop a GIS based land use planning approach which minimizes risks to the 
environment and to livelihoods.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in three project provinces: Kratie, Kampong Cham, and 
Kampong Thom.  Two pilot sites have been selected to test the approach: the communes 
Sambok and Changkrang in Kracheh district in Kratie province, and Chom Kravien in 
Memot district in Kampong Cham province.  The project will support further 
implementation of these initial pilots along with 17 additional communes to be selected 
in the three provinces based on a demand driven process based on the existing 
participatory, annual commune development planning process.  The communes have not 
yet been identified.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Richard H. E. Chisholm (EASRE) 
Mr Asger Christensen (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment  
 
The project is classified as a category B project based on the expected nature and scale 
of its potential for impacts from the development of land for agricultural use.  Land 
allocated under the SLC program will be converted to agricultural uses based on site-
specific land use plans developed following a participatory approach.  Possible uses will 
include wet season rice production, livestock grazing, and perennial tree cropping for 
fruit, nuts, forage, bamboo, and timber for house construction.  
 
The main potential adverse impacts include loss of habitat as well erosion and 
sedimentation associated with land conversion or inappropriate land use practices which 
are not consistent with site plans.  The rural development support activities will not 
involve either distribution of pesticides or related application equipment or result in 
significant increase in pesticide consumption and thus do not trigger safeguards on pest 
management.  The potential impacts are considered to be localized, site specific and 
manageable with known technical approaches.  Any potential impacts are also reversible 
through changes in land use or land use practices.  
 
Environmental Assessment and application of safeguards principles will take a slightly 
different approach compared to normal World Bank projects.  Instead of assessing the 
overall design for i
ts impacts and then planning mitigation and monitoring, the project’s 
environmental assessment will be integrated into the commune level planning approach 
for each SLC, so that the procedures for planning of land use, carrying capacity in terms 
of settlers and settlements, and land development for livelihoods all contribute to 
sustainable land use while minimizing negative impacts on the natural and social 
environment.  The approach is designed to encourage the commune implementation 
Page  4
teams themselves, with the assistance of technically qualified consultants and NGOs, to 
review their own planning and implementation to ensure compliance with the original 
SLC plan and continuously improve it where appropriate. See Annex A for examples of 
environmental planning and mitigation measures corresponding to stages in the SLC 
planning cycle.  
 
Forests  
 
The Forest Policy has been triggered for this project because the project will result in 
some intensification of agricultural activities in degraded or degrading forests.  However, 
in the majority of sites, only small areas of 100-300 ha will be considered for an SLC 
with each family receiving no more than 5 hectares of land for mixed use of which up to 
2
hectares generally is for intensive cropping and the remaining land for grazing/agro-
forestry.  
 
If applied properly, the land use planning process will involve both considerations of 
what constitutes a functional forest (for economic, conservation or protection use) and 
how to determine, using GIS approaches, the extent of degradation of the forest and thus 
the danger of a “do nothing” approach.  The project will support the identification of high 
priority conservation sites using best available dataq and new technologies. For example, 
the planning process will involve the combined use of SPOT 5 imagery and soil surveys 
will contribute to the determination of which areas to retain in forest cover for protection 
purposes given soil type suitability for agriculture, slopes, and position in the micro 
watershed involved.  
 
Within lands selected for agricultural use, planning criteria include the need to maintain 
a
minimum tree cover will be retained for shade and shelter.  Through the technical 
assistance provided by the project,  specialists will be trained in environmental planning 
of micro-watersheds with communities so that, for example, contour lines of existing 
forest will protect erosion prone soils, that no “islands” of isolated forest are left 
unconnected to surrounding forest, and that important watercourses have appropriate 
forest buffer zones along their length.  Forests for particular economic use such as resin 
extraction and bamboo groves will be retained for protection and community use.  
 
Critical Habitats  
 
The project will not support site development which cuase significant degradation of 
critical natural habitats.  Provincial level site selection will identify in advance critical 
habitat sistes and these sites will not be eligible for support under the Bank project.  
 
Critical natural habitats in the project provinces include:  
 
(i) 
Existing protected areas and areas officially proposed by the government as 
protected areas (e.g., reserves that meet the criteria of The World Conservation Union 
(IUCN) classifications such as the dolphin habitat on the Mekong River at Kratie), areas 
with known high suitability for biodiversity conservation, sites that are critical for rare, 
vulnerable, migratory, or endangered species, and sites that maintain conditions vital for 
the viability of these protected areas such as dry dipterocarp forest on upper slopes and 
poor soils  
Page  5
(ii) 
Sites recognized by indigenous local communities as culturally significant (e.g., 
sacred groves and burial sites).  
 
Critical Habitats will be excluded from cultivation and settlement through an 
environmental “hot spots” mapping prepared at the provincial level based on existing 
maps and stakeholder consultations and used in planning for every SLC site at lower 
levels. Similarly, all sites of cultural and historical significance will be excluded from 
settlement by the “hot spots” map and by specific attention to them gained from local 
knowledge in commune and village planning. Screening and guidance notes for 
agriculture, forestry and critical habitats are included in documentation for use at the 
commune and District/Province level.  
 
However, it is possible that the selected sites could impact on non-critical habitats.  All 
efforts will be made to avoid any viable habitat areas.  In the event that some areas are to 
be converted for agricultural purposes a site specific mitigation of management plan will 
be developed which specifies measures to compensate or offset such impacts.  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement impacts are not expected in all SLC areas, and where 
such impacts occur, they are expected to be limited.  Since the project is demand driven, 
the land acquisition and resettlement impacts of the commune level SLC sub-projects will 
not be known by appraisal.  OP 4.12, para 28(a) applies, and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared by the Borrower defining the requirements for SLC 
specific Resettlement Plans where needed.  SLC areas are state land, and land use prior to 
establishment of the SLC will therefore be unauthorized encroachments.  However, in 
order to avoid negative livelihood impacts on poor unauthorized occupants, the RPF 
specifies that if such households started use of land in the SLC area before the cut-off 
date for SLC planning, and depend on their land use in the SLC area for their livelihoods 
and/or residence, they will not be displaced.  If affected by land acquisition/resettlement 
related to the SLC land use and/or infrastructure plan, they will be entitled to land-for-
land compensation equal to the plots allocated to regular Title Land Recipients (TLR), 
and compensation for investments made on the land (standing crops, fruit trees, 
structures).  Poor encroachers are defined as households using 5 ha or less land in the 
SLC area and residing on this land (95% of farm households in Cambodia have 
landholdings of less than 5 ha).  This provision in the RPF goes beyond para 16 in OP 
4.12, which does not require compensation for land if people have no recognizable right 
to the land they are occupying.  In case the land for the SLC is recovered from non-poor 
encroachers and land speculators, who would not depend on this land as their primary 
source of livelihood and in all likelihood not be residing in the SLC area, these will not 
be entitled to any land compensation, but can receive compensation for investments in 
assets (structures, crops, planted trees) on a contiguous area of up to 5 ha of encroached 
land within the SLC area where the bulk of the investments have been made.  In the event 
that unauthorized occupants cultivating more than 5 ha claim that this land constitutes 
their primary source of livelihood, they would have recourse to the grievance redress 
procedure defined in the RPF.  The basic features of the RPF are described in an 
attachment in IRIS (ISDS-Appraisal stage)  
Page  6
For the two SLC pilots, plans for land allocation (including current land use) and 
infrastructure development will only be available after appraisal, but implementation will 
begin prior to effectiveness with retroactive financing.  Eligibility for retroactive 
financing will be made conditional on the completion of land recipient selection and rural 
development infrastructure planning, and submission of documentation to the Bank of 
whether these have any land acquisition impacts.  Site visits indicate that there will not be 
land acquisition impacts, but if there are, the resettlement plans would need to be 
reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  
 
In addition to SLCs, agribusiness enterprises can lease state land under Economic Land 
Concessions (ELCs).  Establishment of ELCs usually entails displacement of peasant 
households, and while the ELC concessionaire is obliged to ensure resettlement and 
rehabilitation of those displaced, this is often not done adequately.  If a commune 
establishing a SLC includes households that have been left landless by a past ELC, these 
households can apply for plots in the SLC.  However, an SLC would not be eligible for 
support from the project, if it is linked to a contemporaneous or planned ELC in order to 
mitigate the resettlement impacts of the ELC.  
 
Indigenous Peoples  
 
Ethnic minority groups in Cambodia include (a) Chinese and Vietnamese, (b) the 
Muslim Cham, and (c) 17 different ethnic minority groups estimated to comprise around 
120,000 persons (1% of the Cambodian population) and ranging from 300 to 19,000 
members.  Only members of the third category are considered indigenous people for the 
purpose of OP 4.10.  
 
In the two provinces with pilot projects, indigenous people constitute about 10% 
(around 30,000 persons) of the rural population in Kratie province, and 5% (around 5,000 
persons) in the Memot district in Kampong Cham province.  Many of the indigenous 
people in Kratie were resettled from the uplands under state sponsored schemes in the 
1970’ies, do not rely on shifting cultivation, are bilingual, and reside in communes that 
also include Khmer villages.  The Memot district in Kompong Cham province comprises 
villages of the indigenous minority group Stieng, who are in transition from shifting 
cultivation to perennial land use (partly due to pressure on land from ELCs), are 
bilingual, and some identify as Khmer rather than Stieng (as is the case in the Choam 
Kravien pilot commune).  In both areas, indigenous communities tend to rely more than 
Khmer on collection of non-timber forest products (NPTF) and grazing in “vacant” areas.  
In both areas, the representation in commune councils of indigenous minority villages is 
often either absent or substantially weaker than that of Khmer villages within the 
communes.  
 
Whereas the SLCs will provide individual land titles to households, the Council for 
Land Policy has drafted a Policy on ‘Registration and Right to Use of Indigenous Peoples 
Communal Land’ (May 2007), which takes as its basis the recognition in the Land Law 
of 2001 (Article 23, 25, 26) of the right of indigenous communities to own immovable 
property as collective title.  The draft Policy identifies preparation of a legal framework 
Page  7
for registration of indigenous peo
ples’ communal land as a key step to realize this right, 
and a sub-decree defining the procedures for demarcating indigenous lands, registering 
such land, and issuing ownership certificates that recognize the collective occupation and 
rights of each community is under preparation.  
 
Since LASED comprises multiple commune level sub-projects that are not identified by 
appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared which 
summarizes the principles in the SLC planning approach and the RPF regarding 
indigenous peoples:  
 
•
In view of the basic difference between an approach for individual titling for 
small land grants to landless or land-poor households within SLCs, and that required for 
provision of collective title to indigenous peoples’ lands, the project will:  
 
-
not
finance establishment of SLCs in areas   predominantly inhabited by indigenous 
peoples (identified through the provincial “hot spots” mapping);  
 
-
apply an approach in the areas where the project is implemented that avoids including 
lands predominantly used by indigenous communities in SLCs (identified through the 
commune level social screening and land use mapping);  
 
•
Notwithstanding the above, in communes where SLCs are established, and which 
include indigenous minority communities, households from these will be entitled to apply 
for plots within the SLCs at par with other commune members;  
 
•
To both facilitate that indigenous land use is taken into account in SLC planning, 
and that indigenous households will have equitable opportunities to become TLRs, 
information dissemination on the LASED principles for SLRs will be targeting individual 
villages (e.g. the elected village chiefs) in addition to commune council members, and the 
land use mapping and planning will likewise involve village representatives in addition to 
commune council members;  
 
•
The baseline data on the social profile of commune members and on illegal land 
users in SLC areas, as well as the monitoring data on SLC land use planning, SLC 
beneficiaries, and management of land acquisition impacts will provide disaggregated 
information on indigenous peoples.  
 
Cultural heritage and physical cultural resources  
 
The 1996 ‘Law on the Protection of National Cultural Heritage’ defines provisions for 
preservation of cultural heritage including the ‘natural world’.  The province level 
Culture Departments are the operational agencies in cultural heritage protection (outside 
the Angkor/Siem Reap region which is directly under the national Apsara agency), and 
maintain cultural heritage inventories.  These will inform the provincial level “hot spots” 
maps, and the commune level SLC demarcation and land use planning will draw both on 
the “hot spots” mapping and local knowledge of burial sites and places of ritual 
significance. Archaeological chance finds will be reported to the relevant provincial 
Culture Department.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project seeks to generate positive long term impacts by introducing participatory land 
use planning which builds awareness and agreement on environmental management of 
Page  8
sensitive areas such as high value forest, stream banks and wildlife corridors, as well as 
introduction of appropriate cropping.  Impact evaluation will review progress in 
maintaining these benefits.  The project also seeks to change attitudes towards land 
management towards greater recognition of local benefits from legality.  Emphasis is on 
developing sustainable agricultural practices which can be sustained ecologically on the 
SLC sites.  Potential indirect impacts may result if participating communities fail to 
adhere to agreed site specific management plans and develop alternative approaches 
which are not consistent with the sustainability goals of the projects   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The main alternative being considered by Government is centrally managed SLCs 
whereby land and beneficiaries are identified by the central government agencies rather 
than the communities or communes.  This approach, in addition to being used as a 
significant mechanism for involuntary resettlement, raises issues regarding the 
development of locally driven management systems which integrate local knowledge of 
the environment as well as of the community.  The locally initiated approach includes 
review mechanisms and technical support to safeguard against inappropriate resettlement, 
impacts on indigenous communities or environmentally sensitive land being used for 
SLCs by local communities, and to require conformance with basic poverty criteria in 
selecting land recipients, but leaves leadership of the process to local communities as 
well as accountability for implementation.  
 
The Screening and Guidance notes for Commune and District use specifically require 
local government staff and beneficiaries to identify alternatives when planning an SLC 
and to document such alternatives for review.  Experience from the pilot sites show that 
potential negative environmental impacts owing to top down planning can be avoided 
using a Agro-Ecological Analysis (AEA) process. This is a participatory planning 
methodology incorporating technical features such as mapping, economic analysis of 
alternatives, analysis of opportunities and constraints, lessons learned from exploitation 
of nearby similar agro-ecosystems, and assessment of potential land acquisition impacts 
under land use scenarios.  A summary of the potential environmental and social impacts 
and their mitigation is given in Annex 2.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
PISA titled Assessment of Potential Impacts of Social land Concessions was completed 
in December 2004, and a social assessment of general land issues was undertaken during 
the preparation of the Cambodia Land Management & Administration Project (LMAP).  
 
The safeguards instruments prepared by the borrower are:  
 
a) 
An Environmental Impact Analysis and management framework which is based 
on participatory, bottom up planning at the commune level, and incorporates an AEA for 
each projected site, or a commune AEA where a number of adjacent sites occur.  
Provincial training teams have been trained as trainers in the technique over several years 
and are in place.  SPOT 5 imagery and existing maps have been digitized to provide a 
Page  9
GIS database for use in planning with communities so that alternatives according to soils, 
slope, vegetation, current land use, and access and infrastructure needs can be assessed 
and documented.  
 
b)
A
Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, and 
Cultural Heritage Protection Framework.  
 
c) 
The Project Implementation Manual includes flow charts that describe in detail 
the commune based planning and implementation process, its linkage to the required 
environmental and social safeguards measures, those responsible, and the authorizations 
required at each stage.  
 
The borrower will have gained some experience from preparation of the pilot site SLCs, 
but will require ongoing TA and backstopping to build capacity on safeguards 
management to implement the measures described above on a larger scale.  At central, 
provincial/district and commune levels the borrower will be assisted by GTZ funded 
technical assistance in the areas of environmental planning, agricultural production on 
marginal soils, rural community development, and the use of social safeguards 
instruments in impact assessment, planning, implementation, and monitoring.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are landless commune members who may benefit as TLRs, poor illegal 
land users within the identified SLC areas who will be able to continue to use land within 
the SLC, and commune representatives who will gain knowledge on SLC establishment 
and participatory land use planning.  Following a public information campaign on the 
project, communes will be able to request for assistance to establish an SLC.  The 
participatory land use planning process at the commune level assisted by the provincial 
and district authorities and supported by TA from GTZ, will establish local knowledge on 
environmental and social safeguard requirements including provisions regarding poor 
illegal land users within the identified SLCs and land use by indigenous peoples.  
 
A
workshop on NGO involvement and approaches to SLC implementation, which 
included the management of safeguards, was held by MLMUPC in April 2007.  During 
the June 2007 pre-appraisal, a workshop was held in Kratie on AEA and SLC land use 
planning with provincial, district, and commune representatives.  Further consultations 
were held in July and August 2007 with community, commune, district and province 
representatives and international and local conservation and social support NGOs in the 
provinces and in Phnom Penh to review the proposed safeguards approaches and seek 
suggestions prior to completion of the key safeguards documents and procedures. During 
the Bank’s December 2007 mission, meetings were held with NGOs and public and 
private sector representatives and donors and following the meeting, the NGO umbrella 
organization has issued an endorsement of the LASED approach and suggesting that 
Government consider adoption of this approach for all SLC activities in Cambodia.  
 
The Implementation Manual, the environmental screening guidance notes, the RPF, 
IPPF, and the Cultural Heritage Protection Framework have been translated into Khmer, 
and disclosed at the commune, province, and national levels.  Based on these documents, 
Page  10
additional orientation workshops on the commune level planning process including 
management of safeguards will be conducted for the relevant authorities in the target 
provinces and, as identified, new participating districts, commune councils, communities 
and civil society organizations in the project area.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  11
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  12
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Steven N. Schonberger 
02/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Asger Christensen 
02/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Richard H. E. Chisholm 
02/27/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
03/05/2008 
Comments:   
