                                                                                                                                                                                                       44074


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 04/04/2008                                     Report No.: AC3282
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Cambodia                              Project ID: P106603
                                                                                                            Project Name: Road Asset Management Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Maria Margarita Nunez
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26,         Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008
                                                                                                            2008
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: EASTE                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                           Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                                                                            development (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):              30.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 15.34
                                                    Authorized                                                      Asian Development Bank                                              6.00
                                                                                                                    AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.82
                                                                                                                                                                                       26.16
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple []             Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                        Public                                                                                                    Yes [ ]       No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The objective of the project is to ensure continued effective use of the rehabilitated
                                                                                                            national and provincial road network in support of the economic development in
                                                                                                            Cambodia. It will do so by improving the institutional and technical capacity of the
                                                                                                            Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT) for road maintenance planning,
                                                                              Authorized                    budgeting and operations, and by expanding and strengthening maintenance activities.

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            The project has three components that are designed to balance periodic maintenance
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            investments with institutional support and capacity development for prioritization,
                                                                                                            planning, and technical aspects of maintenance activities.
                                                                                                  Public

                                                                                                             Component A - Road Asset Management (Total ­ US$52.34 million; IDA ­ US$27.28
                                                                                                            million). The component includes the preservation of MPWT's road network
                                                                                                            throughannual programs for periodic maintenance works (asphalt resurfacing, resealing,

re-gravelling, and minor spot improvements on the surface drainage, road safety, and
small bridge repairs) and provides necessary implementation support. The periodic
maintenance works to be undertaken in the first year of the project have been defined,
and in subsequent years are to be defined during the implementation. It will also support
the Government funded routine maintenance, which will be carried out as output based
contracts.

 Implementation support includes: (i) the preparation of designs and bidding documents
for the first year works; (ii) advice to MPWT on technical designs, cost estimates,
bidding documents, contract management, and safeguard activities for works in
subsequent years; (iii) construction supervision of civil works throughout the project, and
(iv) financial and technical audits annually.

 Component B - Capacity Development (Total ­ US$2.72 million; IDA ­ US$1.84
million). This component, which comprises seven subcomponents, will support the
capacity development at the institutional, organizational and individual level for MPWT
to perform its road asset management functions effectively and efficiently. It will include:
(i) institutional and (ii) technical capacity development for road asset management within
the General Department of Public Works (GDPW); (iii) private sector development and
divestiture of some MPWT force account units; (iv) road safety; (v) HIV/AIDS
awareness campaigns; (vi) resettlement decree training, and (vii) monitoring and
evaluation of project outcomes.

 Component C ­ Merit Based Performance Initiative (Total ­ US$1.10 million; IDA ­
US$0.88 million). This component would support the Government's introduction of the
MBPI in MPWT.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Cambodia is culturally rich, especially in Siem Reap where many important cultural
heritages are located and the area has been the center for international tourists. However,
poverty is widespread and some provinces are contaminated by unexploded ordnance and
land mines. Rice cultivation is the dominant agricultural activity, but yields are erratic
due to flooding. Safe drinking water is a major limitation and Malaria is endemic in the
country. Indigenous minorities (Highland Peoples) are found mostly in the northeast
(Ratanakiri and Mondolkiri provinces). These groups, among them the Tampuan, Kuy,
Jarai, Phnong, Kreung, Kavaet, Brou, Stieng, Lun and others, are estimated to total about
120,000 people, or about one percent of the national population. Cambodia is also rich in
forests and biodiversity. The forests, wetlands and other habitats support many species of
flora and fauna. Freshwater inundated forests are found around the Tonle Sap Lake and in
areas of the Mekong River. The Tonle Sap is the largest freshwater lake in Southeast
Asia. In 1997 it was nominated as a Biosphere Reserve under the Man and the Biosphere
Reserve Program of United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). There are 23 protected areas covering more than 3 million hectares or 19%
of the country's total area and they are well distributed throughout the country.

 The project will cover maintenance of the national and provincial roads under MPWT
responsibility throughout the whole country. Most of the roads are located in flat area,
including the national road number 5 and number 6 which are located around Tonle Sap
and Siem Reap. The project will focus on preservation of existing assets and will not
involve new rights of way or any related issues thereof. The first year road projects have
been identified and significant impacts and land acquisition or resettlement are not
anticipated. For the project roads identified under subsequent annual work plans, the
Environment and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) will be applied.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE)
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Given the programmatic nature of this project, three safeguard policies are triggered: the
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The project roads were rehabilitated during the past 10
years, and significant negative impacts due to resettlement, land acquisitions, and ethnic
minority are not anticipated. The potential negative impacts due to civil works will be
small, temporary, and localized. These impacts can be mitigated through good
construction and management practices and close supervision and monitoring of
contractor performance. No large scale or irreversible impacts are expected as the project
focuses on the road maintenance of existing assets within the right of way.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Road safety risks are likely to increase. A road safety program has been incorporated and
will be implemented under the project. Development and application of safeguard
measures for the subsequent contract roads will also be necessary to ensure that where

significant impacts are anticipated and/or occur, adequate actions are carried out by
MPWT to mitigate them. Potential impacts on HIV/AIDS is unlikely, however, the
project will support on HIV/AIDS awareness campaign to reduce this risk.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Project alternatives are not relevant since the project activities will be carried out along
the existing roads. To reduce complexity due to the parallel-financing arrangement, the
project seeks to establish a common set of safeguard reports in an effort to better align
donor requirements.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
MPWT recognizes the importance of environmental protection and has made basic
commitments to addressing environmental concerns. During the project preparation,
MPWT (i) prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to be applied during
construction; (ii) updated the policy frameworks on resettlement and indigenous peoples
being applied to the on-going (IDA financed) Provincial and Rural Infrastructure Project
(PRIP); and (iii) prepared a safeguard policy framework (ESSF) describing the screening
criteria, the EMP, the Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework (CRPF) and
the Indigenous Peoples Development Framework (IPDF) for the project. A Technical
Environmental Guidelines (TEG) has been drafted and it will be finalized with assistance
from consultants to be recruited under the existing PHRD grant. The TEG will comprise:
(i) generic environmental specification for contractors, (ii) specific requirements for
activities carried out in the protected and/or naturally/cultural sensitive areas, (iii)
environmental guidelines for design and construction works, and (iv) operation guideline
for monitoring and reporting. MPWT will ensure effective implementation of potential
negative impacts at all stages (planning and pre-construction, construction, operations).

 A Social and Environmental Unit (SEU) was formally established as part of the
Department of Planning (DOP) of the General Department for Planning and
Administration (GDPA). However, knowledge and capacity of this unit remain
inadequate. At present there are four social staff and three environmental staff in the
unit. Capacity of other MPWT departments and offices responsible for implementation
of the safeguard measures during planning (Technical Research Center); construction
(Road Infrastructure Department); and operations (Department of Administration, and
General Department of Road Transport) is also inadequate. There has been no safeguard
staff at MPWT provincial level (PDPWT) although a few staff was trained on safeguard
issues. A comprehensive training through training courses and on-the-job training will be
necessary.

 Funding from the project will be provided to strengthen: (i) supervision and monitoring
of safeguard compliance, including reporting; (ii) safeguard training, including
consultation with local agencies and communities; (iii) mainstreaming of safeguard
requirements into MPWT operations for road rehabilitation and maintenance; and (iv)

training on implementation of the Resettlement Decree. Safeguard training will be
initiated soon with funding support from the existing PHRD grant.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the population living along the project roads. During the
planning stage, the GDPW of MPWT will ensure that: (i) all districts and villages are
properly and timely consulted and informed of the road maintenance activities, given the
opportunity to express their concerns on potential impacts, and are presented with the
mitigations measures included in the contract documents; and (ii) provisions of the
safeguards policies are effectively disclosed, via public posting or by community
meetings. The ESSF was disclosed (both in English and Khmer) to the public in Phnom
Penh (at MPWT's office, the World Bank office, ADB office, AusAid office) as well as
in MPWT's provincial offices (i.e. PPWT offices).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02/05/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/06/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/06/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02/05/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/06/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/06/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02/05/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/06/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/06/2008
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process            Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                 Ms Maria Margarita Nunez    04/01/2008
Environmental Specialist:         Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul     04/01/2008
Social Development Specialist     Mr Chaohua Zhang            04/01/2008
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Junhui Wu                04/03/2008
 Comments:

