Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC830 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P084787 
Project Name: Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development 
Task Team Leader: Steven N. Schonberger 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.30 
 GERMANY: 
BMZ 
1.20
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective of the proposed project is to complement recent progress in  
 
land administration, management of forests and protected areas to reorient the current land  
 
allocation practices of Government to support sustainable, more equitable rural economic 
growth  
 
through:  
 
.
Distribution of good quality state land, suitable for agriculture with appropriate support  
 
services to qualifying landless and land-poor households.  
 
.
Implementation of more transparent and technically appropriate mechanisms for state  
 
land allocation and management, including agricultural concessions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would extend the current LMAP framework to provide focused support for  
 
implementation of improved state land allocation and management. The program would  
 
facilitate linkages to management of other state lands such as production forests and protected  
 
areas. The project would also provide a linkage between Government.s land allocation and  
 
agricultural development activities.  
Page  2
o
Implementation of Social Land Concessions (US$12 million estimate):  
 
.
Identification of suitable land based on participatory approaches such as participatory  
 
land use planning and allocation.  
 
.
Selection of beneficiaries based on clear criteria and subject to transparent, verifiable  
 
procedures with strong social participation.  
 
.
Provision of a basic support package for beneficiary families, which can include access to  
 
finance, elements of transport, housing, tools  
 
.
Provision of basic infrastructure and social services on a community-driven basis .  
 
probably through Cambodia.s existing decentralization framework.  
 
.
Production and marketing support for rural livelihoods.  
 
o
Strengthened Capacity for State Lands Management (US$4 million estimate):  
 
.
Regulatory framework, guidelines, capacity building and implementation support for  
 
identification, assessment, classification and allocation of state lands.  
 
.
Regulatory framework, guidelines, capacity building and implementation support for  
 
assessment of current economic land concessions and evaluation of proposed future  
 
economic land concessions.  
 
.
Transparency, monitoring and evaluation of public land allocation and land use activities.  
 
.
Regulatory framework and capacity building support for the enforcement of the land law,  
 
specifically the recovery of illegally obtained state land  
 
o
Institutional Strengthening and Overall Project Management (US$2 million estimate):  
 
.
Institutional strengthening for development of institutions at the local and national levels to  
 
support program implementation.  
 
.
Transparency, monitoring and evaluation of public land allocation based on participatory  
 
approaches and strong civil society involvement  
 
.
Capacity building for beneficiary communities and stakeholders  
 
.
Project Management Support at all levels  
 
.
Reporting and Outreach   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The specific sites for implementation will be determined during preparation based on land  
 
availability and land suitability for social concessions. Site identification will integrate an  
 
environmental and social screening mechanism.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has been implementing a number of IDA-financed projects with safeguards  
 
requirements. While this has resulted in a general knowledge of safeguards and development of  
 
regulatory frameworks for safeguards implementation, actual compliance has required constant  
 
capacity strengthening . particularly at the provincial and district implementation levels . and  
 
supervision.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASRE) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In identifying potential social concession areas, and in assisting government with developing 
implementing guidelines for economic concessions, environmental screening and evaluation 
procedures may be required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
In cases where squatters are present on economic concessions there may be some scope for 
resettlement   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In cases where squatters are present on economic concessions there may be some scope for 
resettlement   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Steven N. Schonberger 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
 
Comments:   
