Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3458
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P101156 
Project Name:  Demand for Good Governance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 2, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASSO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (30%);Other social services (23%);General public administration 
sector (17%);Sub-national government administration (15%);Media (15%) 
Theme:  Other accountability/anti-corruption (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.44 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 3.62
5.06 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to enhance the demand for good governance 
(DFGG) in priority reform areas by strengthening institutions, supporting partnerships, 
and sharing lessons. The state and non-state institutions and partnerships supported will 
be those that (a) promote, (b) mediate, (c) respond to, or (d) monitor to inform DFGG. 
The priority reform areas where DFGG approaches will be supported are those identified 
in the Governance Pillar of the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Cambodia, 
viz., (i) private sector development, (ii) natural resource management, (iii) public 
financial management, and (iv) decentralization and promoting citizens’ partnerships for 
better governance.  
 
The project will contribute to the Government’s and the Bank’s higher level objectives 
of gradually improving governance. It recognizes, however, that no single project can 
address all the challenges for strengthening DFGG. Therefore a comprehensive long-term 
effort is required of which this project is one modest piece. The project also supports 
several CAS objectives by strengthening the linkages between demand-side approaches 
and supply-side activities supported through a number of operations in the four priority 
Page  2
sectors of the Governance Pillar. Finally, the project will promote learning about new 
approaches to building DFGG in Cambodia as well as other countries, by working with 
both state and non-state actors concurrently, and constructively linking their work.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components: (i) Support to State Institutions, (ii) Support to Non-
State Institutions, and (iii) Coordination and Learning as described below.  
 
Component 1: Support to State Institutions. The project’s first component will support 
four promising state institutions (SIs) and programs. These institutions have committed 
leadership and/or demonstrated success in fulfilling one or more DFGG functions 
(promotion, mediation, response or monitoring). In addition, they are active in the 
priority reform areas of the CAS Governance Pillar. The SIs were selected for support 
through a thorough, six-month long process of consultations with government, donors, 
and civil society organizations, informed by review of existing institutional and political 
economy assessments in Cambodia.  
 
The four selected SIs (and the ways in which they enhance DFGG) are: (a) The 
Arbitration Council (AC) (Component 1A) - a quasi-judicial body that mediates DFGG 
and contributes to building an effective governance environment for private sector 
development by resolving collective labor disputes between employers and employees 
when such disputes cannot be settled through prior conciliation; (b) The Ministry of 
National Assembly-Senate Relations and Inspection (MONASRI) (Component 1B) - a 
relatively new ministry engaged in promoting and mediating DFGG through its mandate 
for law dissemination and complaints handling; (c) The One Window Services Office 
(OWSO) and District Ombudsman (DO) (Component 1C) – two flagship reforms at the 
district level piloted by the Ministry of Interior (MOI) that respond to and mediate DFGG 
respectively by providing certain basic administrative services to citizens and small 
businesses under a single roof, and creating an avenue for receiving complaints from 
citizens and the business community on the performance of district officials; and (d) 
Radio National Kampuchea (RNK) (Component 1D) - the national public radio 
broadcasting station, which will help promote, mediate and monitor DFGG by filling a 
gap in public availability of balanced, accurate and up-to-date radio programs, thus 
informing and facilitating dialogue between citizens, non-state actors, businesses and 
government on topics of public interest.  
 
With IDA financing of US$ 10.66 million under this component, the expected support 
to the above institutions will vary, but will generally cover: (a) improving and scaling up 
the scope and coverage of existing operations; (b) piloting new initiatives; (c) adding 
communication and partnership programs to support and extend these activities; (d) 
building capacity through technical assistance (TA) and training; (e) improving facilities, 
office equipment, supplies, and transportation; (f) providing performance-based salary 
incentives; (g) supporting monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and learning activities, (h) 
implementing fiduciary arrangements; and (i) using other anti-corruption, good 
governance and risk management measures.  
 
Page  3
In terms of implementation, each of the four SIs is being treated as a separate 
implementing agency (IA) in charge of managing their specific subcomponent. The 
project is aiming to work as far as possible with the existing IA structures in order to 
promote ownership and sustainability over the longer term. However measures have been 
included to prepare IA structures for project implementation by strengthening processes, 
building existing staff capacity and allowing for additional recruitment of staff and 
consultants to support implementation as needed. A transparent merit-based pay initiative 
(MBPI) and performance-based Priority Mission Groups (PMG) incentive system have 
also been proposed for IA staff to provide the right incentives for high performance. 
Finally, a Multi-Stakeholder Advisory Committee, which has been set up for each SI 
during project preparation, will provide strategic feedback and guidance during 
implementation.  
 
Component 2: Support to Non-State Institutions: With IDA financing of US$ 4.27 
million, this component is designed to provide grants and capacity-building assistance to 
non-state actors (NSAs) so as to strengthen their governance-related work. All NSAs 
receiving grants will be required to commit to a set of “Constructive Engagement 
Principles”, which are being prepared in consultation with the Government and NSAs.  
 
Two forms of grants will be offered: (a) Partnership Grants (Component 2A - about 
25% of all grants) – which will go to activities proposed by NSAs that complement and 
support the work with one or more of the four SIs in Component 1, and (b) Thematic 
Grants (Component 2B – about 75% of all grants) – that will support NSA-led initiatives 
that strengthen DFGG in the four priority reform areas of the CAS Governance Pillar and 
will be independent of the activities of the four SIs supported in Component 1.  
 
Three different sizes of grants – small (<$15,000), medium ($15,000 to $50,000)and 
large ($50,000 to $150,000) will be provided under the Component. The medium and 
larger grants aim to scale up existing NSA pilots and strengthen coalitions and networks 
of NSAs. The smaller grants aim at supporting grassroots initiatives and new DFGG 
ideas. Given these different sizes and purposes, two grant-making mechanisms will be 
used: (i) a Development Marketplace-like competition (a high profile, ‘trade fair’ type 
event to select medium and large grants), and (ii)asmall grants program (with a simpler 
application process for smaller initiatives). In addition, the component will support 
learning activities and capacity building for NSAs (Component 2C).  
 
For implementation of Component 2, the Government agreed that, for independence and 
credibility, management should be entrusted to a non-state entity. Through a rigorous 
identification process, in which several alternatives were considered, The Asia 
Foundation (TAF) was selected to be the IA for Component 2, given its extensive 
experience in both governance issues and complex grant-making in Cambodia. TAF will 
establish a management team and a group of full-time staff to support implementation. 
They will also receive support from existing TAF units locally and internationally. For 
deciding on grants, an independent multi-stakeholder Grant-Making Committee (GMC) 
with representatives from CSOs, the private sector, Government and other stakeholders 
will be established. The selected GMC members are expected to  be widely respected and 
Page  4
high-profile i
ndividuals within their sector, and will be required to sign a ‘Code of 
Conduct’ to help guard againstconflicts of interest.  
 
Component 3: Coordination and Learning: With IDA financing of US$ 2.42 million, 
this component aims to (a) support effective implementation of the project overall, 
ensuring its timely progress and strategic relevance vis-Ã -vis the evolvingCambodian 
context (Component 3A: Coordination), and (b) raise awareness of and building capacity 
in designing and implementing DFGG activities across and beyond the institutions 
directly supported by the project (Component 3B: Learning). It will seek to promote a 
“ripple effect” of constructive engagement across stateand non-state institutions by 
showcasing effective partnerships emerging from the project. Component 3B will work to 
achieve these objectives through its: (i) Awareness Raising and Capacity Building 
Program; (ii) Communications Program, and (iii) an action-oriented Studies Program.  
 
For implementing Component 3, the Ministry of Interior (MOI) will appoint a high-
level official as Project Coordinator to supervise overall implementation and will set up a 
Project Coordination Office (PCO) within the Ministry which will be responsible for 
daily management of the project and dialogue with the Bank supervision team. A Project 
Coordination Group (PGC) will be established, consisting of the Project Directors of the 
different IAs (four from Component 1 and one from TAF for Component 2), civil society 
representatives, and representatives from MEF and other Ministries. The PCG will be 
responsible providing guidance on strategic planning and overseeing progress monitoring 
of the project. The PCO will serve as the secretariat of the PCG.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope. However, different elements will target specific locations 
and at different stages of project implementation. For instance, the law dissemination by 
MONASRI will be undertaken in only a small set of provinces in the first year and then 
be scaled up nationally by the final year of implementation. Of relevance for safeguard 
analysis, are (a) Component 1C (OWSO-DO) which will target urban capital districts in 
all provinces of the country and will require minor construction and/or renovation of 
existing office buildings; (b) Component 3 which may also require renovation of an 
existing office in Phnom Penh; and (c) the RNK subcomponent, whose radio transmitter 
is currently located within the urban area of Phnom Penh and will require repair and 
possibly relocation during the project implementation period.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John D. Clark (EASSO) 
Ms Maria Teresa Serra (EASSO) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During the project preparation, two issues emerged which merited attention and which 
relate to Civil Works under Components 1C and 3, and the issue of the RNK radio 
transmitter repairs under Component 1D. These are described in more detail below.  
 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
The safeguard classification of the project is Category B (Partial Assessment). The 
trigger for the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) policy was the RNK transmitter 
issue.  The project does not trigger the policy on indigenous peoples (OP 4.10) since none 
of the activities specifically target ethnic minorities or indigenous communities. The two 
safeguards-related issues which merited attention are described below.  
 
1) Minor civil works are envisaged in two cases. Under Component 1C, construction 
and/or renovation of offices for the OWSO and DO that will be established in the 
participating districts is foreseen. Under Component 3, similar works may be required to 
accommodate the PCO (and possibly a Governance Resource and Learning Center). In 
both cases, it is expected that existing buildings will be rehabilitated and that new 
construction will be minor. The IAs have confirmed that all works will be done on 
existing Government property and there will be no land acquisition or involuntary 
resettlement. The IAs will follow a set of specific environmental safeguards guidelines 
that have been agreed upon by the Government and Bank at project appraisal. Civil 
works are excluded from the eligible activities to be funded in Component 2.  
 
2) Repair of RNK’s transmitter. During project preparation, a technical assessment of 
the transmission system was undertaken jointly by RNK and AusAID-supported 
engineers and revealed that (i) the existing 200 kW transmitter was operating at only 20-
30 percent of its rated capacity; and (ii) repairs were the least-cost option to increase its 
power output, so as to allow better coverage in remote areas in the country. RNK 
requested financing of about US$ 290,000 for repair (and purchase of spare parts) of the 
main (200 kW) transmitter and a standby (25 kW) transmitter. The study also 
Page  6
recommended that a due diligence analysis be undertaken to: (i) determine whether the 
increase in output could be done within the internationally recognized general public 
safety limits for radio frequency electromagnetic radiation (EMR);  and (ii) assess 
whether, and what, measures would be necessary to ensure safety of workers and nearby 
residents at the current site. Following the study’s recommendations, RNK (with AusAID 
funding) carried outtwo other technical assessments which were subsequently evaluated 
by an independent review funded by the Bank. The conclusion was that the EMR 
emissions from the RNK transmission tower, at its current and increased capacity, are 
within internationally accepted general public safety levels but a number of measures 
should be implemented to improve the site hazard signage and restrict access around the 
AM mast. These measures have been agreed to by RNK and are currently under 
implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to 
the implementation of anticipated future activities given their nature and scale. 
Environmental aspects will be taken into account by the project-supported activities 
during the activity cycle, so as to ensure that any concerns that may arise are addressed at 
the planning, design and implementation phases as needed.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Reducing transmission output and/or immediate relocation of the RNK transmitter was 
initially considered but was found to be unnecessary given the results of the detailed 
technical analyses and expert review subsequently carried out regarding EMR levels at 
current and proposed output levels of the transmitter.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
set of preventive safety and security measures in relation to the EMR emissions from 
the transmitter are being undertaken by RNK during the pre-implementation period. 
These include posting hazard signs (in both Khmer and English) on the front and rear of 
the power transformer cabinet and restricting public access to the compound where the 
transmitter is located. In addition, building on the assessments undertaken during 
preparation, RNK has agreed to prepare an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to 
ensure the application of sound environmental and social safeguard practices and 
standards, should there be a need to further repair the RNK transmitter in the future. An 
EMP may also be required if the Government decides to eventually relocate the 
transmitter complex to a new site, away from populated areas due to general 
encroachment as a result of rapid urban growth in the vicinity of the transmission site or 
for any other reason. The negotiated Financing Agreement includes standard Bank 
requirements for implementation of such an EMP.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders involved for the RNK transmitter issue include: (a) residents living 
in the vicinity of the RNK transmitter, (b) workers carrying out repairs of and overseeing 
on-site operation of the transmitter, (c) the MOI (the project executing agency), (d) 
AusAID, and (e) the RNK.  
 
The MOI posted the agreed safeguards framework (presented in Annex 10 of the Project 
Appraisal Document) and the relevant assessment reports (including the environmental 
safeguards guidelines for civil works) on its website. The relevant safeguards-related 
documents were also sent to the Bank Infoshop. In addition, it was agreed at negotiations 
that the Government shall: (i) in the case of the repair and operation of the existing RNK 
transmitter, disclose to the public the detailed mitigation plans at the current site; (ii) in 
case of relocation of the RNK transmitter, disclose to the public the relocation plans to a 
new site; and (iii) carry out public consultations on the said mitigation or relocation 
plans, as the case may be, before implementation of mitigation measures at each of the 
said site.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  8
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
10/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Teresa Serra 
10/28/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr John D. Clark 
10/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Janmejay Singh 
10/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cyprian F. Fisiy 
10/29/2008 
Comments:   
