Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3563
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P102284 
Project Name:  Cambodia Second Health Sector Support Program 
Task Team Leader:  Toomas Palu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development30.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  50.00
80.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project will support the implementation of Government's Health Strategic Plan 
(2008-2015, HSP2) to improve health outcomes through strengthening institutional 
capacity and mechanisms by which the Government and Development Partners can 
achieve more effective and efficient sector performance.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project (HSSP2) has a health system strengthening focus, with components that are 
aligned to the Government's HSP2).  It includes: (a) Strengthening Health Service 
Delivery through (i) the provision of Service Delivery Grants and contracting for health 
services at provincial level and below; and (ii) investments for the improvement, 
replacement, and extension of the health service delivery network.  (b) Improving Health 
Financing which will support (a) health protection for the poor through the consolidation 
of health equity funds under common management and oversight arrangements and 
expansion of health equity fund coverage; and (ii) supporting the development of health 
financing policies and institutional reforms.  (c) Strengthening Human Resources will 
Page  2
focus on (i) strengthening pre- and in-service training; (ii) strengthening human resource 
management in the Ministry of Health; and (iii) supporting the Merit Based Performance 
Incentive scheme for health managers and key technical staff participating in the 
implementation of the HSP2 at central and sub-national level.  (d) Strengthening Health 
System Stewardship Function by supporting (i) development of policy packages 
identified, strengthening the institutional capacity (in particular meeting the demands 
from Decentralization and Deconcentration); (ii) private sector regulation and 
partnerships; (iii) supporting governance and stewardship functions of the national 
programs and centers overseeing the three HSP2 strategic programs; and (iv) 
empowering new structures for increasing local accountability of health care providers to 
citizens.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Coverage will be national.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helene Monika Carlsson Rex (PRMGE) 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASRE) 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment  
 
The Project is the third Bank support to the health sector in Cambodia and is a 
continuation of what has been carried out under the second phase. An environmental 
review (ER) was conducted by the Government on the first phase of the Health Sector 
Support Project (HSSP) and an environmental management plan (EMP) was prepared 
and adopted to address environmental and human health impacts. The review also 
analyzed the World Bank’s applicable safeguard policies as well as Cambodia’s 
Page  3
environmental policies, laws and regulations and their implications for the Project. The 
ER identified the following Project activities as the sources of environmental and human 
health impacts, which are still deemed relevant and applicable to HSSP2: (i) civil works 
activities involving the construction and/or rehabilitation of health centers and renovation 
of hospital buildings; (ii) health care wastes (HCW); (iii) asbestos in construction 
materials; and (iv) pesticide use in malaria and dengue vector control, which may be 
supported by the Project. An updated EMP for HSSP2, based on the lessons learned and 
experience from HSSP was prepared by MOH to address the environmental and health 
impacts. The updated EMP and Pest Management and Monitoring Plan (PMMP) were 
reviewed by the World Bank and found to be satisfactory and in compliance with the 
World Bank's policies.  The updated EMP was disclosed locally in Khmer and in the 
Bank’s InfoShop.  
 
Civil Works Impacts and Management. The Project will finance renovation of hospitals 
and construction and/or rehabilitation of small health care facilities such as health 
centers. The experience in HSSP confirmed that civil works and the corresponding 
environmental impacts were minimal and temporary and limited to the construction 
phase. The impacts included noise, air emissions and generation of construction wastes. 
The procedures and measures to address these impacts under HSSP, which have been 
assessed to be adequate, will be adopted. These include incorporating environmental and 
health concerns in the design of the facilities, the inclusion of proper housekeeping 
measures and pollution control in the civil works contracts and the use of environmental 
checklists to screen site-specific impacts.  
 
Health Care Waste Generation and Management. The ER of the first phase assessed that 
the potential environmental and human health risks associated with HCW, particularly 
hazardous chemical and infectious wastes, are well-defined and can be readily addressed 
through the adoption of proper HCW Management policy practices encompassing: waste 
minimization, recycling and re-use, proper handling, storage, transportation, treatment 
and disposal of HCWs. Government, with assistance from the WHO, has developed 
comprehensive HCW Management Guidelines to address both waste management and 
hygiene issues. The Guidelines incorporate best HCW management practices and are 
intended for practical application at health care facilities with limited available financial 
and technical resources. In addition, the basic design of health centers includes a water 
supply system, small incinerator and septic tank. A review of the performance of HSSP, 
including the field visits, indicated that the Guidelines are adequate to address the 
impacts and that HSSP is in overall compliance with the Guidelines as well as in the 
basic design of health care facilities. The same Guidelines and basic health care facility 
designs will be adopted in HSSP2.  
 
Asbestos Management. The main activities that could have implications for asbestos 
generation and management are the construction of health care facilities. The ER 
suggested that asbestos in Cambodia is a problem in existing building containing fibre 
cement products. While clay roofing tiles are preferred in provincial and district HCFs, 
fibre-containing ceiling sheets are still commonly used. However, since 2000 the Social 
Fund of the Government has banned the use asbestos-containing fibre concrete materials, 
Page  4
and construction is closely supervised to ensure that contractors will not use cheap 
asbestos-containing materials. The civil works contracts will also contain a provision on 
the use of asbestos-free building materials.  
 
Pesticide Use and Management. The Project may support the purchase of 
pesticides/larvicides to control vectors of malaria and dengue. All pesticides to be 
purchased are synthetic pyrethroids which are considered to pose very low risks to 
humans if used correctly. Under HSSP, all pesticide products have successfully passed 
WHO’s Pesticide Evaluation Scheme (WHOPES), a system set up to promote and 
coordinate the testing and evaluation of pesticides for public health. The same approach 
taken under HSSP will be adopted in HSSP2; an updated PMMP has been prepared and 
will be adopted in HSSP2.  
 
Social  
 
Ill health is a leading cause and consequence of poverty in Cambodia. Health care 
remains for many expensive, of poor quality and difficult to access. Key social 
development issues pertaining to health in Cambodia, include: (i) uneven distribution of 
growth and significant difference between urban and rural and rich and poor households’ 
access to health services and outcomes; (ii) different health needs and challenges among 
women and men; (iii) high vulnerability to poor health and poverty among ethnic 
minorities and in remote areas; and (iv) limited capacity for community participation in 
health service delivery. HSSP2 aims to ensure improved and equitable access to essential 
quality health care and preventative services. Target beneficiaries are mothers, children 
and the poor, all of whom are exposed to high health risks and are disadvantaged in 
accessing affordable health care. Given the Project's focus on maternal health, women of 
reproductive age in particular are expected to benefit from the Project, which will extend 
the health network and making it more affordable.  
 
Under HSSP, a social assessment was produced, and an Ethnic Minorities Development 
Strategy (EMDS), and a Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures were 
also prepared.  The social assessment has been updated for HSSP2, to reflect 
modifications to Project objectives and procedures, as well as changes in the Cambodia 
regulatory framework and World Bank policies.  The updated social assessment takes 
into account consultations with (a) MOH officials, Project partners, and NGOs; (b) recent 
analytical work on equity, gener issues and ethnic minorities; (c) evaluations and 
monitoring of HSSP; and (d) analytical work commissioned for HSSP. The Framework 
for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures has also been updated to ensure compliance 
with current World Bank policy and Cambodia laws.  
 
Ethnic Minorities.  Ethnic minorities face particular challenges in accessing health 
services and tend to be particularly vulnerable to poor health.  Many minority groups live 
in rough-terrain - highland and border areas that are hard to reach - and are generally 
poorer than average.  The sheer physical geography of these settings pose special 
challenges, as well as costs, in terms of accessing, providing and maintaining health care 
services.  By extending the heatlh network and designing it in a way that addresses ethnic 
Page  5
minorities' particular needs and concerns, the Project is envisioned to have a positive 
impact on ethnic moniroties.  
 
HSSP supported renovations of existing buildings on existing sites (endorsed by valid 
MOH land titles), which have not required any resettlement.  The civil works activities of 
HSSP2 are expected to be similar, thus, it is unlikely that the Project will acquire any new 
land.  However, it is not possible to state categorically that no facilities will be 
constructed on new sites, or that no one is living on MOH land.  Consequently, a 
resettlement policy, Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures, laying out 
the processes in case land acquisition is required in the future, has been prepared during 
HSSP2 preparation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project design has sought to minimize financing of new construction, while strengthening 
existing medical waste management systems.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient, under HSSP, carried out an ER, prepared an EMP and implemented the 
mitigating measures set forth in the EMP. With assistance from WHO, Government has 
also prepared a HCW management srategy, as well as a ban on the use of asbestos-
containing construction materials since 2000. An updated EMP has been prepared and 
measures to be implemented for HSSP2 to address environmental and health impacts 
which are similar in nature and magnitude to those in HSSP.  
 
Under HSSP, the Recipient also produced a social assessment, prepared an EMDS and a 
Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures. An updated social assessment, 
EMDS (in the form of an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework--IPPF) and 
Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures have been prepared.  Measures 
to be implemented for HSSP2 to address social issues, resettlement, and indigenous 
peoples’ issues in particular, are very similar in nature to HSSP. With regards to 
indigenous peoples, though similar in most respects, HSSP2 extends Project coverage to 
predominantly ethnic minority Provinces previously covered under other donors' projects.  
Also, HSSP was prepared under an earlier World Bank policy pertaining to indigenous 
peoples. Hence, to ensure compliance with current World Bank Policy (OP 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples) instead of the EMDS, an IPPF has been prepared in consultation 
with affected indigenous peoples.  The IPPF will help to identify health care priorities 
and constraints in ethnic minority communities, and to ensure that HSSP2 designs and 
targets health care improvements that are culturally appropriate and inclusive.  The IPPF 
sets out a two step consultation process.  The first step of this consultation process was 
Page  6
completed during Project preparation, and the second step will take place during the first 
year of Project implementation as part of participatory stock-taking exercise.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders of the Project are MOH policy makers, program planners and 
managers who  will benefit from systems strengthening and capacity building activities, 
as well as from the Project's endorsementof the MOH's HSP2.  Other key ministries, 
notably the Ministry of Economy and Finance, which played a key part in the 
development of the Project design, will continue to play an important role during 
implementation and monitoring.  Civil society will benefit from the opportunities created 
to enhance consumer and community participation in the planning and monitoring of 
services and to increase public accountability. The Project will also broaden the scope for 
community service organizations to work with MOH, as well as private-for-profit 
practitioners, who are also stakeholders in the Project.  
 
Consultaitons with stakeholders included MOH, Central and Provincial Health 
Departments, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Planning, Ministry of 
Women's Affairs, development partners and selected non-governmental organizations, 
research and training institutes who all participated extensively in the design of HSSP2.  
The components were designed in collaboration with MOH and respective partners that 
will lead and implement the components.  Consultations were also held with national 
hospitals, referral hospitals, operational districts, health centers, and indigenous peoples.  
 
Consultations with indigienous peoples' communities, including on the IPPF, were 
carried out in eight villages in three Provinces during HSSP2 preparation.  These 
consultations ascertained through free, prior, and informed consultations that there is 
broad support among the affected communities for HSSP2 and also identified main 
concerns and key issues with regards to indigenous peoples' access to health care.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  8
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Toomas Palu 
05/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bunlong Leng 
05/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helene Monika Carlsson Rex 
05/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
05/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
05/04/2008 
Comments:   
