Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3784 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P106605 
Project Name: Cambodia - Higher Education Quality and Capacity Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Omporn Regel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to produce more highly skilled university graduates 
by improving the access, quality, market relevance, and systemic capacity of higher education 
sub-
sector in Cambodia.  This will enhance Cambodia’s competitiveness and improve its 
capacity to deal with major development issues.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists of four components:  
 
Component 1: Capacity building at both the system and institutional levels. This component is 
to strengthen the management capacity of the higher education sub-sector, both at the central 
Department of Higher Education (DHE) and Accreditation Committee of Cambodia (ACC) 
levels, and of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs).  It will include the following two heavily 
inter-dependent sub-components namely capacity building at the system level and capacity 
building at the institutional (HEI) level. It will include the following two heavily inter-dependent 
sub-components namely capacity building at the system level and capacity building at he in 
intuitional (HEI) level.  
Page  2
Component 2: Competitive Development and Innovation Grants. The objective of this 
component is to improve the focus and quality of learning and teaching in public and private 
HEIs through the strengthening of research capabilities. The component will: (a) improve the 
quality and relevance of academic programs in public and private institutions through fostering 
of research and problem-solving skills; and (b) establish an efficient and sustainable competitive 
mechanism for managing research grant awards to HEIs.  
 
Component 3: Scholarships to Disadvantaged Students. The objective of this component is to 
improve access to higher education for academically qualified but otherwise disadvantaged 
students through the provision of stipend support to set a model of full scholarships. The 
component, is a way to build on and refine the current system of awarding scholarships, and to 
focus on priority areas in line with the Education Sector Support Project (ESSP). The 
scholarships will benefit individual students, and will not involve any direct intervention in nor 
target the values and behavior of ethnic minority communities possessing the characteristics of 
Indigenous People (IP).  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This component is devoted 
to the management and M&E of the project while initiating the establishment of system-wide 
M&E capability.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will have a national coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower understands the importance of safeguards compliance and has been exposed to the 
Bank safeguard policies through implementation of the present Cambodian Education Sector 
Support Project. The borrower is capable and willing to prepare safeguards documents, if they 
are required.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vanna Nil (EASSO) 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The project will not involve civil works except for modernizing existing scientific 
laboratories of local higher education facilities. Giving to the scope and nature of lab 
modernization, formal environmental assessment will not be required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not cause any degradation of natural habitats as defined under the safeguard 
policy. Modernizing existing scientific laboratories will be carried out only in existing facilities. 
existing facilities.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will neither get involved with any clearance of critical or respectful trees nor any 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
degradation of critical forest areas as defined under the safeguard policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will neither involve any procurement of pesticides nor cause any increased use of 
pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, 
religious, or unique natural values.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The scholarship component of the project is intended to increase access to higher education 
for ethnic minorities, among others. But benefits are targeted to individuals, and no community-
level impacts are envisaged..   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not involve any land acquisition because the project only modernizes the 
existing scientific labs.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project does not relate to any dam.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project does not relate to international waterways as defined in the policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined in the policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/19/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard related documents are not required as the project does not trigger any Bank 
safeguard policies.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Omporn Regel 
10/15/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
10/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
10/30/2008 
Comments:   
