Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3704
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P109925 
Project Name:  KH--EDUCATION FOR ALL FAST TRACK INITIATIVE 
CATALYTIC TRUST FUND 
Task Team Leader:  Luis Benveniste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund 
57.40
57.40 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program development objective is to speed up progress towards improved grade 1 
right-age entry, net enrollment, retention, progression rates and grade 6 completion rates 
in primary education.   
 
3. Project Description 
This education investment program is organized around three focal areas:  
 
Component 1: Early Childhood Education Expansion  
 
This component will fulfill the promise under the ESSP 2006-10 to increase the number 
of young Cambodians in disadvantaged communes who can benefit from ECE services 
through the construction of formal preschool classrooms in existing primary schools as 
well as the development of new community-based and home-based ECE interventions, 
within a coherent ECE policy framework.  These efforts will be rigorously evaluated 
through a randomized impact evaluation design.  ESSSUAP represents a significant 
investment scale up for ECE interventions from planned MoEYS resources under the 
ESSP 2006-10.  For the period 2008-2010, planned MoEYS investments were estimated 
Page  2
at US$825,000.  The State Assets Department will be responsible for civil works, while 
the Early Childhood Education Department will be responsible for program 
implementation.  
 
Component 2: Improving Primary Education Access and Quality  
 
This component promotes the ESSP 2006-10 goal of universal primary completion 
through classroom extensions of existing primary schools to provide six grades of 
education and provision of demand-side incentives, while promoting Child Friendly 
Schooling initiatives to enhance educational quality and strengthening teacher 
professional capacity.  These efforts will be rigorously evaluated through a randomized 
impact evaluation design.  ESSSUAP represents a significant increase for classroom 
construction in incomplete schools vis-
Ã
-vis Government’s capital budget plans.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Development and Capacity Building  
 
The purpose of this component is to enable decentralized educational management and 
monitoring by District Offices of Education (DOE), Provincial Offices of Education 
(POE) and the Inspectorate of Education.  The context of these interventions will be the 
rollout of a new school inspection policy, geared towards enhancing direct support 
services and responsiveness to school needs. ESSSUAP will also finance the 
strengthening of administrative processes for procurement and financial management at 
central, provincial and district levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program will be implemented nationwide and targeting areas of incomplete primary 
schools, with highest demand of preschool and primary classrooms.  The construction 
sites are existing incomplete primary schools or District Offices of Education.  In the 
event that classroom construction may take place in a new site, assurances will be taken 
that land is contributed by the Royal Government of Cambodia with consultation and 
management with key local stakeholders, including local community, local authorities, 
school management boards and pagoda committees.  However, at appraisal stage, no civil 
works are envisioned in new sites.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vanna Nil (EASSO) 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Given to the programmatic nature of ESSSUAP, two safeguard policies are triggered: the 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). Lessons learned 
and experiences from the first Cambodia Education Sector Support Project (CESSP) were 
integrated in designing this second phase of the education support program to address 
potential issues related to adverse impacts. As a consequence, MoEYS prepared an 
environmental management plan (EMP) and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to mitigate 
potential minor impacts concerning civil works and disclosed these documents locally in 
Khmer and in the World Bank’s Infoshop.  
 
Environmental Issues  
 
Civil Works Impact and Management. ESSSUAP will finance expansion and 
construction of preschool classrooms, primary classrooms and educational facilities 
(District Offices of Education; Preschool Teacher Training College classrooms) largely 
within existing premises.  Given the nature and scale of civil works for classroom and 
sanitary toilet construction, a formal environmental assessment report was not necessary.  
The program builds on existing practices of the on-going CESSP project, where a 
standardized classroom and sanitary toilet construction design is in line with policy 
guidance of MoEYS.  The State Assets Department is responsible for setting construction 
standards of educational facilities and monitoring implementation activities.  Classroom 
design will include appropriate ventilation, lighting, sanitation facilities and ramps for 
disabled students, as appropriate. Reviews of community-built schools are conducted 
periodically under CESSP and found satisfactory where communities received 
construction supervision training before the start of school construction.  
 
The assessment of CESSP confirmed that these types of construction activities have 
temporary, minor environmental impacts.  They are normally limited to the construction 
phase.  The impacts included dust and generation of construction waste which can be 
mitigated through good construction practices, including proper housekeeping measures, 
proper storage and disposal of excavated earth materials, and pollution control.  Civil 
Page  4
work contracts and procedures to address these impacts will be adopted for this program.  
Contractor bid specifications for school buildings, latrines and water supply wells have 
already been developed, inclusive of environmental provisions for demolition and 
construction techniques, unexploded ordinance (UXO), noise and dust, site and waste 
management, asbestos containing material management, cultural and historic resources, 
and provision of clean water and sanitation facilities.  
 
Social Issues  
 
The program strives to support the Royal Government of Cambodia in its commitment 
towards achieving high quality basic Education For All and promoting equitable access to 
educationâ
 ”inclusive of girls, ethnic minorities, children with disabilities and 
disadvantaged children.  In addition, strengthening decentralized school planning and 
monitoring will motivate community participation, ownership and accountability.  
 
A
primary area of concern is differential access to program benefits.  Scholarships are 
being targeted in three provinces that have large shares of children living in remote 
areasâ
 ”where many of them belong to ethnic minority groupsâ ”or former Khmer 
Rouge controlled areas.  ESSSUAP will also sponsor a disability prevalence survey to 
estimate how physical and mental disabilities may affect school participation and 
performance in order to draw lessons learned to better target school services.  
 
With regards to gender and ethnic minority issues, the proposed early childhood care 
interventions, school facilities expansion, school improvement grants and scholarship 
programs are expected to play a positive influence in enabling girls and ethnic minority 
children to complete primary schooling by reducing the distance away from school (since 
children will not have to travel to other villages to study beyond the earliest grades) and 
diminishing the direct and opportunity costs to education.  Targeted scholarship schemes 
are an actionable measure in the General Policy for Highland Peoples Development 
(prepared by the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Highlands People Development in 
1997).  An Indigenous Peoples Plan has been prepared and is being publicly disclosed.   
 
Lack of toilet facilities is a factor often cited as a barrier to female participation.  All 
school construction will include lavatories for boys and girls.  Teacher professional 
development activities may also serve as an avenue to challenge stereotypical attitudes 
towards gender.  Teachers can raise awareness about the importance of equal access to 
education for boys and girls in their communities and promote attitudinal changes 
towards the role of girls and women in domestic life as well as in society or the economy.  
MoEYS has also endorsed the recommendations from the Remote Schools Teacher 
Development Framework and is actively recruiting ethnic minorities as teachers.  
 
Improving access to basic education demands close contact and dialogue with parents, 
communities and local stakeholders.  The program promotes local participation and 
involvement through a variety of avenues, such as community-contracting schemes for 
school facilities development, participation in school support committees, involvement in 
school planning and encouragement of local accountability through public dissemination 
of information on school performance and resource allocation.  
Page  5
Civil society participation was incorporated during the program design stage through 
active involvement of the NGO Education Partnership.  
 
The program will be carried out in existing school premises and resettlement is not 
perceived to be likely. A compensation policy will be consulted and adopted as 
appropriate, in the incidence of teachers or families residing on designated construction 
sites.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The program design has sought to expand preschools, primary classrooms and 
educational facilities (District Offices of Education; Preschool Teacher Training College 
classrooms), while minimizing investments in new construction sites, in order to expand 
access and upgrade quality of primary education.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In the context of the existing CESSP, the Borrower has fulfilled all safeguard documents 
and actions required in a satisfactory manner.  For ESSSUAP, MoEYS continued its 
commitment to address environmental and social concerns.  MoEYS produced an EMP 
and an IPP and will implement mitigation measures contained in these two documents to 
address potential minimal impacts on the environment during construction phase and 
indigenous peoples in relation to the scholarships program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key Government and civil society stakeholders have been involved in the identification 
of preschool and primary educational needs and prioritization.  At the time of program 
implementation, they will remain involved, in coordination with School Support 
Committees, in identifying children and communities to benefit from improved 
educational access and quality.  The primary beneficiaries of the Program are poor 
children, especially from disadvantaged backgrounds, girls, ethnic minority areas and 
high poverty incidence locations.  Parents of preschool and primary school children will 
highly benefit from the improved accessibility, affordability, and quality of primary 
education.  Secondary stakeholders are policy makers, program planners, education 
managers and various public and non-public institutions including provincial education 
departments, Ministry of Economy and Finance, development partners, NGOs and civil 
society who participated in the design of the program and will benefit through various 
institutional development and capacity building processes and activities.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/28/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/28/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This program is classified as Category “C,” which has minor or no adverse triggers to 
environmental and social safeguards. Incorporating good civil works practices in the 
construction design and bidding contracts as guided in EMP will ensure minimal, 
localized and mitigated impacts.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
Yes 
Page  7
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luis Benveniste 
05/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bunlong Leng 
05/28/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Vanna Nil 
05/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr James A. Stevens 
05/29/2008 
Comments:   
