Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3282
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P106603 
Project Name:  Road Asset Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Margarita Nunez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.50 
 Asian 
Development 
Bank 
6.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.80
28.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to ensure continued effective use of the rehabilitated 
national and provincial road network in support of the economic development in 
Cambodia.  It will do so by improving the institutional and technical capacity of the 
Ministry of Public Works and Transport for road maintenance planning, budgeting and 
operations, and by expanding and strengthening maintenance activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components that are designed to balance periodic maintenance 
investments with institutional support and capacity development for prioritization, 
planning, and technical aspects of maintenance activities.  A detailed project outline is 
elaborated upon in Annex 4. A brief description, including total estimated project costs 
and IDA-financing amounts, is summarized as follows:  
 
Page  2
Component A - Road Asset Management (Total 
–
US$51.65 million; IDA – US$27.8 
million).  The component includes the preservation of MPWT’s road network through 
annual programs for periodic maintenance works and provides necessary implementation 
support.  The periodic maintenance works to be undertaken in the first year of the project 
have been defined, and in subsequent years are to be defined using the RMDS system.  It 
will also support RGC funded routine maintenance, which will be carried out as output 
based contracts.  
 
Implementation support includes: (i) the preparation of designs and bidding documents 
for the first year works; (ii) advice to MPWT on technical designs, cost estimates, 
bidding documents, contract management, and safeguard activities for works in 
subsequent years; (iii) construction supervision of civil works throughout the project, and 
(iv) financial and technical audits annually.  
 
Component B - Capacity Development (Total – US$2.73 million; IDA – US$1.85 
million).  This component, which comprises seven subcomponents, will support the 
capacity development at the institutional, organizational and individual level for MPWT 
to perform its road asset management functions effectively and efficiently. It will include: 
(i) institutional and (ii) technical capacity development for road asset management within 
the GDPW; (iii) private sector development and divestiture of some MPWT force 
account units; (iv) road safety; (v) HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns; (vi) resettlement 
decree training, and (vii) monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes.  
 
Component C – Merit Based Pay Initiative (Total – US$0.70 million; IDA – US$0.50 
million).  This component will provide (i) assistance with assessing and preparing for the 
introduction of the MBPI; and (ii) funding for salary for staff in selected departments of 
the General Department of Public Works (GDPW) and the General Department of 
Planning and Administration (GDPA) of MPWT.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Given the programmatic nature of this Project, three IDA safeguard policies are 
triggered: the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.21), 
and Indigenous Peoples (OD4.20).  No large scale or irreversible impacts are expected as 
the project focuses on the road maintenance of existing assets within the right of way.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Road safety risks are likely to increase. A road safety program has been incorporated and 
will be implemented under the project. Development and application of safeguard 
measures for the subsequent contract roads will also be necessary to ensure that where 
significant impacts are anticipated and/or occur, adequate actions are carried out by 
MPWT to mitigate them.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives are not relevant since the project activities will be carried out along 
the existing roads. To reduce complexity due to the parallel-financing arrangement, the 
project seeks to establish a common set of safeguard reports in an effort to better align 
donor requirements.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
MPWT recognizes the importance of environmental protection and has made basic 
commitments to addressing environmental concerns. In 2006, the Social and 
Environmental Unit (SEU) was formally established as a division in the planning 
department.  However, knowledge and capacity of this unit remain inadequate.  At 
present there are four social staff and three environmental staff in the unit.  There has 
been no safeguard staff at MPWT provincial level (PDPWT) although a few staff was 
Page  4
trained on safeguard issues. A comprehensive training through training courses and on-
the-job training will be necessary.  
 
The MPWT will ensure effective implementation of potential negative impacts at all 
stages (planning and pre-construction, construction, operations). Funding from the project 
will be provided to strengthen: (i) supervision and monitoring of safeguard compliance, 
including reporting; (ii) safeguard training, including consultation with local agencies and 
communities; (iii) mainstreaming of safeguard requirements into MPWT operations for 
road rehabilitation and maintenance; and (iv) training on implementation of the 
Resettlement Decree.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Safeguard Policies were disclosed (both in English and Khmer) to the public in 
Phnom Penh (at MPWT’s office, the World Bank office, ADB office, AusAid office) as 
well as in MPWT’s provincial offices (i.e. PPWT offices) in February 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Margarita Nunez 
02/06/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul 
02/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
02/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
02/07/2008 
Comments:   
