Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/21/2008 
Report No.:  46295
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P109648 
Project Name:  Cambodia Trade Development Support Program 
Task Team Leader:  Stephane Guimbert 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 8, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (P);Trade facilitation and market 
access (P);Other trade and integration (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.25 
 
Cambodia Trade Development Trust Fund 
12.35
12.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Trade Development Support Program’s (TDSP) development objective is to increase 
RGC’s efficiency in formulating and implementing effective trade policies. This is 
expected to lead to transparent and effective trade-related transactions, export 
competitiveness, and growth. The TDSP’s focus is on establishing an enabling 
environment that maximizes the impact of, and reduces the risk to, other sector- and 
product-specific trade promotion and development activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The TDSP would have four components supporting the implementation of the Trade 
SWAp. Component 1 would mainly support the first pillar on cross-cutting reforms. 
Component 2 and 3 would support the third pillar on capacity. All three components 
would give priorities to reform and capacity development that would enable growth in the 
priority sectors identified in the DTIS and supported by the second pillar of the Trade 
SWAp. Component 4 seeks to build implementation capacity for the TDSP and, by 
extension, the Trade SWAp.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program will be implemented nationwide with policy towards achieving maximized 
contribution of trade to economic development and poverty reduction in the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The overall program operation does not raise any significant environmental or social 
concerns.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term environmental or social impacts are foreseen by this operation.  
The project is financing minor renovations works for existing office building, there is no 
scope for any kind of land acquisition, taking of assets, or restrictions on use of natural 
resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The program will not finance any activities which may either cause depletion of natural 
resources or adverse environmental impacts, but rather capture long-term pro-poor and 
environmentally and socially sustainable development.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
There is no safeguard policy triggered by the program.   
 
Page  3
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders have been consulted through the project preparation to achieve 
maximized pro-poor and sustainable development.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is Category "C" Project of which EIA and/EMP or any disclosure is not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
N/A 
Page  4
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephane Guimbert 
09/25/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bunlong Leng 
09/25/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson 
10/07/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mathew A. Verghis 
10/21/2008 
Comments:   
