Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/09/2008 
Report No.:  AC3458
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P101156 
Project Name:  Demand for Good Governance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 11, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASSO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (30%);Other social services (23%);General public administration 
sector (17%);Sub-national government administration (15%);Media (15%) 
Theme:  Other accountability/anti-corruption (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.32 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 3.41
4.73 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to enhance the demand for good governance 
(DFGG) in priority reform areas by strengthening institutions, supporting partnerships, 
and sharing lessons. The state and non-state institutions and partnerships supported will 
be those that (a) promote, (b) mediate, (c) respond to, or (d) monitor to inform DFGG. 
The priority reform areas where DFGG approaches will be supported are those identified 
in the Governance Pillar of the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Cambodia, 
viz., (i) private sector development, (ii) natural resource management, (iii) public 
financial management, and (iv) decentralization and promoting citizen’s partnerships for 
better governance.  
 
The project will contribute to the Government’s and the Bank’s higher level objectives 
of gradually improving governance. It recognizes, however, that no single project can 
address all the challenges for strengthening DFGG. Therefore a comprehensive long-term 
effort is required of which this project is one modest piece. The project also supports 
several CAS objectives by strengthening the linkages between demand-side approaches 
and supply-side activities supported through a number of operations in the four priority 
Page  2
sectors of the Governance Pillar. Finally, the project will promote learning about new 
approaches to building DFGG in Cambodia as well as other countries, by working with 
both state and non-state actors concurrently, and constructively linking their work.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components: (i) Support to State Institutions, (ii) Support to Non-
State Institutions, and (iii) Coordination and Learning as described below.  
 
Component 1: Support to State Institutions.  The project’s first component willsupport 
four promising state institutions (SIs) and programs. These institutions have committed 
leadership and/or demonstrated success in fulfilling one or more DFGG functions 
(promotion, mediation, response or monitoring). In addition, they are active in the 
priority reform areas of the CAS Governance Pillar. The SIs were selected for support 
through a thorough, six-month long process of consultations with government, donors, 
and civil society organizations, informed by review of existing institutional and political 
economy assessments in Cambodia.  
 
The four selected SIs (and the ways in which they enhance DFGG) are: (a)The 
Arbitration Council (AC) (Component 1A) - a quasi-judicial body that mediates DFGG 
and contributes to building an effective governance environment for private sector 
development by resolving collective labor disputes between employers and employees 
which cannot be settled through prior conciliation; (b)The Ministry of National 
Assembly-Senate Relations and Inspection (MONASRI) (Component 1B) - a relatively 
new ministry engaged in promoting and mediating DFGG through its mandate for law 
dissemination and complaints handling; (c)The One Window Services Office (OWSO) 
and District Ombudsman (DO) (Component 1C) – which are flagship reforms at the 
district level piloted in two provincesin the country by the Ministry of Interior (MOI) that 
respond to and mediate DFGG respectively by providing certain basic administrative 
services to citizens and small businesses under a single roof, and creating an avenue for 
receiving complaints from citizens and the business community on the performance of 
district officials; and (d)Radio National Kampuchea (RNK) (Component 1D) - the 
national public radio broadcasting , which will help promote, mediate and monitor DFGG 
by filling a gap in public availability of balanced, accurate and up-to-date radio programs 
which inform, and facilitate dialogue between, citizens, non-state actors, businesses and 
government on topics of public interest.  
 
With financing of US$ 10.75 million under this component, the expected support to the 
above institutions will vary, but will generally cover: (a) improving and scaling up the 
scope and coverage of existing operations; (b) piloting new initiatives; (c) adding 
communication and partnership programs to support and extend these activities; (d) 
building capacity through technical assistance (TA) and training; (e) improving facilities, 
office equipment, supplies, and transportation; (f) providing performance-based salary 
incentives; (g) supporting monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and learning activities, (h) 
implementing fiduciary arrangements; and (i) using other anti-corruption, good 
governance and risk management measures.  
 
Page  3
In terms of implementation, each of the four SIs supported is being treated as a separate 
implementing agency (IA) in charge of managing their specific subcomponent. The 
project is aiming to work as far as possible with the existing IA structures in order to 
promote ownership and sustainability over the longer term. However measures have been 
included to build existing staff capacity in the IAs and to allow for additional recruitment 
of staff and consultants to support implementation as needed. A transparent merit-based 
pay initiative (MBPI) performance-based Priority Mission Groups (PMG) incentive 
system have also been proposed for IA staff to provide the right incentives for high 
performance. Finally, a Multi-Stakeholder Advisory Committee, which has been set up 
for each SI during project preparation, will provide strategic feedback and guidance 
during implementation.  
 
Component 2: Support to Non-State Institutions:  With financing of US$ 4.50 million, 
this component is designed to provide grants and capacity-building assistance to non-
state actors (NSAs) so as to strengthen their governance-related work. All NSAs 
receiving grants will be required to commit to a set of constructive engagement 
principles, which are being prepared in consultation with the Government and NSAs.  
 
Two forms of grants will be offered: (a) Partnership Grants (Component 2A - about 
25% of all grants) 
–
which will go to activities proposed by NSAs that complement and 
support the work one or more of the four SIs in Component 1, and (b) Thematic Grants 
(Component 2B – about 75% of all grants) – that would support NSA-led initiatives that 
strengthen DFGG in the four priority reform areas of the CAS Governance Pillar and 
would be independent of the activities of the four SIs supported in Component 1.  
 
Three different sizes of grants – small (<$15,000), medium ($15,000 to $50,000)and 
large ($50,000 to $150,000) would be provided under the Component. The medium and 
larger grants would aim to scale up existing NSA pilots and strengthen coalitions and 
networks of NSAs. The smaller grants aim at supporting grassroots initiatives and new 
DFGG ideas. Given these different sizes and purposes, two grant-making mechanisms 
will be used: (i) a Development Marketplace-like competition (a high profile, ‘trade fair’ 
type event to select medium and large grants), and (ii) a small grants program (with a 
simpler application process for smaller initiatives). In addition, the component will 
support learning and building the capacity of NSAs (Component 2C).  
 
For implementation of Component 2, the Government agreed that for independence and 
credibility, this task should be entrusted to a non-state entity. Through a rigorous 
identification process, in which several alternatives were considered, The Asia 
Foundation (TAF) was selected to be the IA for Component 2, given its extensive 
experience in both governance issues and complex grant-making in Cambodia. To 
manage the Component, TAF will establish a management team and a group of full-time 
staff to support implementation. They will also receive support from existing TAF units 
locally and internationally. For deciding on grants, an independent multi-stakeholder 
Grant-Making Committee (GMC) with representatives from CSOs, the private sector, 
Government and other stakeholders will be established. The selected GMC members will 
Page  4
be widely respected and high-profile individuals within their sector, and will be required 
to sign a ‘Code of Conduct’ to help guard against conflicts of interest.  
 
Component 3: Coordination and Learning: With financing of US$ 2.52 million, this 
component of the project aims to (a) support effective implementation of the project 
overall, ensuring its timely progress and strategic relevance vis-Ã -vis the evolving 
Cambodian context (Component 3A: Coordination), and (b) raise awareness of and 
building capacity in designing and implementing DFGG activities across and beyond the 
institutions directly supported by the project (Component 3B: Learning). Component 3 
will work to achieve these objectives through its: (i) Awareness Raising and Capacity 
Building Program; (ii) Communications Program, and (iii) an action-oriented Studies 
Program. It will also seek to promote a “ripple effect” of constructive engagement across 
state and non-state institutions by showcasing effective partnerships emerging from the 
project.  
 
For implementing Component 3, the MOI will appoint a high-level official as Project 
Coordinator to supervise overall implementation and will set up a Project Coordination 
Office (PCO) within the Ministry. Separately a Project Coordination Group (PGC) will 
be established consisting of the Project Directors of the different IAs (4 from Component 
1
and TAF for Component 2), civil society representatives, and representatives from 
MEF and other Ministries. The PCG will be responsible for strategic planning and 
progress monitoring of the project while the PCO, which will serve as a secretariat of 
PCG, will be responsible for daily management and dialogue with the Bank supervision 
team.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope. However, different elements will target specific locations 
and at different stages of project implementation – for instance, the OWSO-DO 
subcomponent will only target urban capital districts in all provinces of the country, 
while the law dissemination by MONASRI will be undertaken in only a small set of 
provinces in the first year and then be scaled up nationally by the final year of 
implementation. Of relevance for safeguard analysis, is only the location of the radio 
transmitter that will be used in the RNK subcomponent.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John D. Clark (EASSO) 
Ms Maria Teresa Serra (EASSO) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During the project preparation, two issues emerged which merited attention and the 
safeguard classification of the project is Category B, which requires a Partial Assessment. 
The two issues that merit attention relate to Civil Works under Components 1 and 3, and 
the issue of the RNK radio transmitter repairs under Component 1D. These are described 
in more detail below. 
 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
As mentioned above, the safeguard classification of the project is Category B under OP 
4.01, which requires a Partial Assessment. This was on account of two issues 
–
Civil 
Works under Components 1 and 3, and the issue of the RNK radio transmitter repairs 
under Component 1D as described below.  
 
1) Civil Works under Components 1 and 3: Minor civil works are envisaged in two 
cases in these two components. In Component 1, construction and/or renovation of 
offices for the OWSO and DO (Component 1C) that will be established in the 
participating districts is foreseen. Under Component 3, similar works may be required to 
accommodate the PCO. In both cases, it is expected that existing buildings will be 
rehabilitated and that new construction will be minor. The IAs have confirmed that all 
works will be done on existing Government property and there will be no land acquisition 
or involuntary relocation. The IAs will follow established guidelines and good practices 
for construction, to be agreed upon by the Government and Bank by project appraisal. 
Civil works have been excluded from potential activities to be funded under Component 
2.  
 
2) RNK Transmitter: The only environment related concern is related to the repair of 
RNK’s radio transmitter, which poses potential health and safety issues. During project 
preparation RNK requested IDA financing of about $290,000 for repairs and spare parts 
needed to restore its existing 200 kW transmitter (which was operating at only 20-30% of 
its rated capacity) and a standby 25 kW transmitter. A technical assessment of the 
Page  6
transmission system was undertaken jointly by RNK and AusAID-supported transmission 
engineers and revealed that repairs are feasible; are the least-cost option to increase the 
transmitter’s effective power output; and allow better coverage in remote areas in the 
country. The study observed, however, that there could be potential health and safety 
issues associated with the repair and operation of the transmitter and the transmission 
antenna tower as over time the current location of the transmitter has become surrounded 
by residential development which is encroaching on the station site.The study therefore 
recommended that a due diligence analysis be done to: (a) determine whether the increase 
in output can be done within the internationally recognized limits for electromagnetic 
radiation (EMR) ; and (b) assess whether, and what, measures are necessary to ensure 
safety of workers and nearby residents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to 
the implementation of anticipated future activities given their nature and scale. 
Environmental aspects will be monitored in the activity cycle to ensure that 
environmental concerns are addressed at the planning, design and implementation phases 
of the project-supported activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given the radio transmitter issue described above, RNK agreed to conduct the 
recommended due diligence analysis of safety and health issues, with the support of 
AusAID and Radio Australia. It was envisaged that, as a result of this analysis, two 
scenarios could emerge:  
 
(a) 
Scenario 1: The levels of exposure to electromagnetic radiation (EMR) at full 
capacity do not exceed acceptable limits.  If the EMR readings and technical analysis by 
the consultants were to provide conclusive evidence that the transmitter, restored to full 
power at its present location, would not expose the residents of nearby houses to levels of 
EMR that exceed internationally recognized acceptable limits, the repairs/ refurbishing 
could proceed as proposed.  
 
(b) 
Scenario 2: The levels of exposure to EMR exceed acceptable limits at full 
restored capacity. If this is the result of the due diligence, RNK would then have two 
options:  
 
(i) 
Option 1: Relocation of the transmitter . An Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) would need to be carried out to address the impacts of construction and operation 
of the transmitter at the new location and of decommissioning the existing tower, in 
accordance with Bank’s OP 4.01. The EMP would be implemented, monitored and 
Page  7
evaluated during the DFGG project implementation period in a manner satisfactory to the 
Bank. (The project would continue to be classified as Category B).  
 
(ii) 
Option 2: Relocation of the residents exposed to excessive levels of EMR.This 
would trigger OP 4.12, requiring preparation of a Resettlement Plan satisfactory to the 
Bank, including consultations with the displaced and host populations. The resettlement 
plan would need to be implemented, monitored and evaluated in a manner satisfactory to 
the Bank.  
 
At the time of the pre-appraisal, RNK advised that, over the medium term, they planned 
to relocate the transmitter to an unoccupied site and therefore Option 2 above was highly 
unlikely to be pursued. In addition, since full analysis, a final decision, and 
implementation of the preferred option would extend over several months, they still 
planned to repair the transmitter at the current site. Accordingly, the following safety and 
security initiatives were agreed with the Bank and have been undertaken:  
 
(a) 
 RNK ordered a spare part that enabled it do preliminary repairs to the transmitter, 
increase transmission output to 80-160 kW, and take EMR readings immediately after the 
repair. The part was delivered and installed in end-February 2008.  The technical 
consultants, ZCG Scalar, were contracted by Radio Australia to measure and evaluate the 
EMR levels on the RNK site. Their report was submitted on March 13, 2008.  
 
(b) 
Warning signs (in both Khmer and English) were posted on the front and rear of 
the power transformer cabinet, as recommended in the ZCG Scalar assessment.  
 
(c) 
RNK committed to operate the transmitter at its current location at output levels 
that did not violate acceptable limits, to submit itself to independent monitoring of EMR 
levels and to publicly disclose the information.  
 
(d) 
RNK started to explore the feasibility of relocating the transmission facilities to a 
new location, away from populated areas, and is currently canvassing alternative sites, 
including potential environmental and social impacts at each location.  
 
The ZCG Scalar report indicated that, at 100 kW transmission level, dwellings along the 
East and South walls of the RNK site would be subject to EMR above the safe limits. The 
report recommended that output power should not exceed 100 kW at any time at the 
present location; the antenna should be relocated to a new site, away from populated 
areas; and access of the general public to the site should be restricted.  
 
The appraisal mission held extensive discussion with the Government, Radio Australia 
and AusAID on the urgency of addressing potential health risks at the current site in the 
event that the concerns raised by the ZCG Scalar report were to be confirmed. The scope 
of a three-part EMP, to be carried out during the pre-implementation period, was 
discussed and agreed. This work program would comprise the following:  
 
(a) 
Part 1: Confirmation of EMR readings and potential health risks associated to 
operation of the transmission tower at the current site at different levels of output;  
Page  8
(b) 
Part 2: Development of the detailed solutions to allow for continued transmission 
while avoiding or mitigating health impacts to workers and household (should these be 
needed), through: (i) technical options at the current location, at an alternative site, or 
through other media/technology) on a temporary basis; or (ii) mitigation measures (social 
and/or environmental) to address the health risks at the current RNK broadcasting site 
until the antenna could be moved to a permanent location; and  
 
(c) 
Part 3: Defining the key steps and timeline for relocation of the antenna to a new 
site.  
 
AusAID and Radio Australia agreed to support RNK in undertaking Part 1 of the 
proposed EMP and accordingly contracted another technical consulting firm, Kordia 
Solutions, to review the ZCG Scalar report; conduct a more thorough site evaluation, 
including new EMR readings; and carry out a coverage study for transmission from the 
current Phnom Penh site, an existing Battambang transmission site, and a greenfield site 
on the outskirts of Phnom Penh.  
 
In mid-May, Kordia Solutions submitted its peer review of the ZCG Scalar report, 
indicating that the ZCG Scalar report had many serious errors and omissions, and 
recommending that it be set aside. Kordia Solutions’ findings, based on measurements at 
80 and 160 kW output, were that RNK could operate up to the full nominal capacity of its 
200 kW transmitter on the current site without any health implications to the households 
living nearby. It also indicated that, based on a modeling exercise scaling up form the 
measurements taken on the ground, transmission at 500 kW output level was possible 
(and would be the maximum admissible output level) without imposing health risks to 
households living in the vicinity.  
 
Given that the two reports yielded contradictory results, the Bank has commissioned a 
suitable third party to conduct an independent evaluation (based on a desk review) of the 
two studies, which will be finalized by October. Based on the due diligence thus far, the 
Bank has agreed with the Government on the following additional steps, to be carried out 
during the pre-implementation period and during the first year of project implementation:  
 
(a) 
As the health and safety risks and relevant measures to mitigate those potential 
risks could not be confirmed before appraisal, it was not appropriate to drop the RNK 
component from the project, since the issues under review did not seem to compromise 
the component’s feasibility. A due diligence process is under way and there is agreement 
on further steps to be taken as part of this process.  
 
(b) 
If the preliminary findings of the Kordia Solutions report are confirmed (i.e., that 
transmission can be increased at the current site without risk to workers and households 
in the vicinity), Part 2 of the proposed EMP would not need to be pursued. If, however, 
there are health and safety issues to address, the TORs for Part 2 should be revised, as 
needed, in light of the third party review. The work should be carried out during the pre-
implementation period.  
Page  9
(c) 
Part 3 of the proposed EMP should be expanded to include the full assessment of 
the greenfield option, including: (i) the analysis of alternative sites for their technical 
feasibility as well as for potential environmental, social, health and safety impacts/risks 
(to be conducted by March 2009 - date to be agreed during negotiations); and (ii) the 
development of detailed mitigation measures at the selected site.  
 
(d) 
A timetable of these key steps in the EMP preparation process would be 
confirmed at negotiations and included as dated covenants in the legal documents. 
Agreement would also be reached on public disclosure of detailed mitigation plans at the 
current site, as needed, and/or transmission tower relocation plans to a greenfield site in 
the medium term.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders involved for the RNK transmitter issue include: (a) residents living 
in the vicinity of the RNK transmitter, (b) workers carrying out repairs of the transmitter, 
(c) the MOI (the project executing agency), (d) AusAID, and (e) the RNK.  
 
The framework agreed with the Government at the appraisal stage was posted on the 
MOI website  and sent to the Bank Infoshop. The RNK-AusAID technical assessment 
and the ZCG Scalar technical assessment were also made public and posted on the MOI 
website. Agreement will be sought from RNK (before or during negotiations) that it will 
publicly disclose the following:  
 
(a) the findings of the Kordia Solutions technical assessment (including the analysis of 
transmission alternatives from a greenfield site in Phnom Penh in the medium-term); 
(b)the results of the third party review (to be finalized by mid-September); (c)the revised 
safeguard framework for the DFGG Project; and (d)any other relevant documents, as 
deemed necessary by the Bank.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  10
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
09/09/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Teresa Serra 
09/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr John D. Clark 
09/09/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Janmejay Singh 
09/09/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cyprian F. Fisiy 
09/09/2008 
Comments:   
