Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3876
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P102475 
Project Name:  Cambodia Telecoms 
Task Team Leader:  Natasha Beschorner 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  GPOBA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid 
2.50
2.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to bring basic voice telephony services and other additional 
services supported by the Service Provider’s business case to low income families in 
rural and remote locations in northwestern Cambodia.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will facilitate the provision of:  
 
a) basic voice telephony service – the service can be provided with any technology, 
while the selected service provider will provide full network access and services at a 
quality and price similar to the rest of mobile telephone network in Cambodia; and  
 
b)
basic access to services – the service provider will ensure provision of public access 
points to 80% of the villages in the above targeted locations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will include locations where residents currently have limited or no access to 
basic voice telephony but where there is sufficient population base that would allow a 
Service Provider to establish a commercially viable operation in the area. Four Northern 
Page  2
provinces of Cambodia namely Pursat, Preah Vihear, Otdar Meanchey, and Banteay 
Meanchey have been selected. In case tower sites need to be selected, the project will 
have advance consultations with beneficiary communities and local authorities to ensure 
equally benefit opportunity to all including known minority peoples, carry out minimal 
amounts of land requirement, and ensure that land transactions are taken in accordance 
with land acquisition policy framework.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vanna Nil (EASSO) 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The overall project implementation does not raise any significant environmental or social 
concerns. Potential minor impacts concerning construction activities of the telephony 
towers are likely minimal and can be localized through best engineering practices and 
land acquisition policy developed by the project.  
 
The project does not trigger OP 4.12 as the winning contractor will acquire the sites for 
the telephone towers through voluntary transactions. Land owners can refuse to rent or 
sell land for the towers and the contractor does not have any legal means to obtain the 
land without the consent of the land owner. However, a Land Policy Framework has been 
included in the ESMF to guide the land acquisition process.  
 
The project does not trigger OP 4.10 for the following reasons: (i) project activities do 
not target specific ethnic minority groups or communities;  if towers are chosen by the 
contractor to extend voice telephony service, the locations for the construction of towers 
will be determined based on technical requirements; (ii) land for the towers will be 
purchased or leased with the consent of the landowners and constriction activities are 
likely to impact scattered households as opposed to communities; and (iii) the Good 
Governance Framework includes Element 5 which requires the implementing agency to 
Page  3
establish a Complaints and Remedies Mechanism to address systematic complaints 
covering all aspects of the project, which would be accessible to minorities and non-
minorities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proponent has low knowledge and capacity in implementing Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), therefore, supporting building capacity of the 
project staff and contractors for implementation ESMF, and increasing awareness about 
ESMF are required to ensure the project compliance with safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key government officials, local authorities, civil society, and winning contractor will be 
involving in public disclosure and consultation with targeted people on safeguard 
policies: ESMF.  
 
Khmer simple/friendly language or posters will be used to improve understanding by 
local project beneficiaries. They primary beneficiaries of the project are rural poor and 
disadvantaged people, including IP communities, if there are any, who do not have access 
to basic telecommunications.  Secondary stakeholders are policy makers and local 
authorities who get involved in the design of the project and will benefit through 
institutional development and capacity building activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This project is classified as Category “C,” which has minor or no adverse triggers to 
environmental and social safeguards. Implementing good engineering practices in the 
tower construction design and bidding contracts and land acquisition policy developed by 
the project will ensure minimal, localized, and mitigated impacts.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  5
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Natasha Beschorner 
10/08/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bunlong Leng 
10/06/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Vanna Nil 
10/23/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
10/09/2008 
Comments:   
