Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3285 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/28/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P104525 
Project Name: Cameroon Health Sector Support Investment (SWAP) 
Task Team Leader: Miriam Schneidman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall pu
rpose of the proposed IDA operation is to support the government’s 2009-2012 
Health Sector Development Program. The operation will finance: (i) a target group of districts to 
expand access to a basic package of health services using a performance based contractual 
approach; and (ii) institutional capacity building to contract within the public sector, including 
systems for contract development, data collection and validation, and monitoring and evaluation.  
The proposed four-year operation is a key building block for the SWAp.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The IDA financed operation will include two components:  
 
Component 1: District Service Delivery.  This component will finance consolidated annual 
district action plans which will include a package of services to address childhood illnesses, 
maternal and reproductive health, and major public health problems (e.g. HIV/AIDS, TB, 
malaria).  The focus will be on under-served districts, the poor and vulnerable.  The district plans 
would be comprehensive and financing would hinge on performance, as monitored and measured 
through the new district contracting approach.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening.  This component will provide technical and financial 
support in two key areas: (i) contracting within the public sector, including setting up the 
institutional framework and systems and strengthening capacity; and (ii) putting in place a 
unified information system and capacity to measure performance by generating up to date, 
reliable, financial and programmatic data.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Health has a unit which is responsible for environmental issues, including waste 
management.  With the assistance of KfW the Ministry of Health carried out a comprehensive 
assessment of waste management practices in the health sector.  The assessment found that there 
is a need to strengthen institutional capacity at different levels, to provide training to personnel 
and improve knowledge about the direct and indirect risks associated with poor waste 
management practices, and to provide equipment for facilities to assure the safe management and 
treatment of health care waste in Cameroon.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental assessment is required to determine the adequacy of waste management 
practices in health facilities in Cameroon, to assess the potential negative impacts resulting from 
program-related activities, and to determine mitigation measures that would minimize those 
negative impacts.  Particular concerns relate to the handling of contaminated health care waste, 
which poses serious potential environmental and social concerns. The assessment will focus on 
the hygiene situation in hospitals and on infection control and on systems and equipment for 
disposal of hazardous materials and waste management.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
During the appraisal mission the team will determine whether pygmies reside in the areas to 
be supported by the project.  If so, a simple analysis will be done to ensure that the group will 
benefit from project activities and that interventions are designed in a way which are culturally 
appropriate, and monitorable.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/07/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
With the assistance of KfW the Ministry of Health carried out a comprehensive assessment 
of waste management practices in the health sector. This assessment led to the identification 
of strategies and a draft master plan for safe management and treatment of health care waste 
in Cameroon. With assistance from the Bank, the Ministry of Health is in the process of 
recruiting a consultant to update, refine and finalize the Health Care Waste Management 
Plan. The results of the assessment and the Waste Management Plan will be made public in 
country and at the Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Miriam Schneidman 
02/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
