Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/09/2008 
Report No.:  AC3676
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cameroon 
Project ID:  P104456 
Project Name:  CM-Energy Sector Development SIL (FY08) 
Task Team Leader:  Astrid Manroth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (80%);General energy sector (20%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to increase access to modern energy in 
targeted rural areas and improve the planning and management of sector resources by all 
energy sector institutions.  Through its intervention, the project is expected to contribute 
to improved reliability of electricity supply.  Increased access to and reliability of 
electricity are key factors in the realization of the Government of Cameroon's (GOC) 
growth and poverty reduction strategy.  
 
The Project Development Objective will be achieved through:  
 
(i) 
Setting up a financing and planning mechanism for rural energy (Rural Energy 
Fund);  
 
(ii)  
Improving the legal and regulatory framework and strengthening the capacity of 
sector institutions to better execute their mandates (MINEE, ARSEL, AER, EDC); and  
 
(iii) 
Improving the preparation of energy projects, including preparatory activities for 
the Lom Pangar Hydropower Project (LPHP) and rural energy projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will have three components:  
Page  2
Component I ($45 million), Rural Energy Fund.  This component will help set up a rural 
energy fund as foreseen under the National Energy Plan for Poverty Reduction 
(PANERP) and the decree establishing the Rural Electrification Agency (AER).  A 
pooled financing mechanism based on best practice examples from countries such as 
Mali and Burkina Faso will streamline interventions and increase effectiveness of 
investments in rural energy.  The fund will be managed by AER based on transparent 
operational and fiduciary procedures and supervised by a Rural Energy Planning and 
Programming Committee (REPPC) chaired by Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEE) 
and including representatives from all sector stakeholders.  Other donors have expressed 
an interest to contribute to the fund once it is established. IDA will contribute US$40 
million to the fund, while GOC will provide at least US$5 million to the fund from 
budget contributions over the life of the project.  Over time, GOC intends to ensure the 
sustainability of the REF through a levy on electricity sold and other energy products.  
 
Component II ($15.6 million), Capacity building.  The project will provide technical 
assistance to MINEE (US$6 mm) to (i) improve the planning of least cost investments; 
(ii) finalize the legal and institutional framework of the energy sector; and (iii) conduct 
complementary studies and provide necessary training and equipment.  ARSEL will 
benefit from technical assistance and training (US$ 4 mm) to improve regulatory 
governance, concession oversight, IPP regulation and consumer protection.  Capacity 
building for AER (US$2 mm) will focus on finalizing the REF implementation 
framework, rural energy expansion and energy efficiency.  EDC ($3.6 mm) will benefit 
from technical assistance for: (i) developing tools for water basin management, (ii) pre-
feasibility and feasibility studies for future hydroelectric projects, (iii) communication; 
and (iv) associated training and equipment.  
 
Component III ($9.4 million), Project preparation including the Lom Pangar 
Hydropower Project (LPHP).  The project will assist EDC with preparatory activities of 
LPHP and AER with the preparation of rural energy projects.  World Bank participation 
in preparatory activities for the planned LPHP does not provide a commitment that it will 
finance the construction of the project itself.  The project will support the team of 
technical experts beings put in place by EDC by financing an independent engineering 
firm and other consultants to advance LPHP project preparations and finance outstanding 
technical, environmental and social studies and the preparation of bidding documents.  
For AER, the project will provide technical assistance to identify, prepare and appraise 
rural energy projects in view of their financing by private operators or local communities.  
The project will finance the development of standard bidding documents, standard 
technical specifications and other aspects related to the readiness for implementation of 
rural energy projects under the Rural Energy Fund. The project will also finance 
consultants which will work with AER to provide technical assistance to private 
operators and in the supervision of project execution.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1:  Rural electrification projects  
Page  3
The project will intervene all over the country in rural and peri-urban areas. Most 
subprojects will consist of small rural electrification investments, and no significant 
negative environmental or social impact is expected. Since the project will work on the 
basis of a yearly participatory investment planning, the subprojects to be financed under 
the project have not yet been identified, and the exact details and depth of environmental 
and social impacts and their effective mitigation cannot therefore be determined during 
project preparation.  
 
As required by Cameroon’s environmental regulations and by the World Bank’s 
Operational Policy 4.01 on environmental assessments, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) was developed during project preparation and will be 
used during implementation to identify and evaluate the environmental and social 
impacts of subprojects, and to define mitigation measures that the subproject will 
implement to eliminate negative impacts or to reduce them to an acceptable level.  As 
also required by OP 4.01, the ESMF was publicly disclosed in suitable locations in 
Cameroon and at the InfoShop, before the project appraisal.  
 
The scope of the environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) conducted under 
the ESMF for specific subprojects will depend on the complexity of the subproject.  
Subprojects activities may trigger other Bank policies in addition to OP 4.01.  For 
example, rural electrification subprojects are likely to trigger O.P. 4.12 on involuntary 
resettlement.  
 
In compliance with OP 4.12, the government of Cameroon has also prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to mitigate the social impacts that could result 
from subproject activities such as the expropriation of land leading to people being 
displaced or to the loss, reduction or restriction of access of these persons to economic 
resources, therefore leading to involuntary resettlement and to compensation of these 
persons.  The RPF was also publicly disclosed in Cameroon and at the World Bank’s 
InfoShop before the appraisal of the project.  
 
Component 3:  Lom Pangar hydropower project preparation  
 
The Lom Pangar regulation dam is planned to be built at the confluence of the Lom and 
Pangar rivers, in Cameroon’s Eastern Province.  The dam will create a reservoir of up to 
7.25 bm3 around the Lom and Pangar rivers of which up to 6 bm3 operating capacity  
and a flood routing capacity of 1 bm3.  The reservoir will allow for improved water flow 
management on the Sanaga River, thereby increasing generation capacity and reliability 
of electricity provision from existing hydro power plants at Song Loulou and Edea, 
especially during the dry season.  Improved water flow management will be the basis for 
the construction of a number of downstream hydro power projects, including but not 
limited to the 330 MW hydro power project Nachtigal to be constructed by Alucam. 
Given the geology, the depth of the reservoir will be limited, making the surface of the 
reservoir relatively large.  The reservoir will flood livelihoods, grazing land, cultural 
heritage, some minerals  and parts of the Deng Deng Forest Reserve, a critical natural 
habitat for large primates .  Increased access to the area from dam construction and 
operation activities will put further pressure on the forest.  In addition, the reservoir will 
flood two sections of the Chad-Cameroon pipeline at the crossing of the Pangar and 
Mbitel rivers, for a total length of about 5 km (requiring approximately two 12.5 km 
stretches of pipeline to be modified), creating the risk of an oil spill into the reservoir.  
Page  4
Resettlement will be required but given the low population density of the region, the 
number of people to be resettled is expected to be limited.  The baseline of project 
affected people has not yet been established and is being financed by AFD, but additional 
financing will be provided under the proposed project. Downstream water quality and the 
impact of the dam on fisheries will equally need to be managed.  The project will finance 
preparatory activities for the planned LPHP to help mitigate the substantial to high 
project risks and conduct outstanding environmental and social studies and other 
preparatory activities in compliance with World Bank safeguard policies.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
Mr Emmanuel Noubissie Ngankam (AFCC1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Component 1:  Rural energy fund  
 
The Government has prepared prior to appraisal an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that 
describes how compliance of subprojects supported by the fund with World Bank policies 
will be ensured during project implementation.  The ESMF describes procedures for the 
environmental and social screening and reviewing of subprojects, define precautionary 
principles and measures that must be incorporated in subprojects to ensure compliance, 
identify the institutions accountable for ensuring and monitoring compliance, and define 
capacity building measures required for these institutions to fulfill their assigned tasks.  
Specific safeguards issues and impacts will be determined as sub-projects are identified 
for financing by the Rural Energy Fund (REF).  
 
Component 2.  Capacity Building  
 
This component does not directly any safeguard issue.  It will also benefit from the 
preparation of a strategic environmental and social assessment for the energy sector that 
Page  5
will be prepared under the companion Environmental and Social Capacity Building 
Project for the Energy Sector Project (PReCESSE).  
 
Component 3:  Project preparation of LPHP  
 
This project only finances preparatory activities for the LPHP.  These activities do not 
trigger any safeguard policies.  No commitment by the World Bank is being made at this 
stage to fund construction of the LPHP.  GOC has requested the funding of technical 
assistance, including specifically among other issues to ensure that the environmental and 
social assessment and other outstanding preparatory studies and activities be done in 
accordance with World Bank safeguard guidelines.  With financing from AFD, the 
Government has already completed a draft environmental assessment, which at GOC's 
request was reviewed by the Bank. Comments have been taken into account and a 
number of supplementary studies have been carried out.  The Government also appointed 
an Environmental and Social, as well as a Dam Safety Panel, in accordance with Bank 
guidelines and both panels have started their work.  All reports and studies completed so 
far have been publicly disclosed at the website of the Electricity Development 
Corporation (www.edc-cameroon.com) and through IUCN web site 
(http://www.iucn.org/en/projects/cameroon_lom_pangar.htm).  
 
The potential construction of the LPHP would trigger 7 safeguard policies 
(environmental assessment, critical natural habitat, forests, indigenous peoples, 
involuntary resettlement, physical cultural resources, and safety of dams).  Given the 
sensitivity of the project and for the benefit of transparency, they are being discussed and 
disclosed as part of this project document.  In particular, the LPHP will:  
 
(i) 
Directly serve to increase electricity supply to AES SONEL, which distributes 
power in its concession area, including to the aluminum industry which is Cameroon’s 
single biggest electricity customer.  
 
(ii) 
Flood a small portion of the Deng Deng Forest Reserve.  Avoidance of the Deng 
Deng Forest Reserve had motivated a decision by the World Bank Group to require a re-
routing of the Chad-Cameroon Pipeline.  However, based on available information the 
areas flooded do not include any critical natural habitat, including critical habitats for 
endangered large primates (gorillas and chimpanzees).  
 
(iii) 
Require the logging of riparian forest along the Lom and Pangar rivers, and 
induce opportunities for illegal logging in the areas surrounding the future reservoir 
unless control measures are put in place.  
 
(iv) 
Require the resettlement of an estimated 250 people living in 13 encampments 
and the loss of land for use by communities from the formation of the reservoir.  The 
baseline of project affected people has yet to be established, but may amount to as many 
as 10,000 affected people (including nomadic tribes).  
 
(v) 
Give rise to social risks associated with LPHP construction, including 
compensation issues, potential tensions, safety issues and the influx of health threats, 
such as HIV/AIDS from the influx of construction workers.   
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See 1. above   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Component 1, Rural Energy Fund  
 
Before a subproject is approved for financing by the REF, it will undergo a technical 
and financial screening to make sure that it is least-cost with due consideration to its 
possible environmental and social consequences.  
 
Component 3, LPHP preparations  
 
A
comprehensive economic analysis has demonstrated that LPHP is the next least cost 
investment in Cameroon’s electricity sector after the Kribi gas power plant.  Alternatives 
(which have been analyzed and rejected) are a number of smaller regulating dams along 
the Sanaga which would significantly increase costs, ultimately translating into higher 
electricity tariffs.  World Bank involvement in preparatory activities will ensure that the 
safeguard risks related to LPHP will be addressed in compliance with World Bank 
safeguard rules and international standards for hydro power development.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Component 1, Rural Energy Fund  
 
The borrower’s capacity to address safeguard policy issues in the energy sectoris weak.  
The Rural Electrification Agency (AER), which will be the executing agency for the REF 
component, will be strengthened to have in-house environmental and social capacity. It 
will also be assisted by consultants in the evaluation of proposals to ensure compliance 
with the ESMF, and ESMF compliance would be a condition for subproject financing by 
the REF.  
 
Component 3:  LPHP preparations  
 
A
number of studies have already been conducted to assess and mitigate safeguard 
issues related to LPHP.  Government has conducted a comprehensive Environmental 
Impact Assessment in 2005, complemented by additional studies at the request of the 
World Bank, including a study of large primates in the Deng Deng forest.  In addition, in 
the wake of a joint World Bank AFD mission to the Lom Pangar site in March 2007, 
Government has started implementing an action plan for the protection of the designated 
gorilla sanctuary within the Deng Deng Forest Reserve, with the support of the ongoing 
Forest and Environment Development Program (PSFE) and AFD. In particular, the 
Ministry of Forestry has put a stop to illegal logging in the future sanctuary, and imposed 
a
moratorium on the transport of illegal wood by the national railway company from the 
Goyoum train station.  Steps have also been initiated to establish the gorilla sanctuary, to 
recruit local ecoguards, and to prepare a management plan.  
 
Outstanding environmental and social studies in line with World Bank safeguards 
include:  
Page  7
(i) a cumulative environmental impact study  
 
(ii) a baseline for project affected people  
 
(iii) a forestry management plan to manage the forest areas around the reservoir and 
protect them from illegal logging, and  
 
(iv) a regional development plan.  Financing for these studies as well as the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMP) and Resettlement Action 
Plan (RAP) will be made available under the proposed project.  
 
A
key measure regarding the impact of the use of electricity by the aluminum sector is 
to promote dialogue between the stakeholders.  In this context, the Government of 
Cameroon has commissioned a study on the economic and social impacts of the 
Aluminum sector in Cameroon that is publicly available on EDC’s web site: edc-
cameroon.com.  
 
Government has requested that the independent panel of environmental and social 
experts review the studies conducted to date, and has taken their recommendations into 
account.  The proposed project will provide funding to extend the panel’s mandate 
throughout project preparation.  
 
As mentioned in Section I.5, the project will help build capacity to implement all 
required safeguard measures.  Furthermore, the proposed Project for Environmental and 
Social Capacity Building in the Energy Sector, which is being developed at the same 
time, will strengthen the regulatory and institutional framework and develop capacity to 
address safeguard issues.  The ongoing Forest and Environment Development Program 
(PSFE) is already strengthening capacity to manage environmental and social issues 
associated with the Forestry sector.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Component 1:  Rural Energy Fund  
 
Key stakeholders are the rural communities to be possibly affected by sub-projects 
activities.  These communities will be represented in the Rural Electrification Planning 
and Programming Committee which will be responsible for the annual investment 
program.  Communities will also be consulted during the preparation of sub-projects and 
have their opinion recorded.  These communities will also be involved in project design 
as required as they may be asked to contribute to their project financing either in cash or 
in kind as well as its operation by paying for the energy services they receive.  
 
Component 3:  LPHP preparations  
 
Key stakeholders of the LPHP project include project affected person, such as local 
communities and nomadic tribes, NGOs and civil society and a number of Government 
ministries and institutions, including but not limited to MINEE, MINEP and EDC.  
Following best practice examples of other large energy investment and large hydro power 
projects, a communication and consultation platform will be established between all 
stakeholders.  The proposed project includes capacity building to Government in 
communicating with project affected people and civil society/NGOs and will support 
Page  8
regular coordination meetings as well as timely information dissemination.  First 
meetings have taken place as part of project preparation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Page  9
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Astrid Manroth 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Emmanuel Noubissie Ngankam 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
 
Comments:   
