Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC3641
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cameroon 
Project ID:  P104525 
Project Name:  Cameroon Health Sector Support Investment (SWAP) 
Task Team Leader:  Miriam Schneidman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall purpose of the proposed IDA operation is to support the implementation of 
the 2008-2015 Health Sector Strategy in order to accelerate progress towards the 
Millennium Development Goals. The project development objective is to increase 
utilization and improve the quality of health services with a particular focus on child and 
maternal health and communicable diseases.  The operation will finance: (i) district-level 
services using a performance based contracting approach; and (ii) institutional capacity 
building for contracting, and for putting in place a unified monitoring and evaluation 
system.  The proposed five-year operation is a key building block for the SWAp.   
 
3. Project Description 
The IDA financed operation will include two components:  
 
Component 1: District Service Delivery.  This component will provide flexible support 
for district-level services related to childhood illnesses, maternal, reproductive and 
obstetrical health care, family planning, child and maternal nutrition, and communicable 
diseases, through the financing on a performance-basis of contracts with district 
committees, non-governmental organizations, and health facilities in support of 
consolidated annual district action plans.  
Page  2
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening.  This component will provide technical and 
financial support in two key areas: (i) performance contracting, including setting up the 
institutional framework and systems and strengthening capacity; and (ii) putting in place 
a
unified information system and capacity to measure performance by generating up to 
date, reliable, financial and programmatic data.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be initiated in three provinces (Littoral, North-West, South-West) and 
gradually scaled up nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An environmental assessment was carried out in March/April 2008 to determine the 
adequacy of waste management practices in Cameroon, to assess the potential negative 
impacts resulting from program-related activities, and to determine mitigation measures 
that would minimize those negative impacts.  Particular concerns relate to the handling of 
contaminated health care waste, which poses serious potential environmental and social 
concerns.  The assessment focuses on the hygiene situation in hospitals and on infection 
control and on systems and equipment for disposal of hazardous materials and waste 
management.  The report identifies for each category of health facility the main 
weaknesses and the way to address them.  
 
During the appraisal mission the impact of the project on indigenous groups was 
assessed.  It was determined that, to the extent that the project activities are initially 
limited to three provinces, namely, Littoral, North-West and South-West, there are no 
Pygmies residing in these areas and hence the Indigenous People Action Plan will not be 
Page  3
triggered.  Nevertheless, to the extent that Borroro (nomad shepherds) cross the North-
West province it was suggested that, the main association representing this group will be 
regularly consulted to ensure that the rights and concerns of this group are respected.  
Finally, it was noted that when the project activities are extended to provinces where 
Pygmies reside, the Indigenous People Action Plan will be immediately applied.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Health has a unit which is responsible for environmental issues, 
including waste management.  The unit is well managed and has demonstrated leadership 
in addressing these issues, including in organizing the waste management assessment and 
the follow up workshops.  
 
This unit will be responsible for the monitoring of the Action Plan prepared as part of 
the Waste Management Assessment.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The waste management plan was discussed in country at a workshop which brought 
together key stakeholders.  The plan was disclosed in country and at the InfoShop.  
Furthermore, the local media published articles on the study  
 
During the appraisal the Centre for Environment and Development, a NGOs specialized 
in Pygmy issues and members of the Cameroonian Pygmies’ network organization, were 
consulted about the potential impact of the project on indigenous groups. The outcome of 
the consultation was reflected in annex 10 of the PAD and a regular follow up will be 
ensured.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/04/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/04/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
-
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  5
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Miriam Schneidman 
05/12/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
05/12/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/12/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
05/12/2008 
Comments:   
