Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3347 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P109588 
Project Name: Environmental and Social Capacity Building for the Energy Sector 
Task Team Leader: Yves Andre Prevost 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project would be to:  
 
Ensure compliance of the management of environmental and social issues arising from 
investments in the energy sector, including oil and gas, with international standards and 
practices.  
 
The expected benefits of the project are to: (i) reduce the negative impacts of projects, and (ii) 
develop a transparent, stable and fair framework for managing environmental and social risks 
that comforts large investments, and (iii) institutionalizes information flows between affected 
populations and political decision-makers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Rather than fund separate projects, the proposed project consolidates separate requests for 
capacity building expressed by the CPSP, MINEE and MINEP (see Annex).  
 
Project Components  
 
The proposed project would have 4 components:  
 
Component 1 (US$4 million).  Perpetuating the achievements of the CAPECE.  The project 
would fund the consolidation or implementation of CAPECE activities, most particularly: (i) the 
Page  2
national oil spill contingency plan (PNLDAH), (ii) the coastal and marine environment 
management plan, (iii) implementation decrees for the 1996 environmental law, (iv) the long 
term vision study for environmental management in the oil and gas sector, and (v) the study on 
the socioeconomic impact of the Chad-Cameroon pipeline, (vi) the consultation platform 
between Government, COTCO and NGOs, (vii) the health map for the pipeline corridor, (viii) 
support to the Mbam-Djerem and Cam
po Ma’an National Parks, and the Indigenous PeoplesPlan 
are still ongoing and will require further support.  Lastly, the project would support CPSP to 
address the interaction of the pipeline with new investments such as Kribi and Lom Pangar, and 
more broadly in addressing environmental issues associated with the oil and gas sector.  
 
Component 2 (US$8 million).  Strengthening the Ministry of Environment and Protection of 
Nature, to fulfill its mandate to monitor and control environnemental and social obligations of 
large infrastructure projects, in compliance with the environmental law of 1996 and its 
implementation decrees.  The project would fund: (i) technical expertise in the application of 
environmental regulations, (ii) the preparation of sectoral guidelines for the energy sector 
(electricity, dams, oil and gas), in cooperation with relevant departments, (iii) harmonization of 
national environmental standards and procedures with international norms, (iv) harmonizing and 
linking different regulatory instruments such as Environmental Assessments and Audits, 
Environmental Management Plans, pollution permits, environmental permits for industrial 
plants, and (v) the development of capacity to verify compliance, either directly or though 
delegation of authority to sector ministries.  
 
Component 3 (US$3 million).  Supporting the Environment Unit in the Ministry of Energy and 
Water to ensure that the environmental and social issues arising from large energy sector 
infrastructure projects are addressed in compliance with international standards and practices.  
The Ministry of Energy and Water is the structure responsible for the Energy Sector and in 
charge of implementing key portions of the Energy Sector Development Plan.  Most particularly, 
the project would support the unit to: (i) monitor and advise on the preparation of environmental 
assessments and audits and EMPs for energy sector infrastructure projects, prior to their 
submission to the Ministry of Environment for review, (ii) trigger and monitor the preparation of 
security, social and environmental audits for existing infrastructure (dams, power plants, power 
lines, distribution networks), and monitor the implementation of agreed management plans in 
agreement with the Ministry of Environment.  
 
Component 4 (US$5 million).  Establishing frameworks to manage social externalities 
associated with large infrastructure projects, in compliance with international standards and 
practices.  The component would thus strengthen the ministries of Social Affairs, of Health, of 
Culture, and of Lands, each according to its statutory mandates, building on the lessons of the 
Chad Cameroon Project. More specifically, the project would (i) provide assistance to the 
Ministry of Social Affairs which is the governmental structure in charge of marginalized 
populations, including Indigenous Peoples, (ii) build capacity within the Ministry of State 
Property and Land Affairs and help harmonizing the national legislation on involuntary 
resettlement and land issues (iii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Culture which is in 
charge of monitoring of impacts of projects on physical cultural resources, and (iv) provide 
assistance to the Ministry of Health to the better manage the impacts of projects, notably dams, 
on the health of on site populations.  The project would also strengthen the capacity of civil 
society organizations through training on the World Bank’s safeguard policies.  
 
Institutional Framework  
Page  3
The project would have three implementation units, one for each of the first three components, 
respectively located in the CPSP, the MINEP and the MINEE.  Concerning the first component, 
the current CAPECE institutional framework would be maintained.  
 
In order to build on CAPECE experience, the fiduciary aspects of the social component of the 
project would be managed by the CPSP. This would require modifying Decree 433 of 24 August 
1999 regarding the organization and operation of the CPSP, to add the Ministry of Social Affairs 
and the Ministry of Culture.  
 
The Government will propose a definitive institutional framework before end January 2008 and 
designate a focal point for the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national program that will develop a country system and thus will not be location 
specific   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Capacity building is the purpose of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will continue supporting the management of environmental and social impact 
associated with the Chad-Cameroon pipeline. The explanation follows from the project 
description above.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will help establish a country system.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will help establish a country system   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project will help establish a country system   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will help establish a country system   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will help establish a country system   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project will help establish a country system   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Category B because:  
 
The project does have fiduciary risks.  Most particularly:  
 
(a) 
the Government may not understand the need for transparency in developing and 
implementing environmental management procedures, guidelines and regulations;  
 
(b) 
the Bank may be seen as somehow responsible for Government decisions on 
future projects in energy, mining, transport, or regional development, having financed the 
capacity-building that theoretically would have prevented such things from happening;  
 
(c) 
the environmental community at large may suspect the Bank of being an enabler 
for rapid development, rather than a promoter of environmentally and socially sustainable 
development and a protector of valuable natural, cultural and human resources.  
 
The approach for minimizing these risks would be to:  
 
•
get agreement at appraisal with the Government on a document that will present  
 
(i) the broad terms of reference (i.e., the scope of work, in as much detail as is possible at 
this stage)  for the capacity-building in each component;  
 
(ii) 
the working arrangements (e.g., individual specialists, a firm or firms, 
secondment of officials to work in teams with the experts, etc.);  
 
(iii) 
the review and approval arrangements -- who in the client agencies will review, 
comment on, and eventually accept the products of the TA;  
 
(iv) 
the responsibilities for the overall direction of each component; and  
 
(v) 
the process and responsibilities for decision-making with respect to adoption and 
implementation of recommendations and materials produced.  
 
•
consult with other stakeholders on a draft of this document, prior to appraisal, including 
industry representatives and the environmental/social NGOs.  
 
•
publicly disclose the document as if it were a safeguards document, and that there be 
arrangements for periodic updates to stakeholders on progress of the TA.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
02/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
03/03/2008 
Comments:   
