Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3988 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P112635 
Project Name: Cameroon - Agricultural Competitiveness and Diversification 
Task Team Leader: Renato Nardello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Irrigation and drainage 
(20%);Roads and highways (20%);Animal production (10%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
30.00 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
10.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objectives is to increase the competitiveness of smallholder producers 
working on specific value chains in high-potential areas. It is expected that the project will lead 
to increased value of production at gate level through increased productivity, productivity, 
quality and marketing of their productions. While smallholder producers will be the main project 
beneficiaries, it is expected that the project should work with different stakeholders along the 
value chains. The project will focus on selected agricultural value chains and will concentrate its 
activities in areas with high growth potential (see map, Annex 1).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Removal of Key Infrastructure Bottlenecks (US$25-30 million IDA). The 
component would finance the rehabilitation or construction of infrastructure, including: (i) about 
500 km of rural and agricultural roads, and (ii) rehabilitation of about 800 hectares of irrigated 
Page  2
perimeters in several different production areas: Santchou (West), Ndiop (North West), Lagdo 
(North), Maga-Semry and Yagoua (Far North).  
 
Component 2: Economic partnerships schemes (US$15-20 million IDA).  The component will 
support the establishment of partnership schemes (EPSs) between different actors 
–both private 
and public– of selected value chains.  EPSs are intended to create solid and mutually 
advantageous relationships between value chain actors and will be accompanied by investment 
funds addressing specific financial constraints.  Access to assistance from the project will be 
based eligibility criteria (including pre-investment studies) and anchored on competitive 
processes.  
 
EPSs would be established, whenever possible, around the investment supported by Component 
1. They would also be accompanied by various types of financing incentives and facilities, on a 
matching-grant basis, in order to support:  
 
-Acquisition, rational use, and maintenance of production and marketing infrastructure;  
 
-Productivity and/or quality enhancing technology;  
 
-Processing, storage, and marketing facilities along the value chain that would increase market 
access for smallholders;  
 
-Innovation and demand-driven research  
 
Component 3: Institutional support and capacity development (US$ 7.5-10 million IDA).  This 
component would develop the capacity of actors at different levels, including apex producer 
organizations, core sectoral public services insofar as they are instrumental to support 
smallholders’ productivity and access to the markets and the establishment of a legal and 
regulatory framework conducive to the sustainable development of agricultural value chains.  
 
Component 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (US$ 2.5-5 million IDA).  This 
component would support the establishment, equipment and operations of a small project 
coordination unit, responsible for project implementation, procurement, financial management 
and overall monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rural areas, nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Rensponsibility for environmental issues lies mainly with the Ministry of Environment and 
Protection of Nature. The environmental law of 1996 and its implementation decrees require that 
environmental assessments be conducted for all infrastructure projects and be be reviewed by an 
interministerial committee chaired by the Ministry in charge of environment. Activities under the 
project have to be in compliance with national regulation. The World Bank has approved in June 
2008, a $20 mm Environmental and Social Capacity Building project which will contribute to 
the empowerment of the Ministry in charge of Environment and social issues.  
 
The Ministry of Rural Development, in charge of project coordination, has limited knowledge 
of WB safeguard policies. Capacity development needs will be assessed and compensatory 
measures proposed by the ESMF.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Because of its support to agricultural activities, the project is expected to have site-specific, 
limited, and mostly mitigated impacts on the environment. Because the exact nature of the 
intervention and their exact locations cannot be determined, the Borrower will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will formulate standard 
methods and procedures, along with institutional arrangements, for screening, reviewing, 
implementing, and monitoring of subproject-specific Environment Management Plans.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will exclude interventions that could have significant conversion or degradation 
of natural habitat areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will exclude interventions that could have significant conversion or degradation 
of forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Most project activities will aim to increase agricultural production and productivity and may 
include and/or induce the use of pesticides. For this reason, the Borrower will prepare a Pest 
Management Plan   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will exclude interventions explicitly affecting Physical Cultural Resources. 
However, provisions for managing chance finds will be included in the ESMF.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The Project might intervene in rural areas of Cameroon where Pygmies, a minority ethnic 
group, may be present. The final determination on triggering this policy will be done during 
appraisal mission (Dec. 2008). Because the exact location of the interventions cannot be 
determined, the Borrower could be asked to prepare an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some project activities (irrigated perimeters, rural roads, building of small infrastructure) 
may include involuntary resettlement. Because the exact nature and location of  investments 
cannot be determined up front, the Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
OP/BP 7.50 is triggered because the project may support rehabilitation of irrigation schemes 
in the North and Far North of Cameroon, particularly on the Logone river, with potential, even 
though limited, interference with Lake Chad and international watersheds. The borrower is 
assessing whether Cameroon is using any water extraction agreement they may have with Chad 
and will make available relevant documentation to the bank by Dec 10, 2008. In any case, the 
recipient will be advised to proceed with notification to riparians by Dec. 31, 2008 at the latest, 
with a 60-day period for their responses (also see under III.C below).   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/23/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is expected that the safeguard studies be completed between November 2008 and January 
2009. The EA, ESMF, IPPF, and RPF will be prepared, approved and disclosed (both in-
country and in InfoShop) prior to appraisal.  
 
For OP 7.50, riparians shall be notified by December 31, 2008 and would be given a period 
of three months to respond. For OP 4.10, a final determination on whether it should be 
triggered will be done during the pre-appraisal mission (December 9-19, 2008).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
11/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
11/24/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
