Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC4213
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cameroon 
Project ID:  P112635 
Project Name:  Agricultural Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Renato Nardello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 18, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Irrigation and drainage 
(20%);Roads and highways (20%);Animal production (10%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.50 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
9.50
22.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To increase the competitiveness of beneficiary producer organizations working on 
specific value chains. It is expected that the project will lead to increased value of 
marketed production through increased productivity, quality, and marketing of 
productions. While smallholder producers will be the main project beneficiaries, it is 
expected that the project would also benefit different stakeholders along the value chains. 
The project will concentrate its activities in areas with high growth potential for the target 
value chains.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would be a Specific Investment Loan. It would span six years, with 
an IDA allocation of US$60 million and would comprise four components.  
 
COMPONENT 1: Strengthening Key Rural Infrastructure (US$23.5 million IDA) 
would finance the rehabilitation of key rural infrastructure such as rural roads, and 
irrigated perimeters.  
Page  2
(a) 
Component 1.1: Rural Roads (US$ 14.3 million IDA). The project would finance 
the rehabilitation of about 500 km of rural roads (100-150 km of heavy rehabilitation, 
350-400 km of light rehabilitation) with the main purpose of connecting high-potential 
production areas to markets. Investments under this subcomponents will be identified as 
to support investment under sub-component 1.2 and component 2.  
 
(b) 
Component 1.2: Irrigated perimeters (US$ 9.2 million IDA). The project would 
finance the rehabilitation of about 11,000 hectares of irrigated perimeters in different 
production areas with the purpose of supporting national rice production. Target areas 
could include, Santchou (West), Ndiop (North West), Lagdo (North), Maga-Semry and 
Yagoua (Far North).  
 
COMPONENT 2: Economic partnership schemes (US$23.0 million IDA).  The 
component will strengthen selected value chains by supporting the establishment of 
Economic Partnership Schemes encompassing (i) agreements between different actors of 
the value chains; and (ii) access to investment funds addressing specific technical and/or 
financial constraints.  
 
EPSs are intended to create solid and mutually advantageous (win-win) relationships 
between producer organizations and other value chain actors with the purpose of 
increasing or improving producers’ access to market opportunities. Most likely, EPS 
would be established between producer organizations and an agro-industrial complex or 
market agent to provide a certain quantity of produce at a certain price over a defined 
period, but could include linkage with providers of technical assistance and agricultural 
services (both private and public), input distributors, financial institutions.  
 
Eligibility to assistance under this component will be based on clear criteria (including 
pre-investment studies) and anchored on competitive processes. It is expected that up to 
80 percent of the funds under this component will be allocated to support pre-selected 
value chains (rice, palm oil, plantain, corn, pork, dairy, and poultry), while the remaining 
20 percent would be available to support other value chains. Component 2 will comprise 
the following sub-components:  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Support to the establishment of EPSs.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Matching Grant Facility (MGF).  
 
COMPONENT 3: Institutional support and capacity development (US$ 5.3 million 
IDA) would strengthen the capacity of actors at different levels and would include the 
following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Developing the capacity of apex organizations in order to improve their functions 
in terms of advocacy, organization, negotiation, management, strategy formulation, 
policy dialogue, operations.  
 
(ii) 
Strengthening core functions of sectoral public services insofar as they are 
instrumental to support smallholders’ productivity and access to the markets (seeds 
certification and control, formulation and analysis of sectoral policies, food safety 
standards, veterinary services, monitoring of sectoral resources).  
 
(iii) 
Supporting the establishment of sectoral legal and regulatory framework 
conducive to the sustainable development of agricultural value chains (fertilizers, seed 
control, security of land tenure, irrigation policy, rural roads maintenance, agricultural tax 
code, veterinary drugs, etc.).  
Page  3
COMPONENT 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (US$ 8.2 million 
IDA) would support the establishment, equipment and operations of a lean project 
coordination unit, responsible for project implementation, procurement, financial 
management and overall monitoring and evaluation. The component would also support 
the establishment of an M&E system, a baseline study (to be started with the PPF) and an 
impact evaluation study, as well as the monitoring of safeguard measures and impacts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will intervene in seven regions out of the ten egions of Cameroon:  
 
Sud, Littoral: Oil Palm, Plantain, Pork  
 
Centre: Plantain, Poultry  
 
Adamaoua: Dairy, Poultry, Maize  
 
North and Far North: Irrigation, Poultry  
 
West and Nort-West: Dairy, Poultry, Maize, Pork   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While the project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts, potential negative 
impacts of its activities are likely to include:  
 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS  
 
(i) water and soil pollution due to construction activities, increased use of pesticides and 
herbicides as well as agro-processing activities such as milling and processing of palm 
oil; (ii) deforestation and water pollution due to land clearing and fruit processing for 
palm oil production; (iii) soil erosion and silting due to the rehabilitation of water 
Page  4
management structures for irrigated schemes, as well as to poor agricultural practices; 
and (iv) loss of flora and fauna due to the use of quarries as sources of construction 
materials.  
 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE SOCIAL IMPACTS  
 
(a) loss of livelihoods due to displacement and resettlement caused in particular by the 
rehabilitation of roads; (b) increased social tension between Pygmies and Bantus due to 
the extension of agricultural activities, particularly in the Center, East and South regions; 
(c) increased tensions over access to natural resources (water and land in particular) 
because of increased agricultural activities; (d) reduction of land available for livestock 
grazing due to increased agricultural activities.  
 
POTENTIAL NEGATIVE HEALTH IMPACTS  
 
If left unattended, project activities could also have such as: (i) an increase in the 
incidence of malaria and bilharzias due to increase in the surface of water management 
structures; (ii) pesticide poisoning due to the unsafe application and management of 
pesticides and herbicides by untrained personnel; (iv) traffic accidents and exposure to 
dust and noise of the population near construction sites.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project could lead to minor cases of resettlement linked to the rehabilitation of roads. 
However, the option of limiting the intervention to rehabilitation only should 
considerably reduce the number and the extent of these cases.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
1) The project opted not to develop new large infrastructures (irrigated perimeters and 
roads) limiting interventions under Component 1 to rehabilitation only.  
 
2)
The project positively excluded sensible areas such as Natural Habitats and 
Permanent Forests as defined in the Cameroon Forest Law of 1994.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the exact nature and location of the activities could not be identified prior to 
appraisal, to ensure that potential negative environmental and social impacts of future 
sub-projects are identified and appropriately mitigated the Borrower has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), an Indigenous People Development Framework, and a Pest 
Management Plan (PMP). The set of documents was approved and disclosed in 
Cameroon on April 9,2009 an
d
at the Bank’s Infoshop on April 10, 2009.  
 
With respect to Cameroonian zoning plan developed under Forestry Law 1994, the 
project will not fund activities in the Permanent Forest (Forest concessions, Protected 
Areas such as National Park, fragile ecology zones). Marshland areas will also be 
excluded from funding by the project.  
Page  5
Concerning OP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways), by letter from the Ministry 
of Plan (MINEPAT) dated February 27, 2009, addressed to the governments of Chad, 
Niger, and Nigeria through the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Niger River 
Authority the Borrower notified its riparians countries about the project activities and 
asked them to comment by March 31 2009.  
 
Although the Bank’s operational policy on the safety of dams  has not been triggered, 
the project will ensure that those sub-projects involving the rehabilitation or construction 
of small dams (less than 5 meters in height) will prepare generic safety analyses as per 
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams. While the potential negative environmental and social impacts 
of unsafe small dams is known, the ESMF  describes the mitigation impacts measures of 
functioning small dams such as flood protection; storage of surface water; establishment 
of irrigation and drainage networks, replenishment of groundwater resources; and 
positive effects on biodiversity.  
 
Although the OP 4.36 Forests has not been triggered, the project will be on compliance 
with this policy. In fact, with respect to Cameroonian zoning plan developed under 
Forestry Law 1994, the project will not fund activities in the Permanent Forests (Forest 
concessions, Protected areas as National Park, fragile ecology zones). Marshland areas 
will also be excluded from funding by the project.  
 
Responsibility for environmental issues lies mainly with the Ministry of Environment 
and Protection of Nature. The environmental law of 1996 requires that environmental 
assessments be conducted for all infrastructure projects and be be reviewed by an 
interministerial committee chaired by the Ministry in charge of environment. Activities 
under the project have to comply with national regulation. The World Bank has approved 
in June 2008, a $20 million Environmental and Social Capacity Building project which 
will contribute to the empowerment of the Ministry in charge of Environment and social 
issues.  
 
The Ministries in charge of Agriculture and of Animal Production, responsible for 
project implementation, have limited knowledge of WB safeguard policies. Capacity 
development needs have been assessed and compensatory measures proposed by the 
ESMF. The project budget and activities include measures to strengthen the capacity of 
stakeholders and to implement and monitor the measures recommended by the safeguard 
documents.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the secoral ministries in charge of agriculture and animal production 
(MINADER and MINEPIA respectively), as well as producer organizations represented 
by their national apex organization, PLANOPAC. The Ministry of Environment and 
Nature Protection will also be consulted regularly on EIAs issues.  
 
Page  6
People potentially affected by future subprojects include residents of the areas where the 
subprojects will be implemented, neighbors  of rural roads, user of irrigated perimeters. 
People potentially affected will be first consulted during the environmental and social 
screening process and subsequent discussions of mitigation measures. If the screening 
process revealed the need to carry out a stand-alone  Environmental Impact assessment, 
potentially affected populations would be further consulted and participate in the 
identification of adequate mitigation measures. Results of these consultations will be 
accessible to the public. The project will support the administrative fees required by the 
Cameroonian EIA regulation when such studies are required.  
 
Indigenous People were consulted during the preparation of the IPPF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/13/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/11/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
04/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
04/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
04/23/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/23/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/23/2009 
Comments:   
