Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3990 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P112975 
Project Name: Cameroon - Competitive Value Chains 
Task Team Leader: Vincent Palmade 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (80%);Ports, waterways and shipping 
(10%);Micro- and SME finance (10%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Tax policy and administration 
(P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Export development and competitiveness (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to contribute to increased competitiveness of the economy 
through development of high potential value chains and improvements in the investment climate. 
This is expected to lead to an increase in productive private investments and exports contributing 
to growth in income and employment.  
 
Key outcome indicators would include: improved productivity of firms in the value chain, 
increased wood transformation, increased number of tourists to the selected sites, increased FX 
revenues from ICT, improved “Doing Business” indicators and increased number of registered 
firms.  
 
Key intermediate outcomes would include: rehabilitated tourism sites, tourism roads and 
tourism hotels, a techno park, professional training centers, a national strategy for ports, new 
institutional arrangements for access road maintenance and rehabilitation, one stop shop for 
creating a business, institutional set up for competition, operational investment promotion 
agency and investments supported by the financing and technical assistance facilities.  
Page  2
Indicators will be refined during preparation using realism and selectivity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Choice of instrument. The project will be a five year US$60 million IDA credit (SIL) that will 
leverage Government, donors and private sector resources.  
 
Implementation. The project will be coordinated by a dedicated team in MINEPAT reporting to 
a
high level Steering Committee (the Minister of Economy suggested to anchor the project at the 
level of the President’s office to ensure smooth and swift implementation). The project will have 
four components, as described below:  
 
Component 1: Structuring key value chains (~35 million IDA). This component will support a 
critical mass of infrastructure investments, professional training and reforms specific to each of 
the selected value chains. These will be complemented by the cross-cutting activities of 
components 2 and 3. The subcomponents would be:  
 
•
Forest-based economic activities – the project will promote secondary and tertiary 
processing of timber products up to furniture; fight illegal logging through formalization and 
promoting partnerships with industrial forest companies to supply local/regional markets; run 
training courses for specialized forest industry workers at the “Centre Technique du Bois” (to be 
rehabilitated through a PPP); support cooperatives and communities growing tree-crops such as 
Gum Arabic trees, cashew and teak; and promote co-generation of energy from wood residues.  
The project will complement and leverage the on-going forestry project.  
 
•
Nature based tourism – the project will rehabilitate the roads to the world class tourism 
sites (e.g. Rhumsiki and Korup Park), rehabilitate the state-owned hotels in these sites (through 
PPPs), provide training and standards (e.g. for the guides), provide technical assistance to 
improve air access and security and develop promotion activities. The project will coordinate 
closely with the WWF.  
 
•
ICT – the project will support the creation of a techno park (like in Rwanda and Tunisia) 
including the provision of a training facility (as a PPP). A pre-requisite will be to reduce telecom 
prices by increasing competition (e.g. through the auction of additional mobile licenses). The 
project will complement and leverage the Central African Backbone project under preparation.  
 
•
Cotton/textiles/apparel – potential to be assessed and activities to be specified during 
project preparation.  
 
Component 2: Reducing factor costs (~$7 million IDA). This component will help the 
government tackle the cross-cutting infrastructure and regulatory issues which affect the 
competitiveness of all value chains. This will complement the on-going infrastructure and energy 
projects. The subcomponents would be:  
 
•
Technical assistance to the government to support the development process of the port 
national strategy, in particular of the new Kribi port.  
 
•
Technical assistance to improve the institutional arrangements for the rehabilitation and 
maintenance of access roads.  
 
•
Investments and technical assistance to improve the business environment. Theproject 
will help improve the Doing Business indicators and the institutional set up for PPPs and 
competition. The project will support the creation of a one stop shop for company registration. 
Page  3
This sub-component will be developed and implemented jointly with the IFC. Policy issues 
related to access to land will be covered with the parallel agricultural competitiveness project.  
 
Component 3: Encouraging private investments (~15 million IDA).  This component will 
stimulate investments by providing technical and financial support to banks and companies. It 
will also help improve the investment regime and set up a world class investment promotion 
agency. The sub-components would be:  
 
•
Investment and technical assistance to help banks expand credits to enterprises. This 
could include a credit line and/or partial guarantee as well as technical assistance to the selected 
private banks. This component will be developed, funded and implemented jointly with the IFC 
(following OP 8.30).  
 
•
Investment and technical assistance to help companies develop and implement 
investment projects. This could be in the form of a matching grant managed by the Chamber of 
Commerce and GICAM which have good internal governance. Access to assistance from the 
project will be based on eligibility criteria (including pre-investment studies) and anchored on 
competitive processes. This sub-component will also be developed and implemented jointly with 
the IFC.  
 
•
Investment and technical assistance to set up a world class investment promotion agency 
(as a PPP) to understand what it will take to attract and negotiate with leading strategic investors 
in the key value chains (including agribusiness), mobilize the Diaspora, facilitate investment and 
advocate for key reforms. This will include technical assistance to improve the investment 
incentive regime.  
 
•
Technical assistance to the Competitiveness Committee which is responsible for 
coordinating and supporting the initiatives on the value chains and factor costs.  
 
Component 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (~$3 million IDA). This 
component will support the establishment, equipment and operations of a dedicated team within 
the MINEPAT reporting to a high level Steering Committee. The team will be responsible for 
overall project implementation, procurement, financial management and M&E.  The project will 
support the hiring of world class technical experts. The component will support the establishment 
of an M&E system and critical studies, such as baseline and an impact evaluation study. Finally, 
the component will help set-up stakeholder working groups for each of the sub-components so as 
to make project implementation more "bite-size".   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Most of the project activities will take place around Douala, Yaounde, Kribi, Limbe/Kumba and 
Maroua/Garoua   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Responsibility for environmental issues lies mainly with the Ministry of Environment and 
Protection of Nature. The environmental law of 1996 and its implementation decrees require that 
environmental assessments be conducted for all infrastructure projects which have to be 
reviewed by an inter-ministerial committee chaired by the Ministry in Charge of Environment 
with representatives of sectoral ministries. The activities under the project have to be in 
compliance with national regulation. The World Bank has approved in June 2008, a $20 mm 
Page  4
Environmental and Social Capacity Building project which will contribute to the empowerment 
of the Ministry in charge of Environment and social issues.  
 
There is limited capacity and experience in the Ministry of Economy and Planning to manage 
environmental issues.  The project will include measures to strengthen environmental 
management capacity in the team(s) responsible for project preparation and implementation to 
ensure satisfactory performance. The World Bank safeguards specialists will work closely with 
the counterpart by providing training when needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will fund a few small targeted investments - e.g. rehabilitation of access roads to 
tourism sites, rehabilitation of hotels and ICT techno-park. The project is thus expected to have 
site-specific, limited, and mostly mitigated impacts on the environment. The borrower will 
prepare ESIAs for these. The Borrower will also prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)for those investments which would not have been specifically 
identified by appraisal. The ESMF will formulate standard methods and procedures, along with 
institutional arrangements for screening, review, implementation and monitoring, of sub-project 
specific Environment Management Plans. The borrower will also ensure that the technical 
assistance provided under component 2 for the national port strategy and the institutional set up 
for the rehabilitation and maintenance of access roads will encompass the environment and 
social protection dimensions. The borrower will also review and strengthen the environmental 
and social due diligence capacity of the participating banks and institutions participating in the 
credit line, partial guarantee and matching grant schemes envisaged under component 3. The 
project will also ensure that  the investment promotion agency (also envisaged under component 
3) is equipped to provide advice to investors on environmental and social management 
requirements under national legislation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project may fund small infrastructure in support of ecoutourism in or around selected 
protected areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will support the development of a competitive wood value chain, focusing 
primarilly on wood transformation and coordinating closely with the existing forestry (PSFE) 
project. The extent to which the requirements of the Forest OP will be covered by the on-going 
forestry project will be determined during preparation.  The project might promote forest and 
timber product certification which would be useful from both an environmental and an export 
perspective, .  The project may also promote eco-tourism near protected forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
All agribusiness value chains will be covered by the paralell Agriculture Competitiveness 
project under preparation   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
May be triggered by some of the tourism related activities - to be determined by feasability 
studies   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Investments in the Kribi area and in or around the Campo Ma'an National Park may affect 
indigenous people.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Road rehabilitation may involve relocation of economic activities that currently impinge on 
existing roads.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
No activities related to dams   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
No activities related to international waters   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
No activities in disputed areas   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/21/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project preparation team will recruit consultants to prepare:  
 
1.
ESIAs for the identified investments  
 
2.
an ESMF for the investments that have not been identified prior to appraisl  
 
3.
Resettlement Process and Policy Frameworks for populations affected by road 
rehabilitation  
 
4.
an indigenous people framework, that takes into account existing policy frameworks and 
plans  
 
The plan is to have the documentation ready for disclosure in country as well as in the 
InfoShop by July 2009 - the appraisal mission is planned for September 2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vincent Palmade 
01/07/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/09/2009 
Comments:  approved 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
01/09/2009 
Comments:   
