Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4083 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P113027 
Project Name: CM-Community Development Program Support Project Phase-II 
Task Team Leader: Ousmane Seck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (30%);General education sector 
(20%);Health (20%);Water supply (20%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Decentralization (P);Indigenous 
peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.60
1.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives (PDO) and beneficiaries would be the same as for PNDP 1. 
The project is in support to the overall program’s objective of enhancing the opportunities and 
livelihoods of rural people in Cameroon. To that end, its Development Objective is to improve 
delivery of defined services in targeted communities, strengthen the ongoing process of 
decentralization and enhance the ability of local governments to finance their mandated 
activities, including their capacity to plan. The main beneficiaries will be communes and 
communities supported during PNDP 1 and at least 100 communes in four new provinces to be 
added in the program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
PRELIMINARY PROJECT DESCRIPTION  
 
This second phase of the Community Development Program would expand the strategies of the 
first phase to all provinces, with activities initiated in every rural commune. It would maintain 
and reinforce its support to communes from the previous phase and target new eligible 
Page  2
communes. Particular attention would be paid to the adoption and promulgation of pending laws 
and decrees in order to improve the legal framework of decentralization. Significant progress on 
this area would be a trigger to move to the third phase of the program. At the Government’s 
request, the project would help prepare new laws and decrees as necessary. It would also help 
clarify the procedures and responsibilities regarding support to communes, so as to significantly 
improve the quality of service delivery and building up the local governance capacity. Once 
communes have shown satisfactory performance, more resources and local development 
functions would be transferred from project entities to them. The project would also promote 
collaboration among communes supported during the first phase of the program, and project 
funds could be used for intercommunal subprojects, if communes so request.  
 
The environmental and social management capacity built under PNDP 1 would be expanded 
under the leadership of the project’s environmental specialist and MINEP and funded under 
PNDP 2. The Provincial Environmental Focal Point (PEFP) for the Southern Province will be 
responsible for the environmental issues related to the pygmies. Under PANDP 2, additional 
PEFPs would be hired, one for each of the four remaining provinces to ensure that sub-projects 
are screened at the planning stage and mitigation measures are properly implemented, and 
relevant environmental training is provided at the local and provincial levels.  
 
The project will include four components, that is, (a) local development support; (b) support for 
decentralisation; (c) capacity building at the local level; and (d) coordination, management, 
communication, monitoring and evaluation of the project.  
 
Component 1: Local development support.  The goals of Component 1 will be to improve the 
socio-economic conditions, to increase the productivity of the natural resource base of each of 
the rural communes, as well as to increase incomes. To achieve these goals requires putting in 
place various infrastructures and socio-economic investments. This component will channel 
grants to communes to co-finance their proposed subprojects as identified in their development 
plans. The communal development plans (PCD) will cover both communal investments and 
subprojects for community-based organizations (CBOs) with legal status. The project will 
provide (under Component 3) the technical assistance required to help the communes prepare 
these development plans. The methodology for preparing the development plans was defined 
during the first phase and would be updated as necessary prior to the launching of this second 
phase. The communes will be put more clearly onto the driver’s seat, while emphasizing the 
collaboration among communes for intercommunal subprojects. CBOs will be closely involved 
in this process. The communes and CBOs may receive grants for any public subproject they 
deem important, as long as they meet specific eligibility criteria. The criteria for providing funds 
to communes will be revisited during pre-appraisal.  
 
Component 2: Support for decentralization  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Institutional enhancement of the decentralization process. The efficiency 
of the use of funds provided by the various parties (the State, the private sector, and the civil 
society) to local governments, in particular to the rural communes, depends on the success of 
implementation of the decentralization process.  This component would make it possible to (i) 
conduct specific studies necessary to optimize management of project activities; (ii) organize 
Page  3
workshops and study tours to ensure intra- and intercommunal dialogue; (iii) strengthen the 
capacities of the various parties supporting implementation of the decentralization process, 
including through provision of
 technical assistance to the “Comite-Interministeriel des Services 
Locaux'' to help them prepare new legal tools on decentralization. To that end, technical 
assistance will be provided if necessary, for preparing a compilation of these legal documents as 
a
common reference for all concerned parties, including NGOs.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Mapping of communal boundaries.  
 
The mapping of communal boundaries is the only new activity to be included in PAPNDP 2. 
The PAPNDP 2 support for basic mapping of commune boundaries will provide communities 
with a tool for proper planning of local investment priorities and monitoring of land use and 
management. The project will also help further strengthen decentralized partnership on local 
development.  
 
Component 3: Capacity building for communes and coordination at the local level  
 
The actual responsibilities transferred to communes by the decentralization law require 
development of new capacities in order to ensure, on the one hand, understanding and adopting 
their new roles and efficient accomplishment of their missions, and, on the other hand, the right 
aptitude and adequate capabilities to assume responsibility for the management of local 
investments. The Project will join forces with the Training Center of the Municipal 
Administration”CEFAM”, and under this component would make it possible to:  
 
-
inform and train the members of the commune councils and committees attached to it, 
including civil society in how to efficiently play their role, providing them with the tools 
necessary for managing the local governance institutions, for establishing an environment for 
local economic development and promoting public-private partnerships;  
 
-
inform all stakeholders on the objectives and strategy of the project and help build the 
capacity of citizens to become involved in planning, implementation and monitoring of local 
development actions and assume ownership of project through training and provision of 
technical assistance to rural communes and communities, and to local service providers for 
quality service delivery;  
 
-
help develop  an operations manual or guidelines for communes to improve the quality of 
activities and control at the community level;  
 
Further develop close partnership between the project coordination units, the decentralized 
offcies of MINEP and other relevant sector ministries, as part of the environmental training 
program for members of approval committees, elected officials of municipalities, and provincial 
project staff.  
 
Component 4: Coordination, management, communication, monitoring and evaluation of the 
project  
Page  4
This component aims at ensuring: (i) the coordination and efficient administrative, technical 
and financial management of the program; (ii) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and 
impacts of the program; (iii) acquisition of the equipment necessary for implementing the 
program; and (iv) development of communication activities to enhance public knowledge about 
the project goals and local development potential and practices.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
PNDP 2 will cover eligible communes in the following provinces: Center, South, Adamaoua, 
North, Extreme North, West, East, Littoral, South West, and North West.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has established environmental and social management capacity under PNDP 1 
through the (i) recruitment of an Environmental Specialist at the National Project Coordination 
Unit, and the appointment of an Environmental Focal Point at the Project Coordination Unit in 
the South Province; (ii) provision of environmental training, including the use of the revised 
environmental and social screening form, for members of the Community Approval Committees, 
Provincial Approval Committes, local service providers, local elected officials of the 
municipalities, and Provincial Project Coordination Units; (iii) revision of the environmental and 
social screening form for micro-projects to take into account experience on the ground; (iv) 
preparation of a market waste management plan to be implemented at the markets constructed 
under PNDP 1 and PNDP 2; (v) preparation of a medical waste management plan to be 
implemented at the health centers constructed under PNDP 1 and PNDP 2; and (vi) inclusion of 
environmental and social monitoring indicators in PNDP's M&E system.  
 
In May 2008, PNDP 1 prepared an Environmental Audit to assess the effectiveness of 
environmental and social management of a select number of micro-projects. The audit concluded 
that the basic institutional arrangements for environmental and social management were sound 
but needed further strengthening, particularly as regards (i) coordination of activities between 
PNDP, MINEP, and other sector institutions; (ii) more efficient involvement of relevant 
institutions at the provincial, commune and local levels; (iii) the use of micro-project specific 
environmental and social screening forms; (iv) well-structured annual environmental training 
programs; and (v) proper funding of environmental assessments for micro-projects.  
 
Under PNDP 2, additional Provincial Environmental Focal Points will be hired, and 
environmental training will be responsive to the needs of beneficiaries at the local, commune, 
and provincial levels. A permanent funding source of environmental assessments for micro-
projects, if required, is under discussion.  
 
As appropriate, the Borrower has implemented the provisions of the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF)under PNDP 1 and will continue to do so under PNDP 2.  
 
Under PNDP 1, the Borrower has developed an action plan for the implementation of the 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (June 2003). An additional action plan should be prepared 
and additional funds should be provided for its implementation under PNDP 2. The institutional 
arrangement and human resources are already in place.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  5
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered due to the potential localized adverse environmental and social 
impacts likely to result from the construction of future small-scale infrastructure micro-projects, 
and the generation of medical waste at health care posts likely to be constructed under this 
project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
This policy is triggered with respect to the pygmy communities living primarily in the 
Southern Province as well as in other parts of the country.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy is triggered with respect to potential land acquisition during the project 
implementation as a result of the construction of small-scale infrastructure micro-projects.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project is in the process of determining whether any shared water sources - surface water 
as well as ground water - are likely to be used by sub-projects supplying drinking water.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/17/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
Since the activities under PNDP 2 will be essentially the same as those under PNDP 2, the 
project will: (a) re-disclose the existing Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(June 2003);  
 
(b) disclose the project's mini medical waste management plan prepared under PNDP 1;  
 
(c) apply the provisions of the original Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to micro-
projects involving land acquisition as necessary; the Resettlement Policy Framework (June 
2003) will be re-disclosed;  
 
(d) the Indigenous People Development Plan (June 2003) and an additional action plan 
which will be prepared to complement the first action plan made for the IPDP1 will be 
disclosed; this new action plan will select the mitigation instruments which could be 
reconducted from IPDP1 and which new ones should be prepared.  
 
All safeguard documents mentioned above will be disclosed in Cameroon and at the Bank's 
Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ousmane Seck 
01/08/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/08/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/08/2009 
Comments:   
