Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4401 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/15/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cape Verde 
Project ID: P107456 
Project Name: CV-SME Capacity Building and Economic Governance Project 
Task Team Leader: Alvaro S. Gonzalez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (50%);Micro- and SME finance (50%) 
Theme: Other economic management (40%);Small and medium enterprise support 
(40%);Land administration and management (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's overall objective is to improve the performance of small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) and the transparency and efficiency of public sector governance.  
 
Improvements in the performance of SMEs will be based on propose project measures to: (a) 
improve the investment climate in areas that mostly affect SMEs by targeting these reforms and 
ensuring their execution by building the capacity of institutions implementing these investment 
climate reforms and of the institutions that interface with the private sector; and (b) improving 
SME performance. To improve the transparency and efficiency of public sector governance, the 
project would support: (a) acceleration of reforms and modernization in public finance, 
procurement; and (b) improvements in the public sectors statistics generation and analysis.  
 
Project indicators will be developed during preparation.  These will include: growth in sales or 
increased employment of enterprises that receive technical assistance under the project compared 
to firms not provided the same assistance; improvements in the property registry system; reduced 
cost to procedures to start a business; achievement of standard norms in public financial 
Page  2
management; and the implementation of a monitoring and evaluation system with improved data 
generation and analysis capabilities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would encompass an integrated and multi-pronged approach that will address key 
bottlenecks constraining expanded SME participation in economic growth by improving the 
investment climate and providing support to SMEs and private sector representative institutions. 
The project would also support public institutions that interface with the private sector.  Building 
on the Government#s recent success in improving governance and making the public sector more 
efficient, the project proposes support to complete unfinished reforms in public finance 
management. The project also supports Government#s efforts to improve its capacity to track 
changes in the economy through better generation, management, and dissemination of statistics. 
Lastly, the project would provide financing for project management, including auditing; and for 
monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes. Key activities included in the main two 
components are described below.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Praia, Cape Verde   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/14/2009 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro S. Gonzalez 
05/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/11/2009 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
the project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impact, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
05/11/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
