Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3959 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Central African Republic 
Project ID: P111679 
Project Name: Support to Vulnerable Groups Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Bernard Harborne 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTCS 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Sub-national government 
administration (40%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Support to Vulnerable Groups Community Development Project (PCDAGV) seeks to 
strengthen the capacities of rural communes in the Central African Republic to plan and 
implement local development activities in an inclusive and sustainable manner that builds trust 
between citizens and their Government.  
 
The key result indicators include the following:  
 
ï‚§ 
Percentage of subprojects that are fully functional one year after their completion  
 
ï‚§ 
Percentage of Local Development Plans where the sub-prefecture sector staff have 
participated in the full project cycle (diagnosis, planning, and implementation)  
 
ï‚§ 
Percentage change in surveyed citizens’ level of trust in the Government.  
 
ï‚§ 
Percentage of completed Local Development Plans.  
 
ï‚§ 
Percentage of women in CVDs and CDCs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The PCDAGV will be predominantly financed by Specific Investment Loan of $8 million from 
the International Development Association. The project responds to the Government of CAR’s 
desire to scale up an approach that provides demonstrable results to citizens and that strengthens 
social capital between diverse stakeholders in rural areas. In addition, the proposed project 
design is based on the following basic principles that were agreed upon with aforementioned 
Preparatory Committee: i) strengthen the involvement of sustainable structures in the 
implementation of the project both at local and national levels; ii) finance a diverse set of public-
good development activities, including those in agriculture and the social sectors; iii) balance the 
need for rapid, tangible results with the need for sustainability; iv) enlarge the geographic 
coverage of the approach; v) respect the subsidiarity principle; and vi) use the project as a means 
to improve trust between citizens and the State.  In addition to the Specific Invesment Loan, the 
project will be partly financed (cf. Component A below) by a $3 million trust fund grant from the 
State and Peace-building Fund which is currently being sought.  
 
Project Components  
 
Component A: Capacity Strengthening for Local Development (US$3.0 million): This 
component will empower rural communes and villages to prepare and implement development 
plans in an inclusive manner, with adequate support from deconcentrated Government staff. The 
planned capacity building activities will address the technical and fiduciary skills needed at the 
different decentralized levels to implement local development activities.  This component will be 
financed by a $3 million grant from the newly formed State and Peace-building Fund.  
 
Component B: Local Development Fund (US$5.0 million): The objective of this component 
will be for targeted communes and villages to receive and manage funds in a timely and 
transparent manner. This component will transfer resources to rural communes and villages to 
finance the public socio-economic investments identified during the local development planning 
process.  
 
Component C: Priority Response Fund (US$1.0 million): The priority response component’s 
objective is two-fold: (i) offer a window of opportunity to expedite the delivery of most-needed 
resources, and (ii) encourage participant ownership and buy-in of the project by demonstrating a 
tangible dividend to collaboration.  This component will disburse funds in small increments 
(10% of amounts available under the LDF envisaged) to finance “low-hanging fruit” sub-projects 
that areboth necessary to community life and ripe to be executed.  The Priority Response Fund 
will allow for rapid project selection and financing approval through a set of procedures that are 
lighter and more nimble than those of the LDF.  As such, it will give the project time to develop 
some of its more comprehensive but labor-intensive institutional structures and is envisaged to 
close within two years of project effectiveness or when it is exhausted (whichever comes first).  
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$2.0 million): This 
component will seek to have all project components effectively coordinated and monitored. It 
will support a Project Coordination Team (PCT) responsible for technical and fiduciary oversight 
of the project. It will be mainstreamed within the Department Community Development in the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and its size will be limited to core functions critical to the project’s 
success and forwhich severe capacity constraints exist in the Central African civil service.  
Page  3
With respect to partnership, the Task Team has already had substantive discussions with the 
AfDB, EU, and UNCDF. AfDB has the potential to co-/parallel-finance the operation, and 
agreement has already been reached in principle to harmonize, including having the same 
Preparatory Committee, Project Implementation Manual, and project staff. Significant progress 
remains to outline coverage areas, financing modalities, and to determine whether co-financing 
would be possible (it would be the first co-financed operation between IDA and AfDB).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The PCDAGV will focus on vulnerable communities with a focus on surrounding peri-urban 
centers supported by EC and AfDB financing. The project will be located in the regions of 
Lobaye, Sangha Mbaere, Mambere-Kadei, Ombella MPoko, Mambere ; Ouham ; prefectures of 
Kemo, Ouaka in the Region 6 and the prefectures of Mbomou and Basse Kotto.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity in addressing safeguard issues will be further assessed, and 
the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists on the 
project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will fund some sub-projects – e.g., road rehabilitation, schools, health center. As 
the exact nature of most of the intervention and their exact locations cannot be determined, the 
Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
All projects activities close of the natural habitats will be excluded.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will automatically exclude all area suspect to host cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will target the vulnerable groups and the team suspects the presence of IP in the 
project areas. Due to the fact that this presence cannot be determined until the program is in 
place, the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be used.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The implementation of some sub-projects may lead to land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/19/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, with 
appropriate elements incorporated into the Field Guide and Project Implementation Manual.  
The emphasis in the EMSF should be on establishing a clear negative list, identifying the 
most likely forms of investment that communities will demand, and developing simple 
guidelines for these project types that (i) identify the environmental risks, and (ii) provide 
relevant mitigation measures.  The ESMF should allow for these guidelines to be updated 
and new ones added based on project implementation experience.  
 
A
Resettlement Framework Policy will be developed to mitigate land acquisition for 
subprojects.  
 
As the pre-evaluation mission has determined the project location, an IPDP will be 
prepared for the region of Lobaye, Sangha Mbaere and Mambere-Kadei, region of the project 
and where pygmies' campments do exist.  
 
The three documents will be disclosed in-country and the InfoShop 120 days after the 
effectiveness of the project, according to the Bank’s Disclosure Policy.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bernard Harborne 
12/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
