Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3790 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Central African Republic 
Project ID: P113221 
Project Name: CAR Emergency Food Response Project 
Task Team Leader: Renato Nardello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 22, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Primary education 
(20%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Global food crisis response (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
7.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s overall development objectives are to to (i) provide increased food access to 
primary and pre-school students in targeted areas; and (ii) support farmer’s capacity to ensure 
adequate supply response for medium-term improvement in food security.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have three components:  
 
COMPONENT 1 - School feeding programs ($3.25 million) will support school feeding to 
primary level and pre-school students in targeted regions, in the framework of the World Food 
Programme (WFP) “Support to Education for All and Health” project. The component will 
support providing services to 145,000 primary school children and 8,000 pre-school children in 
the final year of its program.  The food basket will contain cereals, blended food such as corn-
soya blend (CSB), pulses, vitamin A-enriched vegetable oil, sugar and iodized salt. Two meals 
will be served in the schools and kindergartens benefiting from WFP assistance: porridge in the 
morning and a hot meal at noon. Apart from the nutritional benefits, the program is expected to 
Page  2
have significant impact on school performance and attendance rates of beneficiary students. The 
program targets six prefectures: Ouaka, Basse Kotto, Kemo, Nana-Grebizi, Ouham and Nana-
Mambere.  
 
COMPONENT 2 
–
Agricultural supply response ($3.25 million). The component will support 
producer organizations and communities to strengthen the agricultural supply response by: 
providing improved planting material and inputs to farmers; organize technical training to 
improve productivity on a sustainable basis; and provide post-harvest infrastructure to reduce 
post-harvest losses or improve quality and marketing value. Support to farmers for production 
will concentrate on maximizing impact on the 2009 and 2010 planting seasons. These activities 
will be implemented in collaboration with institutions instrumental to the sustainable support of 
the sector, such as the Ministry of Rural Development (MDR), the Rural Development Agency 
(ACDA), and the Agricultural Research Institute (ICRA). This will enable them to assist 
producers and producer organizations, as well as to define a medium-term framework of 
interventions. As such, this component will deliver immediate benefits while simultaneously 
preparing the groundwork for a longer-term support to crucial agriculture-related institutions. 
Twelve out of seventeen prefectures will be eligible for support: Lobaye, Sangha-Mbaere, 
Mambere-Kadei, Basse Kotto and Mbomou (in the Forest region); Ombella-MPoko, Nana-
Mambere, Ouham, Ouham-Pende, Kemo, Nana Gribizi and Ouaka (in the savannah regions)  
 
COMPONENT 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation ($0.5 million). The 
component will support the fiduciary and coordination functions of the Comite Technique 
Permanent du Programme d’Ajustement Structurel (CTP/PAS). The component will also support 
the creation and functioning of a technical committee responsible for the technical content as 
well as for overall technical guidance and monitoring of project activities under Component 2.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Twelve out of seventeen prefectures will be eligible for support: Lobaye, Sangha-Mbaere, 
Mambere-Kadei, Basse Kotto and Mbomou (in the Forest region); Ombella-MPoko, Nana-
Mambere, Ouham, Ouham-Pende, Kemo, Nana Gribizi and Ouaka (in the savannah regions)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity in addressing safeguard issues will be further assessed, and 
the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists on the 
project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Because of its support to agricultural activities, the project is expected to have limited, 
mostly mitigated, and site-specific impacts on the environment. Because the exact nature of the 
intervention, and their exact locations cannot be determined, the project will prepare an ESSAF   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
At this stage it is not possible to exclude interventions in Natural Habitats (Around National 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
parks, marshland areas).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Some project activities will aim to increase agricultural production and productivity and may 
include and/or induce the use of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will automatically exclude all area suspect to host cultural resources   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The proposed Food Response Project will focus on rural areas of CAR where Pygmies, a 
minority ethnic group, may be present. Because of this possibility, an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will exclude all activities involving involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/25/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Though the environmental and social impacts of the project will be site-specific and in most 
cases mitigated, the exact locations of the project sites are not yet known. The Government 
of CAR will update and adapt the Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF) of the LICUS-TF project, prepare a Pest Management Plan (PMP) and 
an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) to be applied during the implementation 
of the project. The project will exclude all activities requiring resettlement. These documents 
will be pub
licly disclosed in CAR and at the World Bank’s InfoShop 120 days after 
effectiveness of the project, as exception to the general Bank policy of disclosure before 
appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
07/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
07/25/2008 
Comments:   
