Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/25/2009 
Report No.:  AC4109
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Central African Republic 
Project ID:  P111679 
Project Name:  Support to Vulnerable Groups Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bernard Harborne 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTCS 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (40%);Other social services 
(40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Community Development Project aims to rehabilitate social infrastructure and 
improve the capacity of local stakeholders to plan and manage local recovery in targeted 
areas of CAR.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Capacity Strengthening for Local Development (US$1.5 million). This 
component will empower rural communes and villages to prepare and implement 
development plans in an inclusive manner, with adequate support from Government staff. 
The planned capacity building activities will address the technical and fiduciary skills 
needed at the different decentralized levels to implement local development activities. A 
Field Guide will outline a streamlined, results-oriented planning approach that is 
transparent and participatory. The Field Guide will also incorporate innovative tools and 
approaches for human security reporting and conflict prevention at the local level.  
 
Page  2
A
training-of-trainers approach will be used, and capacity building activities will be 
undertaken to transfer the requisite skills associated with the Field Guide to national 
NGOs and/or consultants, who will then train and mentor stakeholders at the local level. 
The methodology to be employed will permit targeted communes and villages to (i) 
establish, or where already in place, strengthen Village Development Committees 
(VDCs) and Communal Development Committees (CDCs), (ii) reinforce the capacities of 
de-concentrated line ministry staff and local administrations to support the planning and 
implementation of these activities; (iii) foster trust and mitigate conflicts between 
communities and Government; and (iv) stimulate the effective communication between 
diverse stakeholders involved in local development.  
 
Component B: Priority Response Fund (US$2 million): The priority response fund’s 
(PRF) objective is two-fold: (i) offer a window of opportunity to expedite the delivery of 
most-needed resources; and (ii) encourage participation and buy-in of the project by 
demonstrating a rapid tangible dividend to collaboration. This component will disburse 
funds in small increments to finance sub-projects that are ready for implementation. 
Criteria for accessing the PRF will be outlined in the Project Implementation Manual 
(PIM), but two types of projects will be earmarked in the first instance: (i) those 
articulated in existing local development plans; and (ii) those identified upon the 
guidance of the first sitting (post-project launch) of the Inter-Ministerial Committee, 
including UN agencies that have undertaken needs assessments on behalf of the 
Government, particularly in the health and water sectors. The PRF will allow for rapid 
centralized project selection and approval through a set of procedures that are lighter and 
more rapid than those of the Local Development Fund (LDF). As such, it will give the 
project time to develop some of its more comprehensive but labor-intensive institutional 
structures. The PRF will be implemented by AGETIP-CAF on behalf of the Ministry of 
Social Affairs due to its past performance and knowledge of Bank procedures. The PRF 
will close within 12-18 months of project effectiveness or when exhausted (whichever 
comes first).  
 
Component C: Local Development Fund (US$3 million): The objective of the LDF is 
for targeted communes and villages to have access to funding in a timely and transparent 
manner. Rural communes and villages will identify public socio-economic investments 
through a local development planning process. Service providers will be contracted by 
the CDP to undertake these investments during the course of the project. Criteria and 
procedures for use of the LDF will be described in detail in the Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM), and will include a negative list detailing the types of activities which will 
be ineligible for project financing. The focus of the fund will be on community public 
goods and will complement the AfDB community fund which is focused on individual 
benefits and income generation activities. The technical and fiduciary review of activities 
will take place at all Government levels in line with the decentralization process. The 
budget allocation for the four participating regions in CAR will be determined with a 
‘weighting’ formula based on population levels (80 percent of the fund) and poverty data 
(20 percent of the fund). Criteria for targeting the villages and communes will be outlined 
in detail in the PIM but will be based on the following two principles: (i) first-come-first 
serve according to development of local plans satisfactory to the project; and (ii) 
Page  3
preference given to those villages acting in concert to maximize the impact of 
collaborative implementation. This fund for sub-projects will also be implemented by 
AGETIP-CAF.  
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$1.5 million): This 
component seeks to have all project components effectively coordinated and monitored. 
It will support a Project Coordination Team (PCT) responsible for technical and fiduciary 
oversight of the project. The PCT will be mainstreamed within the Department of 
Community Development in the Ministry of Social Affairs and its size will be limited to 
core functions critical to ensure project success and overcome capacity constraints (such 
as overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and fiduciary matters). Monitoring 
and Evaluation will focus on results-oriented data collection to inform decision-making 
and impact evaluation. As baseline information is very weak support will be given 
through the CDP to ICASEES, to assist particularly on project monitoring and evaluation 
as well as strengthen capacity for information and data gathering more generally.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Geographic location. The project will support the design and implementation of the 
Government's policy with regard to community development, and will as such be 
implemented in the four following regions in the country.  
 
i. 
Nana Mambere; Mambere Kadei and Shangha-Mbaere;  
 
ii. 
Ombella-Mpoko, Ouham and Lobaye;  
 
iii. 
Kemo Quaka and Basse Kotto; and  
 
iv. Mbomou 
 
 
Key socio-economic issues. CAR is a landlocked country, with a population of 4.4 
million. According to household survey data, 67.2 percent of the population lived below 
the poverty line in 2003, with poverty particularly widespread in rural areas, at 71.7 
percent. Approximately 20 percent of the population lives in Bangui, the capital city. The 
agricultur
al sector generates more than half of the country’s GDP and 80 percent of the 
population is engaged in subsistence agriculture. Timber and the diamond industry 
account for about 16 percent and 40 percent of export earnings respectively. Despite its 
richness in natural resources, the CAR remains one of the least developed countries in the 
world (ranking 171st on the 2007 Human Development Index) largely due to its 
landlocked position, weak institutions, a poor transportation system, an unskilled work 
force, and politico-military crises. This situation has been compounded by the 
international financial crisis.  
 
The specificity of indigenous peoples (Aka). Indigenous peoples in the project area 
include the AKA Pygmies. The AKA Pygmies view the great forest of the North, the 
reserve of the Basse Lobaye and its extension as their country. They have grown in this 
forest habitat. Pygmies do not live in villages, but live in temporary camps on the edge of 
the forest or in crop areas. Very dependent on neighboring villagers, pygmies do live in a 
state of submission to each family of Bantu origin, sometimes for several generations.  
Page  4
Some issues they face are the following:  
 
-
Most Aka do not have ID cards or birth certificates and thus cannot participate in civic 
life, register to vote or interact on a legal basis with governmental services;  
 
-
Aka settlements are usually not considered to be independent villages, administratively 
speaking, and are therefore usually unable to articulate their needs to governmental 
institutions. The interests of the Aka are often at the mercy of mayors who see themselves 
as representing a mostly ‘Bantu’ constituency;  
 
-
Lands of ethnic minorities, hunter-gatherer societies, and/or settlements without legal 
status as independent villages, do not enjoy any form of legal protection. They have no 
way to acquire rights to "community forests" or to defend the remnants of their 
"homelands" from outside interests.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Most of the sub-projects planned under the CDP will be small in scale. Their direct 
negative environmental and social impacts are therefore likely to be small. The project 
will not have any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Since the financial 
support to local and communal development plans remains very modest and will be 
distributed among a large number of communities in the country.  
 
OP 4.01 has been triggered because the potential exists that implementation of the CDP 
may lead to negative environmental impacts, mainly of a localized nature associated with 
activities to be financed under the Priority Respond Fund and the Local Development 
Fund. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be designed 
Page  5
in the context of preparation to ensure that the CDP complies with the country's 
environmental policies and the World Bank's safeguard policies.  
 
Indigenous People: as the CDP is a project focusing mainly on rural areas, it can be 
expected to affect ethnic minorities, and particularly those who are referred to by others 
as “pygmies”. According to OP 4.10, an Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) 
should provide additional information to the ESMF and the RPF. An IPDP will be 
prepared to ensure that the CDP will respect the dignity, rights and culture of Central 
African’s “pygmy” populations and that they are also benefiting from the CDP.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: past community-driven development experience shows that 
infrastructure sub-projects – primarily improvements to existing villages andcommunes 
such as roads, water control, wells and schools – sometimes cause lossof land or loss of 
access to other resources, particularly in the case of new physical works or changes in the 
configuration of existing infrastructures. Land tenure and property rights in CAR are 
regulated under the national land tenure system, although traditional land tenure systems 
are in place at the community level. To mitigate the potential for involuntary 
resettlement, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared for purposes of 
planning resettlements under the CDP in compliance with the policies and principles of 
the World Bank, namely OP 4.12 for Involuntary Resettlement, and the land tenure 
policies and regulations of CAR.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since the financial support to community action plans remains very modest and since this 
support will be spread over a large number of communities in the country, there is little 
risk of cumulative impact of combined sub-projects. Nevertheless, in some areas, many 
community sub-projects may create cumulative impacts. Cumulative impacts are impacts 
which may result from individually small-scale activities with minimal impacts but which 
over time can combine to have a significant impact.  
 
Examples are:  
 
-
Deforestation due to the exploitation of forest resources, owing to the use of poles and 
timber in small-scale construction;  
 
-
Depletion of soil fertility due to clearing (using slash and burn methods) of marginal 
forest land;  
 
-
Potential impacts on groundwater, owing to the construction of numerous wells and 
potential cumulative impacts on water users (especially downstream users of potential 
river and streams);  
 
-
Fragmentation of habitats from road projects;  
 
-
Waste and dumping sites due to the inappropriate disposal of waste materials;  
 
-
Strengthening of traditional systems of environmental and social governance and the 
community dialogue;  
 
-
The low capacities of the pygmies might result in the facts that they are not able to 
carry out some or any subproject which would increase their marginalization.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No project situation. In the no-project scenario, poverty and conflict over resources are 
likely to increase in extent and severity over most of the rural areas in CAR, especially in 
the four regions where the project will be implemented. This will result in greater 
resource degradation than the ‘with-project’ situation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
AGETIP, which is currently viewed as the implementation partner for the Priority 
Response Fund (as well as recruitment of key personnel at project inception) will also 
have procurement and financial management responsibilities for the Local Development 
Fund. The project team will look at revising the implementation arrangements 
accordingly, to build capacity in the Ministry of Social Affairs where it is needed and 
delegating the execution of sub-projects to AGETIP. AGETIP has sufficient staff and 
capacity to implement the proposed operation. In the first few months the project will 
work on sub-projects without environmental/social issues (category C). A limited 
positive list will be developed to get the PRF started. Some projects identified for 
Indigenous Peoples areas will not be developed until an Indigenous People Development 
Plan acceptable to IDA is elaborated and disclosed at the Bank InfoShop and published 
by the Government. These temporary arrangements will pass on to the permanent ones 
under the CDP project’s safeguard instruments when the PCT will be trained to deal with 
the attendant social and environmental safeguards issues. Some safeguards training will 
be provided by a Social Development officer hired for the project.  
 
The ESMF will propose environmental and social considerations to be fully 
incorporated into the participatory process for identifying, implementing and monitoring 
activities or sub-projects, in order to ensure that such operations are screened for their 
potential impacts and that they are consistent with World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework. Resettlement issues will be identified as part of the 
environmental and social screening. The RPF will specify the cases in which a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or abbreviated RAP is necessary. Project Affected 
Persons must be identified on the sub-project application form. RAPs and abbreviated 
RAPs shall be prepared with technical support from deconcentrated Ministries.  
 
Indigenous People Development Plan. In the absence of specific measures, pygmy 
communities will not be able to share in the benefits of the CDP and would face 
increased risks of marginalization. The CDP must carry out the activities prescribed by 
the IPDP to fulfill the requirements of OP 4.10. The IPDP and an action plan will be 
prepared within three months after the effectiveness of the project in order to ensure 
pygmies don’t lose out in the ‘first-come-first serve system’ to be used to fund sub-
projects.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
a) ESMF and RPF  
 
Stakeholder interviews in Bangui and Project Target Areas. Stakeholder consultation 
will be a key tool in achieving the ESMF/RPF objectives. Project preparation included an 
intensive schedule of interviews with key stakeholders and informants, especially in 
representative villages at the Regional levels, as well as joint meetings/workshops with 
groups of stakeholders. The ESMF/RPF team will consult stakeholders and key 
informants in Bangui. Separate field visits to the four Regions will be undertaken. The 
purpose of these visits will be to meet and consult with local governments and agencies, 
as well as with participating communes and village communities, to verify the initial 
analysis of the Project’s potential environmental and social impacts.  
 
b) IPDP  
 
The IPDP will be carried out in a participatory manner and in close collaboration with 
all stakeholders (governmental agencies, donor organization, indigenous population as 
defined in OP 4.10, other rural populations, NGOs, etc.).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/08/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/08/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/08/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/08/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/08/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/08/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  8
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is an Emergency project, the ESMF, RPF and IDPP will be disclosed in the World 
Bank InfoShop and in CAR 180 days after the project effectiveness. As AGETIP-CAF 
will implement the two components of the project related to sub-projects, in the first few 
months the project will work on sub-projects without environmental/social issues 
(category C). A limited positive list will be developed to get started with until the 
permanent instruments (ESMF, RPF and IPDP) are disclosed and agreed with the Bank.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  9
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bernard Harborne 
02/13/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
02/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
02/13/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
02/13/2009 
Comments:   
