Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3237 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Chad 
Project ID: P102323 
Project Name: Petroleum Sector Management and Institutional Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Silvana Tordo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 4, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Oil and gas (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Law reform (S);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.80
5.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are to: (i) support institutional development and 
strengthen governance in the petroleum sector; (ii) strengthen the government?s capacity to 
develop policy and operational responses to maximize the generation of revenue over time, 
including by attracting new investors while achieving other development and socioeconomic 
objectives; and (iii) establish an effective framework for managing and minimizing the potential 
negative environmental and social impact of petroleum operations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will assist the government in three primary areas:  
 
(i) Support institutional development and strengthen governance in the petroleum sector:  
 
-
Establish a task team drawn from the ministries of finance and petroleum, to: (a) develop and 
use a financial model for forecasting and analyzing oil revenue; (b) coordinate regular audits of 
oil sector companies; and (c) the develop procedures for improving the quality and effectiveness 
of information sharing among relevant government bodies.  
Page  2
-
Develop the role and the key corporate governance arrangements, including accounting 
standards and performance monitoring parameters, of the national oil company in line with good 
international and industry practice.  
 
-
Develop a wider knowledge base by promoting transparency and training programs aimed at 
improving the basic knowledge of the sector at all level of government.  
 
(ii) Strengthen the government's capacity to develop policy and operational responses to 
maximize the generation of revenue over time while, including through attracting new investors, 
achieving other development and socioeconomic objectives.  
 
-
Acquisition of reservoir modeling and interpretation capabilities with the objective to improve 
the government's  knowledge of Chad?s hydrocarbon potential, devise suitable sector policies 
and promotional strategies, and improve the effectiveness of government?s oversight of 
petroleum developments.  
 
-
Design and develop regulations, model contracts, and licensing procedures in support of the 
hydrocarbon law;  
 
-
Build capacity to regulate, manage, and audit petroleum developments through targeted 
training programs and technical assistance, and develop a methodology to assess the 
effectiveness of these activities.  
 
-
Design and implement a flexible and attractive fiscal system, for maximizing the total value of 
government?s revenue over time.  
 
(iii) Establish an effective framework for managing and minimizing the potential negative 
environmental and social impact of petroleum operations.  
 
-
Strengthen the capacity to regulate, manage, and mitigate the potential environmental risks 
associated with the development of the petroleum sector through the creation of an 
environmental agency and the clear separation of role and responsibility between the agency and 
the ministry of environment.  
 
-
Develop environmental regulations and environmental standards in support of the 
environmental law;  
 
-
Establish a system for the control of implementation of the environmental management plan, 
including the creation of an environmental data base, and the strengthening of site supervision 
capabilities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide, with a particular focus on areas with existing petroleum operation and areas where 
potential is well known or under exploration.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
Prior to the implementation of the Doba Petroleum Project, environmental protection in Chad 
was exclusively ensured by Law 014/PR/1999. Implementing regulations, specific to the 
hydrocarbon sector (upstream and downstream), had not been developed. The Environmental 
Management Plan principles established for the implementation of the Doba Petroleum Project 
have contributed to create ample debate on environment protection and mitigation measures, and 
have provided a model for regulating future production activities. More recently the increased 
level of exploration and development activities within and without the Doba permit has stressed 
the urgency to create a coherent set of regulations for monitoring and managing environmental 
risks. Although much remains to be done, the institutional and regulatory building blocks were 
laid through the Petroleum Sector Management Capacity Building Project that closed in 
December 2006. The propose project will contribute to significantly mitigate the risks inherent to 
petroleum operations in the country as a whole, through the development of environmental 
regulation, and the creation of a culture of adequate monitoring and dialogue with stakeholders. 
the government intention to create an environmental agency is a first important step to build on 
the work already started by the CTNSC.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/22/2008 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Project is category "C". No safeguard related studies are needed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Silvana Tordo 
11/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/06/2007 
Comments:  We agree with the EA category C since the project itself creates no impacts.  The team 
should prepare a risk management and and public consultation element in the project. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
11/21/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
