Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC4116
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P082037 
Original Project Name: Chile: Social 
Protection Technical Assistance Project 
Country:  Chile 
Project ID:  P114774 
Project Name:  Social Protection TA Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 6, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social risk mitigation (29%);Social analysis and monitoring (29%);Poverty 
strategy, analysis and monitoring (14%);Administrative and civil service reform 
(14%);Indigenous peoples (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objectives are to support the efforts of the Government to implement 
Chile Solidario and lay the foundation of a national system of social protection.  They 
would remain the same for the additional financing.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing is needed to implement additional activities to scale-up the 
impact and development effectiveness of the Social Protection Technical Assistance 
Project.  The additional activities to be financed would support the continued operation, 
expansion, and improvements in Chile Solidario and the recent extension of the system of 
social protection to cover young children.  The nature of the technical assistance will 
remain the same for the scaled-up project activities.  There are four main components in 
the project: (a) design and implementation of a national information system for social 
protection, the Integrated System of Social Information (SIIS); (b) training for social 
workers (counselors) and agencies involved in the implementation of Chile Solidario; (c) 
Page  2
analysis, evaluation, and monitoring of social programs; and (d) institutional 
strengthening of MIDEPLAN and project administration.   
 
Chile Crece Contigo is an integrated system of social protection for early childhood.  
The aim is to offer young children an integrated system of interventions and social 
services that support the child and his/her family starting in pregnancy, thereby providing 
the tools needed for them to develop their maximum potential.  The system offers 
universal access to some programs (education campaigns through various channels and 
changes in legislation, relating to maternity leave and policies related to adoption and 
incapacity), as well as interventions for all users of public health services. 
 
For all those utilizing public health services, the program includes improvements in pre-
natal attention and delivery and expanded parental education, all within a framework of 
long-term accompaniment of the child until the age of 4, when they would enter pre-
school.  The framework incorporates a focus on the more systematic early detection of 
risks of development delays (psychological, social, physical) together with the necessary 
referrals to services to address them.  For those identified as vulnerable or with risk 
factors, additional services are guaranteed such as home visits, childcare, a child 
allowance (for the bottom 40 percent as identified by the proxy means instrument), as 
well as access to Chile Solidario, with additional referrals possible for other activities  
related to adult education and employment, among others.  Interventions will also be 
developed at the local level to support activities to support children, including those at 
risk for development delays. 
 
Chile Crece Contigo is based on the same model of social protection as Chile Solidario. 
It is distinguished by several features: personalized counseling; preferential access to 
existing services for the disadvantaged; focus on improving the pertinence and 
effectiveness of public services; use of the Ficha de Proteccion Social to identify 
disadvantaged, at-risk households; and a system of information on individuals to monitor 
system coverage and performance.  Implementation arrangements for Chile Crece 
Contigo are similar to those in place for Chile Solidario.  As is the case with Chile 
Solidario, responsibility for implementation rests with municipalities and starts from the 
base of the existing network of public services.  Coordination of Chile Crece Contigo is 
the responsibility of the Ministry of Planning (MIDEPLAN), specifically the Executive 
Secretariat for Social Protection, which also oversees Chile Solidario.   For the long-term 
accompaniment of children, the Program is using the Integrated System of Social 
Information (SIIS) developed for Chile Solidario.  
 
Some of the specific activities which would be supported under the proposed Additional 
Financing are: advisory services for the extension of the SIIS to Chile Crece Contigo and 
supporting training and materials; training of municipal and staff to implement Chile 
Crece Contigo and the overall system of social protection; process and other studies for  
for Chile Crece Contigo and programs for other vulnerable groups; extension of the 
impact evaluation for Chile Solidario,  including the final round of the household panel 
survey, advisory services and complementary studies, and the design of a continuous 
monitoring and evaluation methodology using the SIIS and the data base of the proxy 
Page  3
means instrument; the development of supporting materials for Chile Crece Contigo as 
well as to carryout recent modifications in methodology for Chile Solidario; analytical 
and implementation process studies; and continued support through advisory services to 
the Executive Secretariat of Chile Solidario.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The original technical assistance project and the scaled-up technical assistance activities 
have national coverage.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Marcela Ines Salvador (LCSHS-DPT) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project triggers the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  The 
objectives of the technical assistance additional financing are to support the efforts of the 
Government to implement Chile Solidario and lay the foundation of a national system of 
social protection.  No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long term, the national system of social protection is expected to contribute to an 
improvement in the standard of living of the poor.  In the case of Chile Solidario, if the 
program is successful, one would expect to see a decline in the share of households below 
the extreme poverty line, higher coverage of existing social protection policies and 
programs among the extreme poor, and some re-design of interventions to better address 
the needs of this group.  In the case of Chile Crece Contigo, the expected outcome would 
be better developmental outcomes of young children, particularly those from poor 
families, thereby helping to improve the equality of opportunity in the country.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the technical assistance project, no adverse impacts are expected.  
Moreover, the government has made substantial efforts to ensure that the Indigenous 
Peoples receive social and economic benefits from the social protection system, including 
specifically from Chile Solidario and Chile Crece Contigo, which are culturally 
appropriate.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During preparation of the Additional Financing (AF), a social assessment was completed 
which: (a) updated the socioeconomic information and government initiatives on 
indigenous peoples; (b) reviewed the results of the consultations carried out for Chile 
Crece Contigo and Chile Solidario; and (c) assessed its design in relation to the potential 
benefits accruing to the indigenous population.  The process of social analysis and 
consultations during the Original Project implementation has been tested, found to be 
responsive to the needs of the IP populations, and is reflected in the excellent 
performance of Chile Solidario in incorporating the indigenous population and in helping 
them to improve the welfare of their families.  Differences in poverty levels between the 
indigenous and non-indigenous population in Chile narrowed sharply between 2003 and 
2006, particularly among the extreme poor in rural areas, suggesting the positive impact 
of the Chile Solidario model.   
 
The social assessment describes the actions already taken by the Government to ensure 
that the IP receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate from Chile 
Crece Contigo.  No negative impacts are expected from the program.  Entrance to Chile 
Crece Contigo occurs automatically with the first prenatal visit of the mother to a public 
health center.  Since the indigenous population participates in the public network of 
services to a greater extent than the rest of the population (84% in urban areas and 96% in 
rural areas, compared to 70% and 90%, respectively for the total population according to 
the 2003 CASEN) barriers to access should not be a constraint.    In order to ensure that 
the design and implementation of Chile Crece Contigo was culturally appropriate, several 
analyses were undertaken and specific materials prepared.  These include studies on 
cultural practices on child rearing, manuals for health workers, and the preparation of 
special educational materials to work with families.  In addition, the document Re-
Concoer: Pacto Social por la Multiculturalidad  which sets out the Government#s policies 
and programs for indigenous communities includes investments to expand and/or 
strengthen the supporting services for Chile Crece Contigo. Details are in the social 
assessment.  A summary is presented below:  
 
1.   
The Executive Secretariat for Social Protection contracted studies covering 
childcare and upbringing practices for Mapuche and Aymara; and developed manuals 
that provide guidance for health workers for pre-natal care and delivery for the Aymara 
population; as well has specially designed educational materials to work with the 
families.       
Page  5
2.  
 In order to promote more pertinent services, innovative approaches were 
systematized, including a model developed to ensure the cultural pertinence of maternity 
services among the Aymara and an unconventional model for early childhood education 
among IP who move to different locations depending on the season. 
 
3. 
Additional health services were incorporated into the Program of Health and 
Indigenous Communities.  Currently 25 out of 28 services participate in the program .   
 
4. 
Indigenous health policy was strengthened by creating and improving family 
health centers, increasing from 13 to 23 the number of child stimulation centers with 
ethnic pertinence within Chile Crece Contigo, and the development of priority health 
programs for these communities. 
 
5. 
Multi-culturality in health programs is being strengthened through the training of 
3600 workers in indigenous languages and health and the incorporation of 14 
intercultural facilitators in health facilities located in zones with a large number of 
indigenous.  Currently 84 intercultural facilitators exist at the national level.   
 
6. 
More childcare centers with an intercultural curriculum will be opened.  In 2007, 
30 inter-cultural childcare centers were opened in different regions of the country.  For 
the period 2008-2010, 44 more are proposed, with an investment of $60,000.000 in each.  
 
7. 
The number of bilingual intercultural schools is being expanded from 200 to 1100 
and the increase of traditional trainers in each of the schools.   
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) 
 
The approach in the AF to the IP safeguards policy builds on the successful experience 
in the Original Project, in particular the substantial advances made to insure that 
sufficient information is contained in the SIIS to monitor regularly and continuously how 
the Chile Solidario and Chile Crece Contigo models function within indigenous 
communities.  The IPP also takes into account the substantial actions already taken by the 
Government to ensure the ethnic pertinence and benefits of the social protection system, 
as well as the amount (US$3million) and implementation period (20 months) of the AF.  
The specific activities are listed below. They would be carried out and/or supervised by 
the Executive Secretariat for Social Protection, in coordination, as appropriate with other 
bodies within MIDEPLAN.   
 
#
Preparation of specially designed educational and other materials for families, 
service providers, and children in indigenous communities to support implementation of 
the Chile Crece Contigo initiative. Examples are a guide for working with Mapuche 
mothers (in cooperation with UNICEF) and one for the Rapa Nui, and educational 
material for children (Budget: 46 million Chilean pesos) 
 
Page  6
#
Systemization of best practices of ethnic pertinence for interventions related to 
Chile Crece Contigo.  (Budget: 15 million Chilean pesos ) 
 
#
Completion of the identification of best practices of Family Intervention Units in 
areas with a high concentration of indigenous population, and drawing from these, the 
adaptation of the Chile Solidario model in those areas.   This would involve the 
following: analysis of information in the SIIS to identify the municipalities with a high 
concentration of indigenous population; provision of a special fund to support the 
municipalities in the adaptation of the psycho-social support in indigenous communities; 
and systematization of the adaptations of the methodology carried out for indigenous 
communities and extension of best practices to other areas. (Budget: 5 million Chilean 
pesos) 
 
#
Participation of a representative of CONADI and experts on indigenous in 
discussions, approvals of studies and work proposals. Specifically it is proposed that 
CONADI would select a representative with technical expertise on indigenous themes to 
interact with the Executive Secretariat team executing the activities with the purpose of 
exchanging information on indigenous issues as they arise.  In addition, CONADI would 
be briefed periodically, at least once a year on advances in implementation.  
 
(Budget: 5 million Chilean pesos) 
 
Given the nature, objectives and focus of the AF and taking into account the experience 
of implementation of the Original Project, no negative impacts are expected on 
indigenous communities.  The plan of action described above would ensure that the 
indigenous population would receive the benefits envisaged from Chile Crece Contigo 
and that these would be culturally appropriate. Monitoring of the advances, functioning, 
and effectiveness of Chile Crece Contigo would be carried out through regular reviews of 
the management reports prepared using the SIIS, the same arrangement as for Chile 
Solidario.  The IP would be monitored in the regular Bank supervision visits.  During 
implementation of the AF, the main forms of consultation would take place through the 
work with indigenous experts, service providers in indigenous communities, and 
coordination with CONADI, as described in the IP.  
 
The plan of action described above would ensure that the indigenous population would 
receive the benefits envisaged from Chile Crece Contigo and that these would be 
culturally appropriate.  MIDEPLAN has the capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described above.  The activities envisaged in the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan 
under the original project were completed. The work benefited from good technical 
supervision, close coordination with the Sub-secretary in MIDEPLAN responsible for 
government policy on indigenous groups and with CONADI and inputs from experts in 
the area.  Finally, actions to ensure that IP benefit fully in the Chile Crece Contigo 
initiative have been incorporated since its design, demonstrating the commitment and 
capacity of the government.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders for both Chile Soliario and Chile Crece Contigo are indigenous 
families, particularly women, as well as the counselors and service providers.  
Consultations took place in the context of the recent study financed by the original 
project - Analysis and Recommendations on Ethnic Pertinence of the Chile Solidario 
System and included interviews and focus groups with indigenous families and program 
staff.  The results of the study validated the key elements of the social protection model 
in Chile, particularly personalized counseling and the minimum conditions, relevant for 
Chile Solidario, Chile Crece Contigo, and the social protection system overall.   
 
Additional consultations prior to the launch of Chile Crece Contigo took place during 
the preparation of studies and materials as described in the IPP and included 
contributions of experts on indigenous issues, as well as focus groups and in-depth 
interviews with members of indigenous communities, particularly women and mothers.  
In addition to households, the consultations covered the community, childcare networks 
and relevant service providers for the IP, in particular education and health.  Details are 
provided in the social assessment.  Also, in the 9th Region (Araucania) experts on 
indigenous issues and a member of CONADI participated in the consultations carried out 
by the Presidential Commission which prepared the report which laid the base for the 
design and implementation of Chile Crece Contigo.   Details are provided in the social 
assessment.  The findings included: 
 
#
Indigenous families in Chile Solidario valued the intervention strategy, 
particularly the counseling provided by the social worker since it was personalized and 
conversational.  The face-to-face approach and dialogue fit well with the form and style 
of relations with indigenous communities. 
 
#
Public health services for children, as well as pre-school and child care services 
for children whose mothers worked were well accepted by the communities.  
 
#
Pre-natal and delivery services should better take into account cultural aspects.  
 
#
Health staff needed to receive more intercultural training and more intercultural 
facilitators should be incorporated in health facilities. 
 
#
Services should incorporate monitors who speak the indigenous language and 
understand the indigenous culture in order to help mothers understand proper care during 
pregnancy and how to prepare for delivery. 
 
#
Communities wanted culturally-sensitive services in their communities. 
 
Monitoring of the advances, functioning, and effectiveness of Chile Crece Contigo 
would be carried out through regular reviews of the management reports prepared using 
the SIIS, the same arrangement as for Chile Solidario.  The IP would be monitored in the 
regular Bank supervision visits.  During implementation of the AF, the main forms of 
consultation would take place through the work with indigenous experts, service 
providers in indigenous communities, and coordination with CONADI, as described in 
the IP.  
 
Page  8
Most of the information in the IPP, including the specific studies and materials, and the 
Re-Conocer Document has already been disclosed (www.mideplan.cl).  In addition, the 
IPP has been approved by the Bank.  The full IPP, including the summary of the social 
assessment, has been disclosed in Chile as well as through the Bank Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/11/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/11/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  9
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
08/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
08/11/2009 
Comments:   
