Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4045 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Chile 
Project ID: P114774 
Project Name: Chile Social Protection Technical Assistance Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social risk mitigation (P);Social analysis and monitoring (P);Poverty strategy, 
analysis and monitoring (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Indigenous 
peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objectives of the original project are to support the efforts of the Government 
to implement Chile Solidario and lay the foundation of a national system of social protection.  
They would remain the same for the additional financing.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Additional resources are needed to implement additional activities to scale up th
e
project’s 
impact and development effectiveness.  These additional activitiesto be financed are related to 
Chile Solidario as well as to the recent extension of the system of social protection to cover 
young children through the Chile Crece Contigo initiative.  
 
When President Bachelet was inaugurated as Chile’s president in March 2006, sheannounced as 
part of the objective of the “Growth with Equality of Opportunity”,the goal of installing by the 
end of her administration a system of early childhood protection, designed to equalize the 
opportunities for development of Chilean children, independent of their social origins, sex or 
household characteristics.  In order to develop specific proposals to reach this goal, she 
Page  2
appointed a Presidential Commission, which carried out technical work, as well as extensive 
consultations, before delivering a report on June 2006, which laid the base for the design and 
implementation of Chile Crece Contigo.  
 
Chile Crece Contigo is an integrated system of protection for early childhood.The aim is to 
offer young children an integrated system of interventions and social services that support the 
child and his/her family starting in pregnancy, thereby providing the tools needed for them to 
develop their maximum potential.  If Chile is to reduce existing inequalities and to promote 
growth, it is crucial to intervene during the first four years of life because this period is 
recognized as critical in the development of the individual.  The Program offers universal access 
to some programs (education campaigns through various channels and changes in legislation, 
relating to maternity leave and policies related to adoption and incapacity), as well as 
interventions for all users of public health services.  
 
For those utilizing public health services, the program includes improvements in pre-natal 
attention and delivery and expanded parental education, all within a framework of long-term 
accompaniment of the child until the age of 4, when they would enter pre-school.  The 
framework incorporates a focus on the more systematic early detection of risks of development 
delays (psychological, social, physical) together with the necessary referrals to services to 
address them.  For those identified as vulnerable or with risk factors, additional services are 
guaranteed such as home visits, childcare, a child allowance (for the bottom 40 percent as 
identified by the proxy means instrument), as well as access to Chile Solidario, with additional 
referrals possible for other activities related to adult education and employment, among others.  
Interventions will also be developed for the local level to support activities to support children, 
including those at risk for development delays.  
 
Implementation arrangements for Chile Crece Contigo are similar to those in place for Chile 
Solidario.  As is the case with Chile Solidario, responsibility for implementation rests with 
municipalities and starts from the base of the existing network of public services.  Coordination 
of Chile Crece Contigo is the responsibility of the Ministry of Planning (MIDEPLAN), 
specifically the Executive Secretariat for Social Protection, which also oversees Chile Solidario.  
For the long-term accompaniment of children, the Program is using the Integrated System of 
Social Information (SIIS) developed for Chile Solidario.  
 
Some of the specific activities which would be supported under the proposed additional 
financing are: training of municipal and public health staff to implement Chile Crece Contigo; 
implementation of an impact evaluation for Chile Crece Contigo, including the constitution of a 
panel of experts; extension of the impact evaluation for Chile Solidairo, including the design of a 
continuous monitoring and evaluation methodology using the SIIS and the data base of the proxy 
means instrument; the development of supporting materials and training to carryout recent 
modifications in methodology for Chile Solidario; and analytical and implementation process 
studies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Both the original project and the scaled-up activities to be supported under the additional 
financing have national coverage.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no unresolved safeguard issues.  The Borrower has demonstrated adequate institutional 
capacity for safeguard policies. The original project triggered the safeguard policy relating to 
indigenous peoples.  Given that Chile Solidario is a universal program for the extremely poor, 
the Government recognized the importance of incorporating elements to guarantee the cultural 
appropriateness of the methodology as well as the generation of sufficient information about how 
the program functioned among these groups.  The Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) 
included 11 activities to be implemented with the objective of ensuring the availability of 
appropriate mechanisms which respect cultural differences and promote the integrated 
development of individuals and the community, at the same time reinforcing recognition and 
respect for indigenous groups.  Most of these activities have been completed, with redefinition of 
a
few studies due to developments during project implementation.  The work benefited from 
good technical supervision, close coordination with the Sub-secretary in MIDEPLAN 
responsible for government policy on indigenous groups and with CONADI (National 
Commission for Indigenous Development) and inputs from experts in the area.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Marcela Ines Salvador (LCSHS-DPT) 
Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The additional financing would not lead to any new safeguard issues beyond those of the 
ongoing project.  Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP. 4.10) would apply to the additional financing.  
No negative impacts are foreseen for indigenous populations as a result of implementation of 
Chile Crece Contigo nor the additional activities related to Chile Solidario.  In the case of Chile 
Crece Contigo, the Government has made substantial efforts to ensure that the activities respond 
to cultural values.  The Executive Secretariat has commissioned background studies, so far on 
the patterns of child rearing and care for the Mapuche and Aymara communities, and developed 
manuals providing guidance to health care workers for pre-natal care and birth of Mapuche and 
Aymara, as well as specially-designed educational materials to use with these families.  Entry to 
Chile Crece Contigo occurs at the first prenatal visit of the mother at the public health center.  
Barriers to access do not appear to be an issue as data from the 2003 household survey show that 
the indigenous population participate to a larger extent than do non-indigenous mothers in the 
public health network 
–
80% in urban areas and 96% in rural areas, compared to 70% and 90%, 
respectively for the non-indigenous.  The consultative process included experts on indigenous 
issues and a CONADI member in the public audience organized by the Presidential Commission 
in the 9th region, as well as focus groups and in-depth interviews with members of the 
indigenous communities and experts on intercultural issues during the preparation of background 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
studies and manuals mentioned above.  In addition, the Executive Secretariat already has 
published two studies systematizing good practices in the area of cultural pertinence 
–
one in the 
area of childcare centers and the other in expanding institutional births among the Aymara.  
 
The additional financing preparation team includes consultants experienced in the 
application of indigenous safeguards policy, who will review available information on the 
consultations and actions taken by the Borrower and would advise if these activities are 
sufficient to comply with safeguard policy requirements or if they would recommend additional 
measures and reach agreement on necessary steps with the Government.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/10/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. September 
-
November, 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
11/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
