Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/25/2008 
Report No.:  AC3326
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P101988 
Project Name:  Jiangxi Shihutang Navigation and Hydropower Complex Project 
Task Team Leader:  Wenlai Zhang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (60%);Power (40%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other rural 
development (P);Water resource management (S);Administrative and civil service reform 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
60.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
162.00
222.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve utilization of the Gan 
River for more reliable freight transport and for cleaner energy production. The PDO is to 
be achieved through  
 
•
improving inland waterway transport capacity and service levels for primary and 
secondary industries in the Nanchang-Ganzhou corridor of the Gan River, and  
 
•
generating clean renewable electricity to help meet rapidly growing demand for 
energy in the region.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will include the following three components:  
 
Component A – Construction of Shihutang Complex.  The Shihutang Complex is a 
single integral infrastructure unit that will form a reservoir with a designed normal pool 
Page  2
water elevation of 56.5/57.0m and normal pool storage of 281 million cubic meters.  The 
Complex is comprised of the following main elements.  
 
•
Sluice gates:  23 sets of dam sluice gates with a total length of 532m will regulate 
flows.  
 
•
Ship lock:  A Grade III single ship lock through the dam of 180 (length) x 
23(width) x 3.5 (depth) meters, with a designed annual transport capacity of 14.45 
million tons.  
 
•
Powerhouse:  The powerhouse built within the dam, with an installed capacity of 
120 MW, will generate 526.5 GWh of electricity per year.  
 
•
Connection dam:  Two sections of dam, for a total length of 931.3m, will connect 
the structures with the both river banks.  One consisting of 83.5m long concrete gravity 
dam and 400.2m long earthen dam will connect the powerhouse to the right river bank; 
the other of 447.6m long earthen dam will connect the ship lock to the left river bank.  
 
•
Dam crest access road:  A 1,633m long road across the top of the dam including a 
crest bridge will allow rural communities to cross the river.  
 
Component B – Flood Protection Works.  The flood protection works consist of 
approximately 43km of dikes, 56km of diversion canals, six sets of pumping stations with 
an installed total capacity of approximately 5,786 kw, and two sets of free drainage 
sluices and two sets of regulating sluices.  
 
Component C – Technical Assistance (TA).  This component consists of the following 
elements aiming to build the institutional and technical capacities of Jiangxi 
Administration of Navigation Affairs (JANA)/JPMO.  
 
•
Optimization of Reservoir Operation – This study aims to maximize the benefits 
of navigation, power generation and flood protection of the Shihutang Complex.  
Optimum management solutions will be developed to direct the operation of the 
Shihutang Complex and the reservoir.  In addition, the feasibility of a coordinated 
operation mechanism for the four interrelated dams, i.e. the existing Wan’andam, the 
proposed Taihe and Xiajiang dams and the Shihutang dam, will be studied, constraints 
identified and solutions recommended.  
 
•
Technology for Waterway Treatment – This study aims to determine measures to 
overcome insufficient water depth at the 17km section of river channel immediately 
below the Shihutang Dam which hinders navigation.  The outcomes of the study will 
complement the engineering design of this Project, and provide reference and experience 
for other inland waterway projects facing similar problems in Jiangxi Province.  
 
•
Capacity Building - In order to enhance the sustainable management of the 
investments, a well-tailored capacity building program will be included in the Project.  
The program consists of international and domestic training and study tours aiming to 
strengthen JANA/JPMO’s capacities in IWT management, waterway development and 
maintenance, construction management, hydropower plant operation, and management of 
cumulative impacts at watershed level.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project is located in the middle reach of the Gan River in Jiangxi Province, 
southeast of China.  The Gan River is one of the largest tributaries of the Yangtze River 
with a total length of 780km and a catchment area of 80,948 km2.  The project site is 
located in the middle reach of the Gan River, with upstream catchment area of 43,770 
km2.  The multi-year average flow of dam site is 1,150 m3/s (max. 153,000 m3/s, min. 
47.9 m3/s).  
 
The project area is mainly flat plain and low hilly area, with secondary and planted 
vegetation.  There are no national-level protected plant species, while there are 11 
provincial-level protected plant species scattering in the region.  Through detailed 
ecological survey, there are 215 old trees identified, mostly in a small nature reserve 
(county-level) by the river banks. There are no protected animal or fish species identified 
in the project impact area.  Studies from several decades ago reported the presence of 
three fish spawning sites between the proposed dam site and the existing Wan’an Dam 
upstream, and the fish arecommon species of herring, grass carp, silver carp, bighead fish 
etc. (normally referred as Four Major Farm Fish Species). There used to be catch record 
of several protected and migratory fish species (Acipenser dabryanus, Psephurus 
gladiusï¼ŒMyxocyprinus asiaticus, Anquilama japonica J.et.s, Coilia ectenes J.et.s.) 
in1980s, since then they have never been found by fishermen and fishery administrations. 
At present, the fish population has greatly declined.  
 
A
cultural relics survey has been conducted by Jiangxi Provincial Cultural Heritage and 
Archeology Institute for the dam site and vicinity of reservoir.  There are classified three 
cultural relics sites (one national, one provincial and one county level protection site) 
identified, but outside impact scope of the project.  There are other two unclassified sites 
(one old ferry site and one old town site) found within impact area. Though it is 
concluded that these two sites are of insignificant value (there is no physical evidence on 
the site, just local memory and records), further refinement of dike alignment during 
preliminary design stage has avoided inundation of these two sites.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The implementation of the project will promote development of inland waterway 
navigation which is an environmental friendly transportation alternative; provide 
renewable hydropower; speed up economy development of poor areas of Jiangxi 
Province; increase flood control standard for five flood protection areas from 1 in 2-5 
years to 1 in 10-20 years capacity.  
 
The project will flood an area which is limited to the land strip along the existing river 
bed. The main safeguard issues include land acquisition during pre-construction stage; 
construction-related impacts (noise, waste, surface vegetation loss, safety and social 
disturbance) during construction; and minor impacts on river ecology, hydrology, water 
quality and dam safety during operation stage.  
 
During construction period, there will be temporary impact of social disturbance in 
terms of construction vehicles and material hauling, noise, air-borne dust, interference 
with local traffic.  There will also be temporary impact on water quality of the Gan River, 
soil erosion, loss of surface vegetation, and health and safety of labor workers.  As there 
are no protected plants and animals to be impacted by construction activities, the 
ecological impact during construction will not be significant, and can be well managed 
with mitigation measures developed in EMP.  
 
During operation stage, there will be permanent loss of little surface vegetations along 
the river banks due to reservoir inundation.  As there is no rare or endangered species in 
the project area and no valuable natural habitat to be affected, the project will not have 
significant impacts on local biodiversity.  The small reserve of about 200 old camphor 
trees is above the inundation level and will not be adversely impacted according to a 
special study conducted by a competent professional institute. The formation of reservoir 
may have very little impacts on fish species. The fish species in the Gan River are all 
common species which can adapt to new segregated habitats environment.  With further 
measures of fish channel, fish breeding and release center and artificial fish-nest 
Page  5
structure, the impacts on river ecology will be not only properly mitigated, but 
significantly enhanced. As the Shihutang Complex is mainly for navigation purpose, 
which will increase navigation capacity upstream and at least maintain current navigation 
capacity at down stream.  It has small modification of flow of the Gan River, and its 
water release will not impact water use and environmental demand of downstream.  
Impact assessment concluded that water quality after construction of Shihutang dam will 
be in compliance with Class II standard as required.  
 
Dam safety is one of the major concerns in this project and has been given full attention 
from the project entity and the Bank team.  As a low water head structure, dam safety can 
be ensured with sound engineering design and construction, as well as adequate 
maintenance and monitoring.  
 
On the aspect of resettlement, the project will affect 53 villages and one state-owned 
farm in Taihe County.  Permanent land acquisition of collective land is estimated 9222 
mu (615 ha) including 2,910 mu (194 ha) farmland and temporary land acquisition 
accounts for 4,954 mu (330 ha) including 1180 mu (78 ha) farmland.  The Project will 
require the relocation of 597 people in 169 households.  Four small enterprises and some 
infrastructure will be affected.  The socioeconomic survey, covering 227 sampled 
households, confirmed that there are no ethnic minority communities/groups in the 
project areas.  
 
There are two projects are directly linked to the proposed Bank-financed project: (1) the 
existing upstream Wan’an dam; and (2) the 18km transmission line fromthe powerhouse 
to the grid which will be constructed by local power authority separately at the later stage 
of Shihutang project. For the existing Wan’an Dam, the team has conducted due 
diligence review on its safety. A Panel of Experts (established as per Bank’s OP4.37 Dam 
Safety) has reviewed the dam safety status and O&M regulations and procedures of 
Wan’an Dam, and concluded that Wan’an Dam isoperationally safe, and it has a set of 
O&M regulations including Regulations on Operation and Regulation Plan and Operation 
and Management Technical Specifications, and Wanan Reservoir Regulation Manual etc. 
For the 18 km transmission line, as the Chinese requirements are broadly comparable to 
the Bank Policy requirements, the task team will carry out a due diligence exercise on the 
EIA of the transmission line and their compliance with the Chinese regulations.  The 
JPMO will make available a copy of EIA for the Bank review.  Given the low sensitivity 
of the project area, the transmission line is not expected to raise any significant 
environmental or social issues.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Gan River is a major inland waterway in Jiangxi province, and cascade dam 
development plan for navigation has been studied since 1950s and approved by NDRC in 
1990.  According to the Gan River Basin Planning, two cascade dam development 
options are recommended, with 8 dams and 10 dams respectively.  Both options have the 
same cascade development plan downstream of the Ganzhou City, which include six 
cascade dams.  Currently only one dam (Wan’an Navigation/Hydro Complex) has been 
Page  6
constructed in 1993, and is about 80km upstream of Shihutang site.  Two other dams (one 
is Taihe dam 41 km upstream and one is Xiajiang dam 90km down stream next to 
Shihutang) are in early planning stage.  In the future, further development of other dams 
can be envisaged, which will have long-term accumulative impacts in the Gan River 
basin.  
 
To address this cumulative impact, a Strategic Environmental Assessment has been 
developed in 2005 for the Jiangxi Inland Waterway Navigation Development Plan.  
Based on this report, the cumulative effects of individual step construction will be limited 
while the construction of multiple steps will have obvious cumulative effects due to 
accumulation of time and identical impacts.  The negative impacts are mainly on aquatic 
life, especially on the migratory fishes, semi-migratory fishes and spawning sites. 
Multiple-step construction will make floating and semi-floating spawns to flow into static 
waters too early during drifting and hatching process, thus affecting their growth.  Since 
the cascade dam development is mainly for upgrading of existing navigation channel, the 
concerns of adequate environmental flow will not be an issue.  The positive impacts of 
the cascade dams are to promote the economic development of the Gan River basin, 
especially poor counties along the river. As part of institutional strengthening component, 
the project will support strengthening the capacity for the management of cumulative 
impacts at watershed level.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives are considered in various stages of project development and in various detail 
levels, including without a project scenario.  
 
At planning stage, various cascade dam development scenarios have been considered in 
the Gan River Water Basin Plan which has been initiated since 1950s.  More than five 
cascade dam development options were considered, among which Option I (8 dams) and 
Option V (10 dams) were recommended.  For both options, the lowest 6 dams (including 
Shihutang) downstream of the Ganzhou City are the same.   
 
The “without-project” scenario was considered during EA preparation.  Though from 
purely environmental perspective, construction of the Shihutang dam will bring some 
manageable ecological and social impacts.  From a macro perspective, the project will 
promote inland waterway transportation (which is more environmental friendly than 
highways) and economic development of poor counties along the river.  It will also 
provide cleaner renewable hydropower which, otherwise, will be generated from coal-
fired power plants given the prevalence practice in China.The environmental and social 
impacts from the project can be well managed to acceptable level with adequate 
implementation of EMP and RAP.  
 
During project feasibility and design stage, alternatives have been considered for flood 
protection embankment alignment, dam location, dam configuration and water level. 
Comprehensive comparisons have been conducted for environmental, social, technical 
and financial factors, and final selection is based on overall optimum consideration.  
Page  7
-
Zhujiacun Nature Reserve.  Original flood control bank cuts through the core 
zone and buffer zone of the small Zhujiacun Nature Reserve (about 200 old camphor 
trees).  It was rejected during EA preparation. A new alignment avoiding the reserve was 
selected.  
 
-
Dam location.  Two dam sites are considered: one is Shihutang (upper location) 
and one is Fangzhou (lower location, about 6km downside).  The Shihutang site is 
selected due to less land acquisition and resettlement, smaller inundation area, less 
earth/stone works, shorter embankment, less old tress to be protected, and better 
geological conditions.  
 
-
Water level.  Four different normal pool levels for reservoir were considered 
during feasibility/EA study, including 56.0m, 56.2 m, 56.5m and 56.8m.  After detailed 
comparison, the level of 56.5m is selected due to adequacy for Grade III navigation 
channel standard, relatively less land inundation and people resettlement.  
 
-
Dam configuration.  Three alternatives are considered: one is ship lock in left and 
powerhouse in right; second is ship lock in right and powerhouse in left; third is ship lock 
and powerhouse all in right.  The first alternative is selected due to smooth connection 
with the natural channel, as well as slightly less earth/stone works, less spoil disposal and 
soil erosion.  
 
-
Ship lock configuration.  Three ship lock dimensional configurations are 
considered. All three have nearly the same environmental situation, the selected option is 
the smallest size that can meet the same targeted objectives.  
 
-
Flood protection works.  With or without embankment protection for five 
inundated areas are considered.  With protection works option is selected, which will 
prevent 65,800 mu (4,386 ha) of farmland from inundation.  Additional 1,911 mu (127 
ha) of farmland will be saved through elevating the level of the farmland.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental:  
 
The Project Management Office for the Construction of Shihutang Navigation and 
Hydropower Complex (JPMO) has entrusted CCCC Second Harbor Consultants Co. Ltd, 
a
Class A environmental impact assessment consultant certified by SEPA, for EA 
preparation. Comprehensive EA documents (including EMP) have been prepared, and a 
full set of mitigation measures has been developed to avoid, minimize and mitigate the 
adverse environmental impacts envisaged, which include:  
 
Planning Stage  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement:  Flood control embankment are designed for 5 areas, 
reducing inundation area from 78.5 km2 to 5.9 km2, which is limited to the land strip 
along the existing river bed.  The people resettlement will be reduced from 53,700 to 597.  
A
Resettlement Action Plan has been developed in accordance with OP4.12.  Details are 
in Social Safeguards section of this Annex.  
 
Page  8
Dam Safety:  The design was conducted by a consortium of qualified institutes to ensure 
adequate safety measures are integrated into project design.  An independent Dam Safety 
Panel (DSP) was established to review the investigation, design, and construction of the 
dam and the start of operations.  The qualification of panelists is confirmed by the Bank.  
A
safety review on the existing Wan’an Damupstream of the proposed project has been 
conducted by the DSP and concluded that the Wan'an dam is under a safe operational 
condition.  The Plan for Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance, and the 
Instrumentation Plan have been developed.  
 
Construction Stage  
 
Social Disturbance:  The impact will be mitigated by proper selection of access road 
avoiding residential areas, well planned traffic management measures with dedicated 
staff and clear signage.  Coordination with navigation channel management authority will 
be maintained to ensure safe navigation during construction.  
 
Surface Water:  Two phases of cofferdam construction approach will be adopted, and 
water flow will not be diverted away from existing river course. Wastewater during 
construction will be mitigated through establishment of wastewater settling, oil 
separation facility and installation of integrated sewage treatment system.  Wastewater is 
not allowed to discharge into the Gan River directly.  
 
Air pollution:  The mitigation measures to be adopted include frequent water spraying 
on construction site and access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk 
materials and timely site clean up after construction; dust control facility for material 
processing and mixing tower; personal protection facility (e.g. mask) will be provided to 
workers as needed.  
 
Noise:  Main mitigation measures include use of low noise equipment and proper 
maintenance; installation of noise reduction facility for material processing, air 
compressor, chiller system; careful scheduling of construction activities near sensitive 
sites; speed limit and no-horning signs will be installed for access road sections near 4 
villages and one school; night-time material hauling is restricted for roads nearby 
residential areas (30m); provision of personal protection facility to relevant workers.  
 
Ecological environment:  The mitigation measures mainly include environmental 
protection education to workers; inspection and supervision of dedicated staff on old trees 
and protected plants identification and protection; relocation of protected old trees as 
necessary and plantation of new trees along roadside.  
 
Soil erosion:  Temporary retaining wall will be constructed to prevent earth/stone from 
falling into water body.  Wastewater collection/interception ditch will be dug in material 
processing area.  Spoil disposal sites will have proper drainage, retaining structure and 
timely leveling and reclamation.  
 
Page  9
Cultural heritage:  No impact is expected on the three classified heritage sites due to far 
distance from project activities. Dike alignment was fine tuned to avoid the other two 
unclassified sites. Chance find procedures will be put in place as required by national 
regulations and Bank’s policy.  
 
Public Health:  Mitigation measures will include regular hygiene inspection of 
living/office area, drinking water resources, dinner rooms, solid waste collection sites and 
toilets; education to labor workers on health (including local epidemic, HIV/AIDS etc.); 
annual health inspection of workers; vaccination for workers; and on-site storage of 
medicines for common infectious diseases such as diarrhea, malaria, TB and virus 
hepatitis.  
 
Operation  
 
River ecology:  Mitigation measures include design of fish channel; establishment of 
fish breeding and release center; establishment of artificial “fish nest” by plantation of 
140 ha water plant in three shallow areas; continuous monitoring of fish species, amount 
of spawn and fish, habitats situation for two spawning sites; and monitoring of effect of 
breeding centre.  
 
Hydrology:  With coordination and agreement with the Wan’an reservoir, a minimum 
water release sufficing normal navigation, water use and environmental demand in 
Shihutang reservoir is to be secured.  
 
Noise:  No-horning signs will be installed at both upstream and downstream of ship-
lock to avoid noise impact.  
 
Soil erosion and bank safety:  The project will include intensive re-vegetation program 
along the new embankment and canals. Routine maintenance of bank protection facility 
and side slope plantation will be conducted to minimize soil erosion.  Regular monitoring 
of bank stability will be conducted for risk identification and timely remediation.  
 
Environmental risk:  Mitigation measures include: development of dam Operation and 
Maintenance Plan and Emergency Preparedness Plan; training and implementation of 
Preparedness Plan for Inland Waterway Accidents of Ji’an City.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
The project minimizes the need for resettlement by careful selection of dike and 
drainage canal alignment and minimization of reservoir area. It also significantly 
improves the life of resettled people who are now suffering frequent flooding.  
 
The JPMO has mobilized a very experienced team for the resettlement planning from 
several design institutes.  The resettlement and rehabilitation strategies and action 
programs were formulated based on technical investigations in the field and through a 
consultation process with the affected villages.  They are summarized as follows:  
Page  10
Livelihood development:  The project will permanently acquired farmland 2,910 mu 
(194 ha) farmland from 53 villages, resulting in about six percent decrease of land 
holdings in the area of the affected villages.  Measures such as land redistribution, cash 
compensation, land improvement, and so on are explored according to the results of 
consultation with the affected villagers. Meanwhile, there are about 1,180 mu (78 ha) 
farmland will be temporarily used, and will be returned to the villages after restoration by 
the contractors under supervision by RS management system.  Further, it was also 
determined in the RP that advance compensation will be paid and be monitored according 
to compensation rates defined in the RP to ensure the full income restoration of the 
affected.  These designed measures will be implemented and monitored and evaluated by 
resettlement management system, including external monitor.  
 
Household relocation:  The 169 affected households (HHs) with 597 persons will be 
relocated among which 95 HHs will build their new houses in their same villages and 74 
HHs will be moved into new constructed villages, after receiving compensation including 
replacement cost for their original houses and movement subsidies and resettlement 
allowance.  During the process of houses restoration, the local government will provide 
assistance in addition to specific investment for the planned infrastructure within these 
villages.  
 
Enterprises restoration:  The project will affect four small enterprises, which are 
unnecessary to be relocated and will be restored their business at the same locations.  The 
project will provide compensation for their asset loss and relocation costs as well as 
transitional subsidy for lost wages or profits during relocation.  The employment of the 
workers will not be affected  
 
Infrastructure restoration:  The project will inundate some local infrastructure and public 
facilities, including roads, ferries/ports, pump stations, power facilities, etc. in reservoir 
area and damage some at the dam site.  The project will pay full compensation to the 
respective owners at reconstruction cost.  They will be responsible for the construction or 
restoration of the affected infrastructure.  The investment for the restoration has been 
estimated and included in the total project budget.  
 
Health Issues:  The RP covers a section of environmental protection plan in project area, 
which covers, among other things, some measures on construction related health issue, in 
order to educate resettlers how to protect themselves and their environment.  
 
Budget for resettlement:  The RP contains a resettlement budget and funding plan 
developed on the basis of the inventory and compensation rates.  The total resettlement 
budget is estimated more than RMB 200 million.  The resettlement investment includes 
land compensation, price contingency and physical contingency.  The resettlement cost 
will be financed by the government.  
 
Organizational management:  The JPMO and Taihe County will respectively set up a 
resettlement office as designed in the RP.  They will be staffed and be trained to ensure 
Page  11
development of management capacity.  In addition, the RP has developed training 
arrangement and relevant requirements of resources for these offices.  The JPMO will 
coordinate the RP implementation which is to be actually conducted by county 
government via its resettlement office that will be set up according to the RP.  
 
Resettlement monitoring:  Internal and external monitoring mechanisms for RP 
implementation has been designed in the RP and will be constituted prior to the project 
implementation.  Internal monitoring, to be conducted by the JPMO’ resettlement office 
and county resettlement office, will focus primarily on physical progress.  An external 
monitoring agency is to be engaged to report progress of the resettlement implementation 
every six months.  Apart from physical progress, external monitoring reports will assess 
household relocation and livelihood restoration as well as transitional measures for 
affected enterprises, schools and others.  The RP describes monitoring purposes, 
responsibilities, indicators, methodology, procedures and reporting requirements.  
 
As a linkage project with a minor land acquisition, the 18km transmission line from the 
powerhouse to the grid, which will be planned and built by the grid authority at later 
stage of construction of the Shihutang Project will be covered in project supervision and 
monitoring to ensure its resettlement implementation complies with the requirements of 
the Bank Policy.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental:  
 
The key stakeholders include local project-affected people and relevant local 
government agencies (cultural relics, environment, water resources, inland waterway 
management etc.).  Two rounds of public consultation were conducted in accordance with 
Bank’s OP4.01 with total participants of 320.  The concerns raised related to adequate 
resettlement compensation and life restoration, recruitment of local labors, flood control 
embankment, less land occupation, water-logging concerns, farmland protection, possible 
traffic over the dam crest, suggestion of protection of Zuci building of Pingshang village 
during resettlement, engineering quality control, etc.  All these concerns were addressed 
in the project design, RAP and EIA/EMPs.  
 
The first round information disclosure was conducted along with the first round 
consultation through internet on April 10, 2007, which presents brief project information 
and potential environmental issues.  After the draft EIA is prepared, a simplified version 
of EIA report was disclosed through internet on June 12, 2007 according to national 
regulations in China.  The full EIA report was disclosed in Taihe County Government 
Shihutang Project Office with announcement published in Jinggangshan Daily (largest 
local newspaper in project area) on October 16, 2007. In addition, simplified EIA reports 
were made available in government offices of Wanhe, Tangzhou, Yanxi and Mashi 
counties and Wushan Farm office. The EA documents were also disclosed in Infoshop on 
Jan 3, 2008.  
 
Page  12
Resettlement:  
 
The RP is based on extensive consultation with stakeholders, including diverse levels of 
governments, village leaders.  All the affected households, enterprises and schools were 
identified through the census and inventory.  Project information was provided to the 
affected via various channels such as newspaper, TV, posters and public meetings.  The 
socio-economic survey involves about 227 households, provided baseline information 
and migration pattern, etc.  Meetings were held with involved local authorities and JPMO 
staff on resettlement policies and mitigation of negative impacts.  Focus group discussion 
and extensive key informant interviews were conducted with local government officials 
and the affected villages to finalization of compensation rates, relocation arrangements 
and livelihood restoration measures.  The measures ensured that the displaced persons 
participated in the resettlement planning process, particularly in the census, inventory and 
the formulation of the relocation and rehabilitation programs.  The results of these 
consultations, especially on people’s needs and concerns, have been reflected in the RP, 
which was in principle approved from local governments and was already placed in 
county library on Jan.6 2008, with an announcement on Newspaper in Jiangxi Province.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/03/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  13
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  14
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wenlai Zhang 
02/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
02/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Songling Yao 
02/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
Mr Ximing Zhang 
02/04/2008 
02/04/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
02/19/2008 
Comments:   
