Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4458
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P112759 
Project Name:  Shandong Ecological Afforestation 
Task Team Leader:  Susan S. Shen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 21, 2010 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (67%);Climate change 
(33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
59.72
59.72 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) would be to demonstrate effective 
afforestation models for environmentally fragile areas in support of Shandong's 
environmental afforestation program.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Environmental Plantation Establishment (66,000 ha at costs of US$109.5 
million), which would include two sub-components:  
 
(a) Re-vegetation of Degraded Mountainous Areas: Under this sub-component the 
project would establish tree and shrub vegetation on some 38,000 hectares on highly 
degraded hill sides with a shallow soil cover. These areas have no agricultural potential 
and are currently lands with sparse vegetation. Through supportive tree and shrub 
planting combined with protection, these areas are expected to recover into dense and 
multi-story vegetation with grass, shrubs, and different species of trees reducing soil and 
water erosion and developing into a more diversified landscape in the longer-term.  
 
Page  2
(b) Protective Plantations on Saline Coastal Areas: Under this sub-component some 
28,000 hectare of tree belts with different species would be established near the mouth of 
the Yellow River to protect agricultural land, improve its productivity, and stabilize 
newly-constructed land. .  The project would work in sites where the Government has 
already invested in infrastructure works, including road and dyke construction, drainage 
and irrigation works, and the in flushing of salt to reduce salinity.  The project would 
complement these investments by planting trees and shrubs along roads, canals and on 
areas designated for afforestation to protect agricultural crop land and stabilize soil 
movement caused by wind and water erosion.  
 
Component 2: Technical Support and Project Management (costs of US$6.3 million).  
This component would support/finance: (a) nursery upgrading to propagate wider number 
of species and improvement of seedling quality including nursery equipment, on-site 
irrigation system (sub-lateral or smaller ditches), small-scale on sites civil work, as well 
as training; (b) applied research and extension program to generate and disseminate a 
wider range of species and techniques to improve protection forest establishment and 
management; ( (c) training and technical services, as well as office facilities to build up 
project management capacity for the project implementation agencies and communities 
including farmers; and (d) a project monitoring and evaluation system to monitor project 
performance, achievement of the project objectives and assess the project's environmental 
and socio-economic impact.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover two locations in Shandong Province.  Shandong Province is an 
Eastern Coastal province with a still comparatively low forest cover of only 13.44%, 
ranking as the 22nd among the provinces in China.  The forestry resources inventory 
conducted in 2007 reports a forest area of the whole province of 2.54 million ha, 
including protective forest 0.68 million ha, timber forest 0.87 million ha, economic tree 
0.99 million ha.  Major efforts to increase the forest cover have been undertaken in recent 
years resulting in a forest cover increase from 3.31 percent in 2002 to currently over 13 
percent.  The timber volume has reached 86.28 million m³, with an incremental of 28.09 
m³ over 2002 showing improvements both in quality and volume.  However, the land 
resources available for commercial plantations reached the limitation with large areas of 
land suitable for commercial and productive plantation forests already afforested.  The 
emphasis of the forestry development strategy has thus shifted towards afforestation of 
marginal areas with a particular importance for the environment.  
 
The project will contribute to implementation of two of the five major environmental 
forestry programs included in Shandong's afforestation development strategy: (1) 
Afforestation of mountainous areas with a poor vegetation cover, and (2) Establishment 
of a protective tree belts in a coastal area.  
 
The problems in the hilly-mountainous areas located in central Shandong have arisen as 
a
consequence of excessive deforestation and unsustainable land use activities over a very 
long period of time. The result is that these lands are almost entirely devoid of any 
Page  3
vegetation other than grasses and a few scattered shrubs.  Most areas are now largely 
unusable except for low-grade grazing by goats.  
 
The coastal areas have been formed in the last few decades due to silt deposition in the 
Yellow River delta.  The most recently developed soils have a high salt content which 
makes them unsuitable for most of the species typically used in afforestation activities. 
The sites also face strong winds which adversely affect many species which might grow 
on these sites.  The project will support afforestation in these difficult sites.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social assessments conducted during project preparation phase 
did not identify any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Overall, 
the Project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits.  
 
(a) Environmental Assessment. The project was categorized as "B" and an EA was 
undertaken by the Shandong Provincial Academy of Environmental Sciences covering 
possible impacts, mitigation and compliance monitoring, building on the experience of 
previous WB-financed forestry projects in China.  The negative impacts are moderate to 
insignificant and can be readily mitigated and minimized if the environmental 
management plan (EMP) is implemented properly.  The EMP includes institutional 
arrangements for EMP implementation, budget requirements for monitoring and training.  
For easier reference during implementation, the EMP is split into two documents--stand-
alone Environmental Protection Guidelines and a stand-alone Pest Management Plan.  
 
(b) Natural Habitats. The sites selection criteria preclude natural habitats or any 
protected areas and set requirements on distance between planting sites and protected 
areas. The mountainous areas are highly degraded in the coastal region, trees are to be 
Page  4
planted on saline land previously lifted above the ground level to allow salt leaching by 
precipitation and irrigation to a salinity appropriate to salt-tolerant trees to survice.  The 
local forestry bureau confirmed that tree belts would be established only on these 
converted land, thus the project itself will not adversely affect the surrounding area that, 
though not protected area, is covered with natural vegetation such as reedbeds.  
 
(c)  Forests. The project complies with the Forest Policy.  It aims to increase tree cover 
for mainly environmental improvement purposes.  The project will not lead to conversion 
of natural forests or involve establishment of commercial plantations, nor will it 
introduce any invasive species.  
 
(d) Pest Management.  Since the project will use pesticides or herbicides to establish 
and manage afforested areas and in nurseries, a pest management plan has been 
developed based on implementation experience of previous Bank financed forestry 
projects in China and it is in compliance with Bank's policy.  
 
(e) Physical Cultural Resources.  The policy is not triggered. Proposed afforestation 
sites are not located in or next to any known areas with physical, cultural, or natural 
relics. Sites selection criteria exclude such areas. This has been confirmed by the 
Provincial Bureau of Cultural Relics.  
 
(f) Indigenous Peoples.  This policy is not triggered because there are no ethnic minority 
communities in the proposed project areas, as identified through the project social 
screening by the Bank social specialist on the team.  This has been also confirmed by the 
Provincial Bureau of Ethnic and Religious Affairs.  
 
(g) Involuntary Resettlement.  The social assessment confirmed that there will not be 
any land acquisition or relocation. Participation is fully voluntary and this is ensured 
through a participatory process taking place in each administrative village. Restriction of 
access to land due to the need to establish vegetative cover is voluntarily agreed by the 
participating households. Land currently used by non-participating households is 
excluded from the project and this is confirmed in the site selection criteria.  Potential 
indirect impact, such as impact from windbreaks on households not participating in the 
project, is minimized through inviting these households for consultation during the 
participatory process for joint identification of mitigation measures.  The Participatory 
Planning Manual lists these recommended measures.  
 
(h) Safety of Dams, International Waterways and Disputed Areas. These three policies 
are not triggered since the project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of dams, 
involve international waterways, or located in any known disputed areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Shandong Province is in the process of implementing the national forest land tenure 
reform.  Without the project, fragile unforested lands would likely remain collective 
village forest land.  With the project, part of the village collectives could opt to contract 
Page  5
their lands to individuals or enterprises inside or outside the village.  In the short term, the 
enterprises consulted during preparation have stated that they were not interested in such 
contracts.  Therefore no provisions have been made in the project for such partnership 
arrangements.  The impact is therefore negligible.  In order to further potential 
association of the project with contracting of land to individuals or enterprises, collective 
village contracts have been retained as one management option for villages that choose 
not to allocate their collective forestland.  These contracts may evolve in the future into 
villages associations or cooperative arrangements.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During project design, some of the technical planting models were adjusted to increase 
the environmental benefits such as smaller areas of single species plantings to establish a 
landscape mosaic that would increase diversity and resiliency of the plantations.  
 
In addition, the participatory social assessment documented how public goods 
afforestation might take place in a top-down manner leading to less-than-optimal 
environmental and social outcomes.  Therefore a participatory planning process was 
developed to ensure fully voluntary and informed participation of villagers/households 
and ensure that the technical design will be adjusted to local conditions.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower recruited independent and qualified institutes on social development and 
environmental assessments of the project in compliance with WB (and government) 
regulations.  The recommendations have been incorporated into project design and 
activities. Particularly planning (with related training) and M&E, have been costed in 
detailed project costs.   Shandong Province and the Forestry Bureau have participated in 
three previous Bank-supported forestry projects and therefore have hands-on experience 
in the implementation of Bank safeguards policies. All three previous projects required 
EIA/EMP under OP4.01 and Pest Management Plan (OP4.09). The last two Bank-
financed forestry projects in Shandong undertook social assessments and focused on 
meaningful consultation and participation. Refresher training on WB safeguard policies 
and guidelines were provided by the Bank team during preparation.  All documents were 
disclosed in accordance to the Bank's requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the provincial, county, township forestry bureau staff, 
administrative village leaders and natural village cadres and communities, individual 
farm households, and state forest farms, the latter tasked with ecological forest 
protection. During the preparation phase, training on consultation and participatory 
planning procedures were provided to the Provincial and Country PMO staff and, Design 
institute staff by the National Social Development Specialist(s).  More than 20 staff 
participated. These staff joined the social assessment field survey together with the 
national specialists.  Sixteen villages took part in the initial survey during a total of 16 
days, four per agroecological region.  Since there was great homogeneity within each 
Page  6
region, it was concluded that the sample size was satisfactory.  Activities during the SA 
consisted of focus group discussions with households, interviews with village leaders, 
and direct observation of potential project sites.  Project impact for poor households and 
women was specifically assessed with local households in the village cadres.  The 
inclusion of poor households and women will continue during participatory planning in 
other project villages throughout implementation. Prior to pre-appraisal, the PMO and 
local authorities conducted a project information campaign (using a project information 
and village meetings) for each potential project village throughout the proposed project 
counties.  The pre-appraisal mission observed a satisfactory outcome of this information 
process in the visited communities. The PMO further piloted the participatory planning 
process in all the village communities planned for first year project implementation based 
on the draft project Participatory Planning Manual. This participatory process makes 
specific provisions to invite all affected groups including those that do not reside in the 
project, as well as women and the poor. Village and household applications in these Year 
1
locations have been completed and the pre-appraisal mission observed that these had 
followed the project's principle of fully voluntary application.  All other villages will 
follow a similar process during subsequent years.  
 
The safeguards documents were disclosed in Shandown Province on July 16, 2009, and 
made available at the Infoshop on July 27, 2009. The borrower has advertised the 
availability of the safeguards studies on July 16, 2009 on Shandong Information website 
(www.sdly.gov.cn)and made these documents available in the public domain web-sites of 
the local government on July 16, 2009, the county PMOs, and in the county public 
libraries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/24/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/16/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/27/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/24/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/16/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/27/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
07/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Xin Ren 
07/27/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
07/27/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
07/29/2009 
Comments:   
