                                                                                       48095

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                    Report No.:



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/03/2009

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                                 IProject ID: PI01521
Project Name: Yingkou Economic Development Zone Heating Project
Task Team Leader: Gailius J. Draugelis
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 31, 2009       Estimated Date of ERPA Signing:
                                                                       August 30, 2009
Managing Unit: EASCS                          Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services
T'      .....,'   .,-,,_
                          · Municipal Finance
Financing amounts by source:
Carbon Financing: $7.90 million
TOTAL: $7.90 million
Environmental Category: B



B. Project Objectives

The proposed development objectives ofthe Carbon Offset Project are:
   ·  To improve the energy and environmental efficiency of heating services in the Yingkou
       Economic Development Zone.
   ·  Reduce global emissions ofcarbon dioxide.

The objectives of this World Bank Carbon Offset Project are therefore consistent with the
developmental and poverty reduction objectives of the Country Partnership Strategy. dated May
23,2006.

C. Project Description

The project consists of the sale of the first 600,000 emission reductions (ERs) resulting from the
construction ofa new centralized heating system that will supply existing heating areas currently
supplied by small, inefficient and polluting hot water boilers, to the World Bank-managed
Spanish Carbon Fund. This project will be implemented by the Yingkou EDZ Huayuan Heating
Company.       Carbon revenues will provide an additional revenue stream, which will provide
additional financial comfort to Yingkou EDZ Huayuan Heating Company and its lenders.

The project will produce greenhouse gas reductions through the reduction in coal consumption
for heating. Coal consumption will reduced by replacing use of 79 boiler plants that operate with
132 boiler units throughout the Yingkou Economic Development Zone with a more efficient
central heating system comprising: (a) 85 km primary and about 70 km secondary network; (b)
66 group substations and 11 pilot building level substations; (c) a boost pump station; (d) heat
meters; and (e) ancillary and control (SCADA) systems. The heating supply will be purchased
from the existing Huanen Yingkou power plant consisting of 2X320MWp units using
supercritical technology. Therefore, the efficiency of heat generation is substantially higher
compared to heat generated from small and inefficient heat only boilers that are presently
operating in the project area.

This carbon offset project falls under the large-scale clean development mechanism (CDM)
project activity category and applies the newly approved methodology AM0058, which is
applicable to project activities that introduce a new primary district heating system to supply heat
to residential and commercial consumers, where the heat comes predominantly from a
cogeneration plant (CHP), can also involve introduction of new modem heat only boilers to
supplement heat from CHP or where the project boundary includes only existing buildings.

Monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken through the specific plan for Verification of
Emissions Reductions that will be developed in the clean development mechanism (CDM)
Project Design Document. The Yingkou EDZ Huayuan Heating Company will be accountable
for overall reporting on implementation progress, preparation of financial monitoring reports,
and preparation of audited project accounts.           These reports are consolidated at the provincial
level by the Foreign Funds Utilization Project Office, the provincial-level PMO, and for project
accounts by the Liaoning Finance Bureau.                                       .

D. Project location (if known)

The project activities would be implemented in selected areas of the Yingkou Economic
Development Zone, Yingkou Municipality, Liaoning Province.                           The Yingkou Economic
Development Zone has an urban population of 335,000. The project activities will replace use of
a total 79 boiler plants that operate with 132 boiler units throughout the project area.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

As the development and implementation of the CF Operation is within the Yingkou Economic
Development Zone Central Heating Supply Subproject under the approved IBRD Liaoning Third
Medium Cities Infrastructure Project (LMC3) (P099224)i, that has previously been appraised by
the Bank and is now under supervision, the environmental and social due diligence carried out
for the project, including the monitoring and supervision ofthe Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), satisfactorily addresses all safeguards
issues and no new issues are raised by this Operation. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was


ILiaoning Third Medium Cities Infrastructure Project (P099224). The CF Operation is within the scope of
Component 1: Central Heating Infrastructure, which covers six cities and includes the construction ofnew and
rehabilitated central heating systems.

not required for this subproject; however, a RPF was prepared in the event of any changes to
routing or siting that would require land acquisition or involuntary resettlement.

The Yingkou EDZ Huayuan Heating Company is the implementing agent and is responsible for
management ofthe IBRD loan to the Yingkou Economic Development Zone Heating Subproject
and the proposed Carbon Offset Project.

The Yingkou EDZ Huayuan Heating Company will also be responsible for operation and
maintenance of all CDM related tasks to ensure that CERs are monitored and accounted for and
for compliance with all environmental and social safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

    Ms. Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 

    Mr. Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 


    II.       SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                                             Yes             No            TBD
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                                   [X]             [ ]
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                            [ ]            [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                [ ]            [X]
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                 [ ]            [X]
Involuntary Resettlement (OPfBP 4.12)                                                   [X]             [ ]
Indigenous Peoples ( OPfBP 4.1 0)                                                        [ ]            [X]
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                     [ ]            [X]
Safety ofDams (OPfBP 4.37)                                                               [ ]            [X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)'                                                 [ ]            [X]
Projects on International Waterways (OPfBP 7.50)                                         [ ]            [X]
Piloting the Use ofBorrower Systems to Address Environmental
                                                                                         [ ]            [X]
and Social Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OPIBP 4.00)


Environmental Category: B

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

The development and implementation of the Carbon Offset project involves no changes
whatsoever in the LMC3 Project objectives, components, implementing agencies or
implementation schedule. Consequently it involves no Environmental and Social safeguards
issues beyond those that have already been identified in the LMC3 Project ISDS.

The LMC3 Project was assigned a Category B, therefore this proposed Carbon Offset project is
assigned a Category B as well; however, no additional safeguard instruments are required other
than those that have been prepared under the LMC3 Project.

·By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination ofthe parties' claims on the
disputed areas

Safeguard issues that have been triggered in the LMC3 Project are:

Environment. In accordance with World Bank's OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment policy, the
project was assigned "Category B" reflecting the limited extent and duration of any adverse
environmental impacts associated with the construction and operation phases in each of the sub
projects. Chinese language Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared with full
English translations. For all sUb-projects at least one public consultation was conducted. An
English language Environmental Assessment Comprehensive Summary was prepared and a draft
submitted to the Infoshop on September 19, 2007.              The Environmental Assessment
Comprehensive Summary for the entire LMC3 Project and Environmental Management Plan for
the Yingkou EDZ subproject will be re-disclosed to the Infoshop as part of the proposed Carbon
Offset Project.

Involuntary Resettlement and Land Acquisition. As part of the safeguard requirements for the
LMC3 Project, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) were prepared for the different components in
accordance with local laws and regulations and the World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement. Among eleven subprojects, five of them involve resettlement and the impacts are
limited. For the Yingkou EDZ subproject there is no land acquisition or affected populations. To
address any resettlement impacts caused by project design changes during implementation, a
resettlement policy framework is in place. A Summary RAP covering all relevant subprojects
was prepared in English and disclosed through the Bank's InfoShop as part ofthe LMC3 Project.
The RAP and RPF will be re-disclosed to the Infoshop as part of the proposed Carbon Offset
Project.

IV. APPROVALS
                                                                                      --
  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards .Coordinator:  Mr Panneer Selvam
    Comments: 

  Sector Manager: 
                  Mr Ede Jorge IjjaSZ-vasquez(
    Comments: 


