                                                                                                                                                                                                        44063


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 01/31/2008                                    Report No.: AC3137
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: China                               Project ID: P096925
                                                                                                            Project Name: China Bengbu Integrated Environment Improvement Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Shenhua Wang
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5,        Estimated Board Date: March 11, 2008
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: EASUR                         Lending Instrument: Sector Investment
                                                                                                                                                         and Maintenance Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Roads and highways
                                    Disclosure                                                              (10%);Water supply (5%);Sub-national government administration (5%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource

                                              Public                                                        management (S);Regional integration (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):          100.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                    Authorized                                                      Borrower                                                        124.00
                                                                                                                                                                                    124.00
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                        Simple []             Repeater []
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                                        Public

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The project development objective is to improve the effectiveness and sustainability of
                                                                                                            selected urban environmental services delivered in Bengbu Municipality through
                                                                                                            improving water supply, reducing incidents of land submergence from flooding, and
                                                                                                            enhancing wastewater management.

                                                                              Authorized                    3. Project Description
                                                                                                            The proposed project includes a package of integrated interventions that support and
                                                                                                            address: (a) water environment issues in Bengbu City proper and counties of Guzhen,
                                                                                                            Huaiyuan and Wuhe through investments in flood control, flood prediction and control
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            systems, storm drainage, water supply, wastewater collection, inter-district infrastructure
                                                                                                            development, and environmental management; (b) introduction of professional
                                                                                                  Public    management services and load-based charges for industrial wastewater management in
                                                                                                            one `model' industrial park through public-private partnership in infrastructure service
                                                                                                            provision; (c) enhanced cooperation between administrative units (municipality, districts
                                                                                                            and counties) of Bengbu in: inter-municipal infrastructure optimization; information

sharing and integrating water quality databases and enhancement of environment-related
information dissemination to the public; and (d) support for reform of water sector
agencies.

 The project has the following four components:

 Component 1: Comprehensive Water Resources Management

 The component includes: (a) construction of a pumping station to manage floods and
increase storage capacity of Tianhe Lake; and (b) construction of a flood discharge
pumping station at the Longzi outfall; desilting of the southern part of Longzi Lake
located within Bengbu City proper; and improvement of embankments to manage floods
and restore Longzi Lake.

 Component 2: Urban Environmental Infrastructure Improvement

 The component includes: (a) Bengbu City proper (south of the Huai River): construction
of storm drainage facilities in the old city area, High Tech Development Zone, Economic
Development Zone, and Longzi Lake District, respectively; reconstruction of
Xinchuantang, Nanshijia storm drainage pumping stations; and rehabilitation of Zhi Huai
Road storm drainage pump station; and (b) Huaishang District (north of the Huai River):
construction of: storm drainage networks; three flood discharge pumping stations;
wastewater collection networks, including a pipeline to transfer wastewater from
Huaiyuan County to Huaishang District for treatment; roads; and desilting of drainage
canals.

 Component 3: Sub-Urban Environmental Infrastructure Improvement

 The component includes: (a) Guzhen County: construction of storm drainage networks,
wastewater networks, and roads, and desilting of drainage canals; (b) Huaiyuan County:
construction of storm drainage networks, two storm drainage pumping stations, and
roads, and desilting and rehabilitation of three flood retention basins and a drainage
canal; and (c) Wuhe County: construction of a water supply intake, treatment plant,
transmission and distribution networks, an industrial wastewater treatment plant (WWTP)
and collection networks, storm drainage networks, a flood discharge pumping station
including a detention storage basin, facilities for containing first flush flows and
accidental spills, desilting drainage canals, and roads.

 Component 4: Institutional Development and Capacity Building

 This component includes: a) water quality monitoring improvement; b) implementation
support; and c) technical assistance for capacity building.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Bengbu is one of the municipalities in Anhui Province located in the central eastern part
of China. Topographically, 86% of the municipality is plains with relatively centralized
hills, and 8% of the total surface area is water due to interlaced inland rivers, canals and
lakes. Bengbu is located in the northern edge of the north subtropical zone and in the
humid subtropical monsoon climate region. The annual average precipitation is 905.4
mm.

 In Bengbu, there lie many rivers and lakes which belong to the Huai and Huaihongxin
river systems. Bengbu is in the lower section of the middle stream of the Huai River,
which has resulted in frequent flooding due to large amounts of flood discharge from
upstream during the flood season every year.

 The Huai River is one of the most polluted rivers in China. Despite considerable
government efforts including the Bank-financed Huai River Pollution Control Project, it
remains one of the most difficult rivers to clean up. According to the historic monitoring
results, its water quality for Bengbu section has not met the Class III target in the last
seven years, especially during the dry season from January to March when the flow rate
of the Huai River is low and insufficient to dilute the incoming pollution.

 Indigenous Peoples
 Based on demographic information, there are 36 ethnic minorities in Bengbu with a total
of 35,267 people including Hui, Menggu, Man, Yi, Zhuang, Miao, Hani and Korean. The
minority population is only about 1% of Bengbu's total population, and no minority
group will be affected under the project. Therefore, OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples is not
applied.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
   Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Issues
 The proposed project would contribute to a significant improvement of the environment
in and around the project areas by improving urban environmental infrastructure for
water supply, wastewater treatment, food control, and storm drainage. Among other
things, the project would lead to a projected reduction of CODcr 3650 t/y and NH3-N
730 t/y discharged into the Huai River by increasing a treatment capacity of about 50,000
m3/day wastewater for the No.1 WWTP upon completion. Through dredging of the lake,
rivers, canals and storm drainage ditches, the project would also improve flood
management and drainage capacity, surface water quality, and ecological environment
and local landscape in and around the project areas. Taking an example of Longzi Lake,
its storage capacity would increase by 1.15 million m3, nonpoint pollution due to its
contaminated sediment would be eliminated, and the aquatic environment would be
improved by reducing toxic and hazardous substances in the sediment. Moreover, the
project would effectively upgrade the flood management standard of defined service area
to prevent frequent floods, guarantee the safety of people's lives and properties, and
promote industrial and agricultural development through the construction of storm
drainage pumping stations.

 However, there would be some adverse impacts. The impacts during the construction
phase mainly include airborne dust during transportation and odors from disilting and
possible improper disposal of solid waste, noise from construction, vehicles and
equipment, solid waste, traffic disruption, and impacts on the ecological environment. On
the other hand, key impacts during the operation phase include odors from the WWTP,
noise from traffic, and the operation of storm drainage pump stations, the WWTP, and
the water treatment plant, sewage from storm drainage pump stations and sludge from the
WWTP and the water treatment plant, and industrial water wastewater.

 Involuntary Resettlement
 Six of the eight subprojects involve land acquisition and resettlement. The resettlement
impacts will be seen in 11 townships with 46 villages. The project will affect 11,128
people in total, of which: (a) 9,127 people (2,422 households) will be affected by
permanent acquisition of the collective land; (b) 267 people (77 households) affected by
demolition of urban residential houses; (c) 1,710 people (405 households) affected by
demolition of rural residential houses; and (d) 24 people affected by demolition of four
small grocery stores. Among project affected persons (PAPs), 11 persons from seven
households are identified as vulnerable according to the criteria described in the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).

 Individual RAPs for each subproject were prepared in Chinese by design institutes (DIs)
with the assistance of the respective project management offices, house demolition
offices, Land Administration Bureaus, affected villages and communities, and potential
displaced persons. The RAPs were prepared in compliance with OP 4.12 Involuntary

Resettlement and describe in detail project impacts, affected populations, consultation
process, rehabilitation measures, budget, and implementation and monitoring
arrangements. On the basis of the individual RAPs, a summary RAP was also produced
in both Chinese and English.

 During project design, project owners and the DIs assessed possible linkages with
ongoing or previous activities, and found that the linkage issue exists in the Mohekou
Industrial Zone (MIZ). To address the issue, a resettlement retroactive review and a
resettlement policy framework were prepared, respectively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
For environmental safeguards, as noted in Item 1 above, there are potential negative
impacts during the operation of the WWTP if it is not appropriately designed and
managed, including its effluents with relatively high concentrations of pollutants, odors
and noise, and production of sludge. In addition, wastewater treatment will also produce
sludge, with a risk to release contaminants if the sludge is not appropriately and safely
disposed. Furthermore, if dredged sediment is not properly handled and disposed,
environmental impacts at the sites may be seen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
An extensive analysis of technical alternatives, including the `no project scenario' was
conducted for each component during feasibility study preparation, with the objective of
minimizing environmental impacts and costs.

 For the Longzi Lake component, two kinds of desilting equipment, hydraulic dredging
machine and cutter-suction dredger, were compared in terms of applicable conditions,
energy consumption, working efficiency, required preparatory work, discharge distance,
precision, and environmental and ecological impacts. The hydraulic dredging machine is
found more suitable for the project since it is expected to have less environmental and
ecological impacts and higher evacuation precision.

 For the water supply component in MIZ, comprehensive analysis of alternatives for the
water source and location of a water treatment plant, the water intake process, and the
water distribution system was conducted. In each instance, taking into account both
advantages and disadvantages, the option with less operation costs and environmental
risks in the long term was selected.

 In addition, for the wastewater treatment component in MIZ, various alternatives were
considered for the location and discharge outfall of a WWTP, and the wastewater
treatment process to select the option with less resettlement and environmental risks.
Details are found in the feasibility study reports and the consolidated Environmental
Assessment (EA).

 Efforts were also made to minimize resettlement impacts during project planning and
design. The resettlement impacts were significantly reduced through optimizing the
project design and implementation arrangements. For example, the total area or number
of houses to be demolished has been minimized when demolition is inevitable. Details
are found in Section 1.4 of summary RAP and each subproject RAP.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address the safeguards issues, a consolidated EA/Environmental Management Plan
(EMP), a consolidated RAP, individual EMPs and RAPs for each subcomponent, a
resettlement retroactive review, a resettlement policy framework and social assessment
have been developed.

 The Bengbu Municipal Project Management Office (BMPMO) will have overall
responsibility for coordination with and reporting to the World Bank on safeguards issues
of the project. Some county-level implementing agencies, such as Guzhen, Wuhe, and
Huaiyuan, have less experience with Bank projects. Training on the Bank'ssafeguards
policy has been provided and additional training will be necessary. An independent
environment and resettlement monitor will be contracted under the project, and BMPMO
will prepare semi-annual environmental management reports for the Bank's supervision
team.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental Safeguards
 Two rounds of public consultation were carried out through questionnaire surveys,
public meetings, focused group discussions, and interviews in January and July 2007.
The first round aimed to learn of public concerns about the project, while the second
round to communicate EIA findings and proposed mitigation measures and to confirm
public acceptance and satisfaction. Both rounds focused on the PAPs and beneficiaries of
different ages, genders, educational backgrounds and occupations.

 There also have been many rounds of consultation with government agencies, local
governments, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders of the project to
discuss project locations, scope, environmental and socio-economic concerns, and
environmental management and mitigation plans.

 In addition, information on the project and potential environmental impacts has been
publicly disclosed through such means as the local newspaper, libraries, the Internet, and
government bulletin boards.

 Social Safeguards
 Public consultation and participation was a key element in resettlement planning. The
affected residents, business people and district governments participated in the census,
inventory and formulation of the livelihood rehabilitation strategy, measures and
relocation sites. Their feedbacks have been reflected in the compensation rates and

livelihood rehabilitation measures. The RAP contains a list of major consultation
sessions. The participation and consultation process will continue in resettlement
implementation. To facilitate active public participation, the following mechanism has
been established:

 Step 1: Displaced persons can appeal verbally or in writing to an implementing agency
if they are not satisfied with the RAP. For verbal appeal, the implementing agency should
record in written form and solve the problems within two weeks;

 Step 2: If the displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of Step 1, they
can appeal to BMPMO after receiving a decision notice, and BMPMO should resolve the
case within two weeks;

 Step 3: If the displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of BMPMO, they
can appeal to a local Construction Commission (CC) after receiving a decision notice.
The latter should handle the case within two weeks; and

 Step 4: If the displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of the local CC,
they can bring a lawsuit to a civil law court in case of objection to any aspect of the RAP
after receiving a decision notice.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                         Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       08/14/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   08/09/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08/14/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                         Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       08/14/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   08/09/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08/14/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:

  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process             Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                               Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Shenhua Wang                             12/18/2007
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Chongwu Sun                              12/18/2007
Social Development Specialist       Mr Chaogang Wang                            12/18/2007
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan          12/20/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Keshav Varma                             12/20/2007
 Comments:


