Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3904
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P099751 
Project Name:  CN-Sustainable Dev. in Poor Rural Areas 
Task Team Leader:  Alan L. Piazza 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P101844 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (45%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%);Roads and 
highways (15%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring 
(S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
100.00
100.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed p
roject’s development objective is to explore and pilot more effective and 
innovative ways of providing poverty reduction assistance to the poorest communities 
and households in the forms they themselves most desire and with greater positive 
impact.  By bringing project funding down to the community level and enabling the 
communities and households to determine the use of those funds, the project would help 
resolve the problems of (a) only a limited portion of available poverty reduction funding 
reaching the local level, and (b) institutional priorities and administrative constraints 
predetermining what poverty reduction activities actually take place at the local level.  In 
addition, by improving access to housing, vocational and other training, and health and 
other social services, the project would help to overcome the dangerous working and 
living conditions and other difficulties confronting rural migrants living in urban areas 
and help expand the rural poor’s access to off-farm employment.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
1.  CDD Component (US$80.6 million for community infrastructure and public services).  
The CDD component would reach out to poor villages and address the lack of basic rural 
infrastructure and the persistently poor enabling environment for participation in 
economic development.  The component will provide investment support for the 
construction and improvement of village access roads, drinking water supply systems, 
rural sanitation infrastructure, electrification, communication infrastructure, school 
building construction and repair, small-scale agriculture production infrastructure (such 
as cisterns and water storage systems, irrigation and drainage, and land terracing and 
other land improvements), and basic housing repair.  Implementation will be demand-
driven to ensure that infrastructure investments will meet the needs that have been 
identified by the villagers themselves as most urgent preconditions for improved well-
being.  
 
2.  CDF Component (US$40.0 million for Household Income Generation and Capacity 
Building).  The CDF component would address the current lack of basic income sources 
in remote villages by providing small block grants to communities to support household-
level productive activities such as improved and diversified crop production, animal 
husbandry, and other income generating activities. The CDF approach would draw on the 
experiences of a number of CDD and CDF pilots currently being implemented and tested 
in China. It would promote the full devolvement of all implementation, management and 
supervision responsibilities to participating villages, with informed and self-determined 
choices for productive activities.CDF implementation would be accompanied by 
carefully sequenced capacity building at the village level, including farmer training in 
technical and vocational skills, infrastructure operation and management, community 
development, skills training for women, and training in fund operation and management. 
Capacity building would also include support to the extension services of key line 
bureaus, access to market information, and awareness campaigns about off-farm labor 
opportunities for farmers.  
 
3.  Rural Migrants Support Component (US$8.1 million).  The rural migrant support 
component would address the challenges 
associated with China’s on-going largescale 
rural-to-urban migration, a defining factor of China’s urbanization process, with the 
objective of exploring a replicable model which could be scaled-up nationwide.  The 
identified challenges include unsafe housing conditions and harsh living environments, 
lack of vocational training for better and more stable job opportunities, absence of 
financial assistance to migrant workers to start their own business, very limited access to 
basic social services such as legal assistance and health care, and relatively weak capacity 
of administrating migrant workers affairs, including a weak monitoring and evaluation 
system.  The component will support activities to improve migrant workers dormitories, 
mainly through renovation instead of constructing new buildings; providing vocational 
training; establishing revolving funds, similar to the CDF approach (of component 2), to 
provide financial support to migrant workers’ micro-enterprises; establishing migrant 
community service centers to provide social services such as legal aid, AIDS and STD 
prevention, and care for migrant women and migrant’s children including protection of 
women’s rights and children’s schooling.  The component will also support activities to 
Page  3
improve the current monitoring and evaluation system and a research activity to examine 
the relationship between migration and poverty alleviation, based on the component’s 
experiences, for making policy recommendations to the municipal and central 
governments. The component will be implemented in Chongqing (in Wanzhou District, 
Fuling District, Yunyang County, Youyang County, and in the Chongqing Municipality 
itself) where there are large concentrations of migrant workers.  
 
4.  Climate Change Adaptation and Sustainable Land Management Component (US$5.0 
million GEF-co-financing).  The GEF component will address potential climate change 
risks and land degradation issues that are closely linked with rural poverty and related to 
the limited carrying capacities of the fragile dryland and mountain ecosystems in the 
project area, unsustainable agricultural and other land use practices, and lack of 
alternative income sources.  The component will seek to improve the awareness of 
emerging climate change risks and potential impacts on livelihoods and provide support 
to develop and implement simple adaptation measures. These measures are expected to 
be related primarily to agriculture, land and water resource management and may 
include: land rehabilitation and protection investments, including silt arresting structures, 
flood bank protection, erosion control measures, and restoration of native forest, steppe 
and grassland vegetation; activities to ameliorate current land management, such as 
improved cropping and grazing practices, and community land use planning and zonation 
to reduce use intensity; broadening genetic diversity and species pools of important 
agriculture crops; and support for institutional and community-level capacity building. 
This component will be implemented under the CDD approach and in close coordination 
with component 1 and 2.  
 
5.  Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation Component (US$13.6 million).The 
project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) component would facilitate 
the efficient implementation of the project and the coordination between the various 
government agencies at national, provincial and local levels.  Specifically, the component 
would include support for (a) overall project management and implementation, including 
government staff training, office equipment, vehicles, and (b) design and implementation 
of a comprehensive project MIS system, including progress, financial and impact 
monitoring and evaluation.  In addition, it will support the design of the project’s overall 
participatory and CDD approachthat is envisaged to cover all project components. This 
would include the development of guidelines for participatory planning of community 
development and productive activities, provision of community facilitators to support the 
set up and operation of CDFs, participatory planning and implementation guidelines for 
the rural migrant workers component, participatory monitoring and evaluation of project 
activities, and implementation support for the participatory and CDD approach.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project would be implemented in 25 counties and districts in Chongqing, 
Henan and Shaanxi.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as Category B due to the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of 
the project and the nature and magnitude of its potential environmental impacts.  FCPMC 
prepared the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) following the 
relevant policies, laws and regulations of the Chinese central government and local 
governments.  The ESMF complies with the safeguard policies of the World Bank, will 
assist with avoiding or minimizing the potential negative environmental and social 
impacts of the project activities, and helps to ensure improvement of the livelihoods of 
farmers and the sustainable economic and social development of the project poor areas.  
 
It is expected that limited and scattered land acquisition will be required for a variety of 
small infrastructure activities proposed in the community infrastructure and public 
service component. But there no physical relocation of people is anticipated to be 
necessary. An overall project resettlement policy framework has been developed to guide 
future planning efforts in case of any resettlement or land acquisition need.  
 
Among the project’s 25 counties and districts, two counties/districts are designated 
minority autonomous areas which comprise concentrated populations of ethnic minority 
peoples including Tujia and Miao.  Consultation with minority groups was carried out 
through the process of the social assessment and broad community support for the project 
has been obtained.  The safeguards review process concluded that OP 4.10 is triggered 
but that no separate Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is needed since the majority of 
beneficiaries are minorities.  The elements of IPP have been integrated into the overall 
project design.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In accordance with the experience of this series of poverty reduction projects in China, 
the ESMF analyzed the possible environmental and social impacts of the components to 
be financed, proposed corresponding mitigation measures, explicitly defined activities to 
be and not to be supported, and the avoidance of locations unsuitable for activity 
implementation in order to reduce negative environmental and social impacts.  
Meanwhile, the ESMF made provisions for a mechani
sm to satisfy the Bank’s safeguard 
requirements including the organizational structure, an evaluation system, a monitoring 
system, and capacity building.  
 
The project will bring about positive impacts and benefits to the environment and the 
targeted communities in the project areas, and have minimal adverse impacts. To 
maximize environmental benefits and minimize potential negative impacts, checklists of 
environmental and social impacts were designed, and mitigation measures were prepared 
for each subcomponent. All adverse environmental impacts can be avoided, reduced and 
minimized, provided the mitigation measures developed in the ESMF are properly 
implemented.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None, not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project will be coordinated by FCPMC (affiliated to LGPR at the national 
level), which has rich experience with Bank supported projects. At the provincial level, 
the local FCPMCs (affiliated to the provincial poverty leading group offices) will take the 
lead in project management. This arrangement helps assure the proper preparation and 
implementation of safeguard policies. The Shaanxi provincial FCPMC has previously 
executed a similar village-based Bank poverty reduction project, and is therefore 
experienced in safeguard requirements.  Similarly, the Henan Provincial PMO has rich 
experience with Bank-supported projects in the rural sector, and is well experienced in 
safeguard requirements.  The Chongqing Municipality will need some guidance from 
FCPMC at the central level.  Most county level authorities are new to Bank-supported 
project procedures and will need guidance from the provincial PMOs.  In addition, the 
Bank will provide training to provincial and county level PMO staff on safeguards 
policies and experienced safeguards consultants will be hired to assist with 
implementation of safeguards instruments.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In addition to the consultation conducted to obtain inputs into project design, and in 
accordance with the stipulations of the safeguard policies of the World Bank, a 
participatory public survey was conducted including a questionnaire survey, expert 
consultation, and a workshop.  
 
Page  6
A
community driven development (CDD) approach will be applied and a CDD manual 
has been prepared and the participation mechanism of community in project decision and 
implementation has been established and provided in the CDD manual.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/19/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/05/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/05/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/23/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The safeguards review process concluded that OP 4.10 is triggered but that no separate 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is needed since the majority of beneficiaries are 
minorities.  The elements of IPP have been integrated into the overall project design.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Page  7
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alan L. Piazza 
09/19/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
09/19/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
09/19/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iain G. Shuker 
09/19/2008 
Comments:   
Page  8
