Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3330
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P096812 
Project Name:  Yunnan Urban Environmental Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Takuya Kamata 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource 
management (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
150.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
150.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project will assist Yunnan Province improving effectiveness of lake basin 
management in Er’Hai and Dianchi, and to improve effectiveness and coverage of critical 
urban environmental infrastructure for the development of county towns, through 
expansion and establishment of wastewater services and solid waste management 
systems, as well as improvement of river environment management systems in Dali, 
Kunming, Lijiang and Wenshan municipalities and prefectures.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of two pillars: i) integrated lake basin management (ILBM) systems 
and infrastructure for and Er’hai basin in Dali Prefecture and ILBM forDianchi basin in 
Kunming Municipality through TA; and ii) urban environmental infrastructure 
development in 16 counties in Kunming and Lijiang Municipalities, and Wenshan 
Prefecture.  The total project cost is US$ 326 million, of which IBRD loan is US$150 
million.  
Page  2
Component I: Integrated Lake Basin Management System and Infrastructure (US$ 
58.96 million, of which IBRD loan is US$ 28.36 million):  
 
1.
Er’hai Lake sub-component: Dali Prefecture has developed well-functioning 
integrated lake basin management system for Er’hai over the last decade, with assistance 
from UN and other bilateral donor agencies.  Its effectiveness is demonstrated in the 
recent adoption of a long-term Integrated Er’hai Lake Basin Management Master plan 
(2003-2020), which well articulates policy directions and action measures, as well as in 
the enforcement of regulations, including closure of fish ponds and restoration of 
shorelines. This sub-component will therefore focus on physical investments laid-out in 
the Master plan, which provide: (i) rehabilitation and construction of about 80 km of 
sewer and 40 km of storm water drainage, and a WWTP with a capacity of 4,000 m3/day, 
in four major districts of Dali City; (ii) solid waste management system with capacity of 
70 tons/day and landfill storage capacity of 1.13 million m3 in Eryuan County; (iii) a 
wastewater treatment plant with a capacity of 4,000 m3/day and sewer network in 
Dengchuan Town; (iv) rural non-point pollution control targeting sanitation interventions 
in 100 key villages, and small-scale wastewater collection and treatment facilities; (v) 
environment management of major watercourses flowing into the lake (four major rivers 
and 18 minor water streams from Cangshan Mountain), including rehabilitation of river 
banks; and (vi) technical assistance and equipment provision for enhanced pollution 
monitoring and control.  
 
2.
Technical Assistance sub-component for Dianchi Lake would assist key bureaus 
represented in the Dianchi Management Committee of Kumning Municipality to develop 
an “Integrated Lake Basin Management System” for Dianchi, aiming at enhancing policy 
formulation and implementation, and improving institutional coordination and 
enforcement of regulations. It would comprise assistance for: i) development of a long-
term Integrated Dianchi Management Masterplan; ii) revision of the Dianchi 
environmental regulations; iii) development of an action plan for rural non-point 
pollution control, for reduction of agricultural run-offs from farmland around the lake; 
and iv) improvement of monitoring capacity of relevant bureaus, including development 
of water quality model.  
 
Component II: Urban Environment Infrastructures Development for County Towns: 
This component will assist selected county towns in Kunming, Lijiang, and Wenshan 
developing urban infrastructure critical for economic growth (US$ 205.21 million, of 
which IBRD loan is US$ 97.85 million), as detailed below:  
 
1. 
Kunming Municipality sub-component (Songming, Xundian, and Luquan 
Counties): Construction of three sanitary landfills of total storage capacity of 1.5 million 
m3, total designed capacity of 365 tons/day, with designed lifetime for 10-15 years; 
associated collection and transportation facilities; and closure of existing dumpsites, for 
three county towns.  
 
2. 
Lijiang Municipality sub-component (Lijiang Ancient Town District, Yulong and 
Huaping Counties): (i) Construction of a sanitary landfill of total storage capacity of 2.29 
million m3, designed capacity of 350 tons/day, with designed lifetime for 18 years; 
associated collection and transportation facilities; and closure of an existing dumpsite, 
Page  3
jointly for Lijiang Ancient Town District and adjacent Yulong County. (ii) Establishment 
or expansion of two wastewater treatment plants with a total treatment capacity of 80,000 
m3 / day and construction of sewage collection and drainage networks of over 90 km in 
Yulong and Huaping Counties.  
 
Additionally, the project will include the cultural heritage works proposed for Lion 
Mountain Park in Lijiang and small TA to ensure that the proposed rehabilitation works 
comply with UNESCO protection codes and other national cultural heritage regulations.   
 
3. 
Wenshan Prefecture sub-component (Wenshan, Qiubei, Funing, Yanshan, Malipo, 
Guangnan, Xichou and Maguan Counties): (i) Construction of three sanitary landfill of 
total storage capacity of over 2 million m3, designed capacity of some 350 tons/day, with 
designed lifetime for 10-20 years; associated collection and transportation facilities; and 
closure of existing dumpsites, in Funing, Malipo and Maguang Counties. (ii) 
Establishment or expansion of three wastewater treatment plants with a total treatment 
capacity of 28,500 m3/day and construction or rehabilitation of sewage collection and 
drainage networks of over 200 km in Wenshan, Qiubei, Yanshan, Malipo and Funing and 
Guangnan Counties. (iii) Integrated environment management of 21 km section of 
Panlong River in Wenshan County and 11 km section of Puting River in Funing County, 
including enhancement of riverbank and dredging; as well as environment improvement 
measures for Lake Puzhehei in Qiubei County, including construction of rural wastewater 
treatment and sanitation facilities, river course management, rehabilitation of wetland. 
(iv) Technical assistance for enhanced environment monitoring and capacity building for 
the Prefecture.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Yunnan Province is located in the southwest border of China, which is a mountainous 
province on plateau.  The altitude declines gradually from northwest to southeast in a 
ladder shape, and elevation differs significantly, with average altitude of about 2,000 
meters, maximum altitude of 6,740 meters and minimum altitude of 76 meters.  The 
topography is varied, and climate is complex with significant vertical altitude difference 
in temperature.  
 
The province has more than 600 rivers, including 180 larger rivers, most of which are 
upstream of rivers flowing into sea and belonging to six major river systems separately.  
The rivers flow into three seas and three bays (East China Sea, South China Sea, the 
Andaman Sea, the North Bay, Motama Bay, the Bay of Bengal) before flowing into two 
oceans (Pacific and the Indian Ocean).  
 
There are many plateau lakes in Yunnan Province.  The total area of lakes is 1,066 km2 
with catchment area of 9,000 km2, and total water storage of 30 billion m3.  The most 
famous ones include Dianchi Lakes, Erhai, Fuxian Lake, Lugu Lake, and Yangzonghai. 
Dianchi Lake is the largest lake in Yunnan, and ranks sixth in the country.  
 
Yunnan Province has 16 prefectures, 29 minority autonomous counties in 129 counties. 
By the end of 2005, the province's total population was 44.2 million, with urban 
Page  4
population of 11.6 million.  Yunnan is a province with most minorities in China, and 
there are around 30 groups of minorities with over 5,000 people each.  Population of 
minority accounts for 33.4% of the total population in the province.  
 
The provincial GDP of the year 2005 is RMB 347 billion; the added value of the 
primary industry was RMB 67 billion, the secondary industry was RMB 145 billion and 
the tertiary industry RMB 137 billion.  
 
Yunnan has unique geography, climate, and natural & ecological environment.  Cultural 
diversity, natural and cultural landscape created unique tourist resources in Yunnan.  
Stone Forest, Dali and Xishuangbanna, three rivers flowing in parallel, and Yulong Snow 
Mountain in Lijiang are famous national scenic areas.  In addition, there are 47 
provincial-level scenic areas.  
 
Summary of Key Characteristics of Project City  
 
1) Kunming: 
 
 
Kunming is the capital of Yunnan Province, serves as the political and cultural center, 
and transport and communications hub. Kunming is in the central eastern of Yunnan 
Plateau; multi-years temperature is 14
.7
Â° C.  The city consists of five districts (Wuhua, 
Panlong, Xishan, Guandu and Dongchuan), one city (Anning) and eight counties 
(Chenggong, Jinning, Fuming, Shilin, Yiliang, Songming, Xundian and Luquan).  By the 
end of 2005, there are 46 townships, 7 minority townships, 53 towns and 30 sub districts. 
In 2005, the city had a population of 5.1 million, with total GDP of RMB 106 billion, 
increasing by 11% from the previous year. Per capita net income of farmers was 3,258 
Yuan.  
 
2)  Dali  
 
Dali Bai Autonomous Prefecture is located in the northwest of Yunnan Province, east to 
Erhai lake, west to Diancang mountain.  The Prefecture contains one city and 11 towns.  
Dali City is located in the watershed area of Jinsha River, Lancang River and Red River.  
At the same time, most parts of area belong to Lancang River that its runoff area accounts 
for 98.75% of the city's total area.  By the end of 2005, there were 34.3 million 
permanent residents and its GDP was RMB 23.5 billion in 2005, 15% increase from the 
previous year.  
 
Er’hai Lake is located at the edge of Dali city with its surface of 2,565km2.  There are 
about 117 rivers in this area including Yongan River, Miyi River, Luoshi River, Boluo 
River, Xier River, Fengyu River, and Eighteen streams of Cang mountain.  Erhai basin 
includes Dali city and Eryuan County where there are 18 towns. The total population in 
Erhai basin is 854,800 people.  Main economic activity around Er’hai lake consists of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, fishery, tourism and electric power industry.  
 
3) Lijiang  
 
Lijiang city is located in northwestern Yunnan Province, 502 km from the provincial 
capital city Kunming.  The rivers in Lijiang City belong to Lancang River and Jinsha 
River.  Lijiang city is in low latitude monsoon climate, with a unique mountain climate 
Page  5
characteristic.  The administrative jurisdiction of Lijiang municipality include the ancient 
city zone, Yulong Naxi Autonomous County, Yongsheng County, Huaping County, and 
Ninglang Yi Nationality Autonomous County. At the end of 2005, its total population 
was 1.1 million, including minority population of 0.7 million.  Naxi, Yi, Lishi, Bai and 
Pumi minorities represent relatively large population.  Total GDP of the city was RMB 6 
billion in 2005, 10.8% increase from the previous year.  
 
4) Wenshan  
 
Wenshan Prefecture is located in the south eastern part of Yunnan Province, bordering 
Vietnam on the south.  The total area of the prefecture is 31,456 km2 and 95% of the total 
area is mountainous and semi-mountainous area.  Low-latitude plateau, monsoon climate 
prevails over Wenshan Prefecture, with no severe cold winter.  Main grain crops of the 
prefecture include rice, maize, wheat and potato.  Products such as peanut, flue-cured 
tobacco, hot pepper, pseudo-ginseng, fibrous crop, and cotton are specialized and 
exported.  Wenshan Prefecture consists of eight counties, i.e., Wenshan, Yanshan, 
Xichou, Malipi, Maguan, Qiubei, Guangnan and Funing. By the end of 2005, there were 
114 towns (townships), including 17 minority towns (townships) with total population of 
3.3 million.  Total GDP of the prefecture was RMB 15 billion in 2005, 13.1% increase 
from the previous year.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Andres Liebenthal (MIGIE) 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASRE) 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
Page  6
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
OP4.01 Environmental Assessment (EA). The EA reports have been prepared for all 
project components, which satisfy the Bank’s requirements for OP.4.01.  The project 
would have overall positive environmental and social impacts by mitigating pollution 
caused by untreated wastewater and uncontrolled dumpsites. In addition to pollution 
abatement, the project will bring positive impact on aquatic ecology and water quality for 
the rivers in the project area.  The investment has no adverse impacts on water resources 
and on residential areas. Other key environmental impacts include: disposal of sludge 
from the WWTP, leachate collection and disposal, selection and construction of 
resettlement sites.  
 
OP4.04 Natural Habitats.  The subprojects will not bring any negative impact on 
sensitive sites, critical natural habitats or protected areas.  Under the project, integrated 
control and the treatment of rivers and municipal environments, wetland conservation, 
lakeshore ecological restoration, integrated treatment and control of micro-watersheds 
will be implemented.  This will enhance pollution control and ecological environmental 
protection, which is important for natural habitats.  The project will also help to 
consolidate the objectives of the 11th Five Years Plan i.e. improving the ecological 
environment of key watersheds and natural habitats, and enhancing the living standards 
of local people.  
 
OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources.  Cultural property exists in the city but no impact 
has been identified in the project area. The EA report includes construction clauses with 
explicit procedures in case of finding cultural property during the construction period.  
Lion Mountain Park which was designed by the UNESCO as world cultural heritage list 
is located outside of the Ancient Lijang Town.  
 
OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  Borrower prepared the Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) for project activities that are acceptable to IBRD.  The proposed investment would 
affect 1,554 households while 6,587 persons will be affected by involuntary resettlement. 
Project activities will require land acquisition for a total of 2,292 mu of collective land 
and 2,326 mu of state-owned land, moreover, 80,721 square meters of housing areas will 
be demolished.  RAP has included land development program, land sale, the use of 
revenues from land sales and compensation.  
 
OP4.10 Indigenous People. Yunnan is renowned for its diverse ethnic minority groups. 
In the four project municipalities and prefectures, 13 ethnic minority groups will be 
affected.  Social Assessment (SA) Report has been prepared in accordance of OP 4.10, 
based on extensive surveys, public forums and interviews with the affected indigenous 
populations.  In addition, a separate analysis has been finalized and included in the SA 
report by the China Cross-Cultural Consulting Center, Sun Yat-Sen University (CCCC) 
which conducted a field survey to identify the features of project areas, social impacts, 
benefit mechanism on the indigenous peoples (IPs) involving 34 subprojects.  
 
Page  7
OP4.37 Safety of Dams. The proposed project does not involve any activities to 
construct or rehabilitate dams.  However, four reservoirs in Wenshan Prefecture and two 
in Dali Prefecture provide water resources to several project towns, thereby triggering the 
Bank’s Safety of Dams Policy. An independent expert from Nanjing Institute has 
conducted a review of the dams in the project area and found that Qinhuadong Reservoir 
–
triggered by the integrated management of Putting River in Funing County 
subcomponent – is currently the only dam that may need to improve its operational 
capacity.  Further follow-up actions will be discussed with the Funing authorities.  In 
addition, operations manual and emergency plans for all the related dams will be 
discussed and agreed with the relevant authorities.  
 
OP7.50 Projects on International Waterways. Er’hai Lake in Dali discharges water to 
Mekong River through its tributary of Yangbi River.  Wenshan and Malipo Counties are 
part of the catchment of the Red River, which flows into Vietnam.  The two counties 
discharge water into the Red River through an upper reach tributary.  Pollution reduction 
achieved through the implementation of the proposed components will benefit the two 
international rivers.  The Bank has been assisting Yunnan Province in notifying riparian 
countries according to the Bank’s policy procedures.  Currently, the Bank is awaiting the 
decision of the Chinese Government on ways to proceed (i.e., whether the notification 
will be issued by the Government of China or by the Bank on their half).  
 
BP17.50 Public Disclosure. The Bank's disclosure requirements have been followed.  
All drafts of the EAs, RAPs, were disclosed in Washington DC by Nov 2, 2007.  
 
All the EA reports in Chinese have been disclosed locally as follows:  
 
ï‚§ 
Consolidated EA: announcement was made in the Yunnan Daily newspaper 
informing that the draft CEA has been prepared and where it is available for public; the 
EA-summary was linked to the YEPB's website on October 24, 2007.  
 
ï‚§ 
For all the subcomponents in Wenshan Prefecture, announcement was made 
through the Wenshan Daily Newspaper informing the draft EAs have been prepared and 
where to locate draft EAs for public on October 12, 2007  
 
ï‚§ 
For all the subcomponents in Dali, announcement was made through the Dali 
Daily Newspaper and Dali Government Website informing that the draft EAs has been 
prepared and where it is available for public around October 11, 2007.  
 
ï‚§ 
For Yulong stormwater drainage system and Lijiang city wastewater 
subcomponent, announcement was made through the Lijiang Daily Newspaper on 
October 14, 2007 informing that the draft EAs has been prepared and where it is available 
for public.  
 
ï‚§ 
EA report for Huaping’s wastewater and sewer components through the Lijiang 
Daily Newspaper on October 17, 2007.  
 
ï‚§ 
EA report for solid waste managements in Lijiang was disclosed through the 
Lijiang Daily Newspaper on October 12, 2007 and EA report on Lion Mountain 
components in Lijiang was disclosed through the same newspaper on November 18, 
2007.  
Page  8
ï‚§ 
FOR all the subcomponents in Kunming Municipality, announcement was made 
through Kunming Daily Newspaper on October 12m 2007 informing that the draft EAs 
has been prepared and where it is available for public.  
 
All Chinese RAP documents have also been disclosed locally, the details are shown in 
the table below.  
 
Cities    
Media             Timing       Location  
 
Kunming 
Kunming Daily News Paper 2007-08-31 PMO & government Web  
 
Wenshan 
Wenshan Daily News Paper 2007-08-29 PMO & government Web  
 
Dali 
Dali Daily News Paper 
 2007-09-03 PMO & government Web  
 
Lijiang 
Lijiang Daily News Paper 2007-09-12 PMO & government Web   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to bring significant positive benefits for the environment, public 
health and tourism-based economy due to improved sanitation services and capacity.  
Wastewater treatments and landfills are new for the city, but appropriate technologies 
have been chosen to meet the national environmental standards at acceptable costs.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed project is built upon the experience gained from implementing the first 
Yunnan Environment Project financed by the Bank.  During project preparation, 
alternative facility locations and treatment technologies were explored and considered.  
 
In terms of minimizing the impacts associated with involuntary resettlement, efforts 
have been made during project planning and design.  The resettlement impacts have been 
significantly reduced through optimizing the project design and implementation 
arrangements.  These are described in details in Section 1.4 of Summary RAP and each 
sub-RAP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Impact:  In order to maximize environmental benefits and to avoid, 
minimize and mitigate potential short-term negative environmental impact, stand-alone 
EMP was prepared.  The EMP includes detailed information on: environmental 
management; supervision mechanism and institutional arrangements; mitigation 
measures; environmental monitoring plans; training plans; estimated budget allocations 
necessary to implement the mitigation measure; monitoring plans; and ways to strengthen 
client capacity.  Based on the findings of EIA report, the EMP will be incorporated into 
bidding and contract documents to ensure that obligations are clearly communicated to 
contractors.  Bidding documents will also include environmental management as one 
criterion for selecting contractors.  Contractors will be obliged to follow appropriate 
environmental, health, and safety standards to reduce associated risks during construction 
and operation.  
Page  9
For each project component, PPMOs, Municipal/Prefecture PMOs and County PMOs 
will take the responsibility for environmental management and compliance with required 
environmental standards during construction and operation periods.  Yunnan PMO is a 
repeated borrower and demonstrates rich experiences and capacity to plan and implement 
the mitigation measures described above. Each project owner will either include 
environmental specialists as staff or engage environmental specialists for the supervision, 
inspection, coordination and management of environmental performance, in order to 
ensure implementation of EMP and compliance with regulatory and project requirements 
for pollution control and environmental protection.  
 
An environmental monitoring program for the construction and operation phases has 
been designed and included in the EMP.  The monitoring program covers air, water 
quality, noise level, sewage, dredged sediments, soil erosion, sludge and leachate disposal 
and management etc., with specific requirement on parameters, frequencies, time, 
locations, responsible agencies and estimated costs.  The program also entails reporting 
and response procedures to ensure that appropriate actions shall be taken, in response to 
the findings of the monitoring.  Monitoring reports will be compiled regularly and 
submitted to the PMO, all relevant agencies and the World Bank.  
 
In order to ensure the effective implementation of such measures/plans, the EMP 
includes training programs for professional, managerial and technical personnel from the 
government, project proponents and operational units, environmental institutions, 
contractors, and construction supervisors as part of capacity building.  Mandatory 
environmental training for contractors and construction supervisors will be held prior to 
the commencement of construction.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: The provincial PMO and Lijiang PMO have in the past 
implemented Bank projects and have resettlement specialists.  However, some 
implementing agencies, particularly at prefecture and county levels, such as Wenshan, 
Dali, has not had prior experience with the Bank-financed project.  Training on the 
Bank’s social safeguards policy has been provided and additional training will be 
provided.  An independent consultant to monitor resettlement will be contracted under 
the project, and a semi-annual report will be prepared to inform the Bank supervision 
teams of resettlement progress.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Assessment: Two rounds of public consultation were conducted in each of 
the four project Municipalities or Prefectures during the preparation of the EAs; the first 
round was conducted during the EIA TOR preparation stage, the second round was 
conducted during the draft EIA report stage. Both rounds of public consultation focused 
primarily on the project-affected people and beneficiaries of different age groups, 
genders, educational backgrounds and occupations, relevant government organizations 
and experts from academic or public institutes on various environmental and socio-
economic issues have also been consulted.  The consultation was primarily through 
Page  10
questionnaire surveys, public meetings of key affected people and other stakeholders, 
supplemented by special seminars or interviews.  Public concerns and opinions expressed 
are addressed in the EAs and incorporated into the project design and environmental 
mitigation measures.  
 
The project’s basic information, major anticipated adverse impacts and mitigation 
measures have been disclosed to the public through bulletins, posters, as well as local 
newspapers, TV and radio broadcasting.  The draft final EA reports and EMPs have also 
been made available at the public libraries, PMOs and on the websites in each of project 
cities and Prefectures.  The draft English version consolidated EA documents were 
submitted to the Bank in Oct 2007.  The final EA Report, EMP, REA and EA Summary 
were submitted to the Bank in Nov 2007 and found to be satisfactory. The EA Reports 
will be sent to the Bank’s Infoshop in November2, 2007.  
 
Resettlement Action Plan. Public consultation and participation was a key element in 
resettlement planning.  The affected residents, business people and district governments 
participated in the census, inventory and formulation of the livelihood rehabilitation 
strategy, measures and relocation sites.  Their feedback has been incorporated in 
determining the compensation rates and livelihood rehabilitation measures.  The RAP 
contains a list of major consultation sessions. Participation and consultation process will 
continue in resettlement implementation.  To facilitate active public participation, 
following complains handling mechanism has been established:  
 
Step 1: Displaced persons can appeal by verbal or paper way to village committee or 
project demolition implementation institution if they are not satisfied with resettlement 
plan. For verbal appeal, village committee and demolition institution should record in a 
written form and solve the problems within two weeks;  
 
Step 2: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of Phase 1, they can 
appeal to municipal PMOs/ administration institutions after receiving decision notice and 
the latter should resolve it within two weeks;  
 
Step 3: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of municipal PMOs/ 
administration institutions, they can appeal to subproject leading team or local municipal 
construction commission after receiving decision notice. T he latter should handle the 
case within two weeks;  
 
Step 4: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of subproject leading 
team or local municipal construction commission, they can bring a lawsuit to a civil law 
court in case of objection to any aspect of the resettlement plan after receiving decision 
notice.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/29/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/24/2007 
 
Page  11
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/02/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/01/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/02/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
IPP elements have been incorporated into overall project design.  Therefore individual 
IPDP is not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  12
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  13
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Takuya Kamata 
12/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
12/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
12/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Andres Liebenthal 
12/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
12/11/2007 
Comments:  No comment. 
