Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3509 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/09/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P101716 
Project Name: Jilin Food Safety 
Task Team Leader: Iain G. Shuker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agro-industry (40%);Animal production (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(20%);Crops (20%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (40%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(40%);Technology diffusion (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of this project would be to improve the legal, regulatory and institutional capacity, 
both private sector and public sector, to manage agricultural product safety and quality in Jilin 
Province.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost would be US$142 million of which the IBRD would finance US$100 
million. The cost of the project includes a US$22 million contingency.  
 
The current proposal for the project comprises five components.  
 
Component A. Promotion of Good Agricultural Practices for Agricultural Product Quality and 
Safety. (20 million)  
 
This component would invest in the development of new standards for good agricultural 
practices, increasing the adoption of good agricultural practices by farmers, and a pilot program 
Page  2
to introduce certification programs for farmers and agricultural product processing businesses.  
New standards for good agricultural practices standards would be funded and developed by the 
Provincial Agricultural Bureau, Livestock Bureau and Aquaculture Bureau.   These standardized 
good agricultural practices would include both legal minimum standards and detailed 
recommendations for farmers on the best agricultural practices available, including appropriate 
cultivation practices, pesticide use, integrated pest management, post harvest practices, animal 
husbandry practices, aquaculture production practices and the appropriate use of veterinary 
medicines.  They will include standards for #safe#, #green# and #organic# agricultural products.  
Increasing the adoption of standardized good agricultural practices and certification programs 
will be achieved through providing matching grants to farmer groups or agricultural product 
processors to set up 200 # 300 demonstration sites that use improved agricultural practices that 
result in safer agricultural products.  Certification programs will include inter alia, #safe,# 
#green,# #organic# Chinese standards as well as certification for international standards under 
international standards such as HACCP and ISO.  
 
Component B.  Public Monitoring of Agricultural Product Quality and Safety (63 million)  
 
This component would finance the upgrading of the agricultural product safety and quality 
management, monitoring, and enforcement system in the Agricultural Committee, Livestock 
Committee and Aquaculture Committee in Jilin Province.  In the course of this upgrade, the key 
innovation would be the introduction of risk based approach to monitoring and enforcement.  It 
would finance the upgrading of equipment at newly established agricultural product safety 
enforcement offices, which would complement the training of enforcement staff under 
Component C.  It would finance the development of an agricultural product quality and safety 
information system to monitor and identify agricultural products safety issues using risk based 
approaches.  It would finance the construction or rehabilitation of 3 provincial and 9 municipal 
level laboratories for testing pesticide and veterinary product residues, as well as the quality of 
pesticides and veterinary products. Any laboratories constructed under this project would 
conform to the relevant chapters of ISO 17025. It would also finance the establishment of the 
baseline inventory of key areas of the Province that are unsuitable for agricultural production as 
a
result of environmental contamination.  This would include areas contaminated by heavy 
metals, pesticide residues, air and water quality and other soil quality parameters.  
 
Component C.  Agriculture Product Quality and Safety Applied Research, Training and 
Awareness Raising (12 million)  
 
This component would aim to increase the level of knowledge on agricultural product safety 
and quality in Jilin Province.  It would finance applied research, training and public awareness 
raising.  It would finance research through a priority setting exercise that identifies key areas of 
research that can be directly applied to improving agricultural product safety.  A comprehensive 
training program has been prepared that includes training ranging from high technology 
laboratory technician training to in-field farmer training.  These research and training tasks 
would be contracted out to pre-qualified list of universities or institutes on a competitive basis. 
The public awareness campaign would use local television, radio and newspaper media outlets to 
promote agricultural product safety amongst farmers and the general public.  The design of the 
public awareness campaign would be contracted out to a media consulting company. 
Page  3
Implementation would be managed by provincial, municipal and county level government 
agencies through local media companies, taking into account the language requirements of ethnic 
minorities.  
 
Component D.  Demonstration Models for Safe Agriculture Supply Chains (19 million)  
 
This component would aim to develop and demonstrate viable business models for 
incorporating farmers into safe and quality agricultural product chains.   The project will lend 
funds to eligible private enterprises or farmers associations to develop and demonstrate models 
for integrating small-scale farmers into high quality, high value and safe agricultural product 
chains.  The sub-loans would finance revenue generating investments that are complementary to 
the public goods investments discussed in other parts of the project. The on-lending term to the 
end-borrowers would be market oriented and would meet the actual cash flow needs of the 
entity.  Nevertheless, each sub-loan#s maturity will not be longer than 6 years and with 
maximum 3-year grace period. Sub-loans would be intermediated by the Finance Bureau with 
the assistance of a qualified agent bank [or banker] hired by the PMO to appraise, monitor and 
collect sub-loans.  
 
Component E.  Project Management and Monitoring (6 million)  
 
This component would support project management offices at the provincial, municipal and 
county level with equipment and training, and a monitoring and evaluation system.  
 
Implementation Arrangements:  This project will be managed by an established Project 
Management Office (PMO) in the Finance Bureau of Jilin Province.  It has already managed 
earlier World Bank projects and is familiar 
with the Bank’s procedures.  The implementing 
agencies for the project will be Agriculture Bureau, Livestock Bureau, and Water Bureau, for 
components 1 - 3, and the Jilin Finance Bureau for Components 4 - 5.  Implementation of 
individual sub-projects under Components 1 and 4 will be carried out by combinations of 
agribusiness companies and small-scale farmers or farmer’s organizations.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards:  The key safeguard risks are: i) constructions and 
operation of food safety testing laboratories under the project; ii) the use of chemicals for pest 
management; iii) the presence in the Province of a large number of minorities; and (iv) 
reputational risk to the Bank and Government in the event of a food safety incident related to the 
project participants.  An environmental assessment for the project would review laws related 
food safety and regulations that govern the management of testing laboratories to ensure that 
they comply with the Bank#s environmental guidelines.  During implementation, the 
management of laboratories would be monitored to ensure compliance with Bank environmental 
guidelines.  This will include safe use and disposal of laboratory chemicals.  The construction of 
testing laboratories on new sites will cause land acquisition, house demolition and business 
interruption. A RAP will be prepared to address the issue.  Sub-projects selected under 
competitive grant, matching grant or onlending procedures will only be identified during project 
implementation.  Operations manuals for the matching grants and onlending would include 
safeguard procedures (RPF and EMPF) that ensure that projects are: i) screened; and ii) 
monitored for social and environmental risks in compliance with Bank environmental guidelines 
(OP 4.01), pest management safeguards (OP 4.09) , Indigenous Peoples ((OP 4.10) and 
Page  4
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12).  Sub-projects would only be eligible if they meet the 
safeguard procedures stipulated in the manuals.  Standardized EMPs (and PMPs) will be required 
for this sub-project were such a requirement is triggered through the screening process.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This project will cover all of Jilin Province.  Most of the investments are in regional food safety 
regulatory reform, reequipping existing laboratories and training staff in major cities and towns 
in Jilin province in the area of agricultural product safety. There is a research and extension 
component that will advise farmers on good agricultural practices.  There are also about 20 
commercial agribusiness operations or farmers groups that will serve as demonstration sites for 
new institutional arrangements and innovative agricultural technology uses that will allow small-
farmers to enter into high value agricultural product chains. Participation in these demonstration 
sites will be voluntary.  There are minority populations in Jilin Province.  The selection of 
beneficiaries for this project would not exclude minorities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
China has a good track record in implementing the Banks safeguard policies under Bank 
financed projects. The Project Management office responsible for managing this project has 
managed other World Bank and Asian Development Bank projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Feng Ji (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project will include the development and implementation of Good Agricultural Practice 
that are environmentally friendly.  As a result, this project is likely to have a beneficial impact on 
the environment.  Good agricultural practices developed and implemented under the project 
would be consistent with national laws, international conventions and World Bank guidelines on 
environment.  The construction and operation of the laboratories will require an environmental 
management plan for both construction and operation.  The mitigation measures are common and 
not complicated or significant. A separate EMP for be developed for each of the laboratories.  
Sub-projects selected under competitive grant, matching grant or onlending procedures will only 
be identified during project implementation.  Operations manuals for the matching grants and 
onlending would include an Environmental Management Frameworksafeguard procedures that 
ensure that projects are: i) screened; and ii) approved monitored for environmental risks in 
compliance with Bank environmental guidelines (OP 4.01).  Sub-projects would only be eligible 
if they meet the safeguard procedures stipulated in the manuals.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
N/A   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
N/A   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will encourage th
e
use of integrated pest management and safe use of pesticides 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
through establishment of the Good Agricultural Practices under components 1 - 4.  For sub-
projects in Components 1 # 4 that will be defined during implementation, pesticides are 
anticipated to be procured and IPM methods applied.  A Pest Management Plan will be prepared 
for the ForProject to include the appropriate measures to address risks of the pest management 
and to support the IPM  sub-projects that are identified as a risk in the area of pest management 
through the standard screening procedure, a Pest Management Plan will be integrated into the 
EMP.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
N/A   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
There are a large number of ethnic minorities in the province. Korean, Manchu and 
Mongolian ethnical minorities are largest minority groups in Jilin. Since the component 1.2 and 
component 4 are open projects to all applicants within the province, it is very likely the project 
will be implemented in the area that have ethnic minorities# collective attachment to and present 
in. However, during the project preparation, such an impact on ethnic minority communities 
could not be determined, because the project area could only be determined during the project 
implementation according to the project design, an Ethnic Minority Planning Framework will be 
prepared to address the issue at this stage. The approved Framework will be included in the 
project operation manual.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Within the five components of the projects, sub-component 2.3 which will upgrade the 
testing laboratories will cause involuntary resettlement. The new construction of the laboratories 
is expected to cause land acquisition, house demolition and business interruption. Therefore, a 
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared to address the resettlement impact of the sub-
component.  
 
Component 4 will transfer loans to specific enterprises and the enterprises will use the loan 
to upgrade its agricultural products# storage facilities. New construction of warehouses is 
expected and the land taking is very likely. Since the project sites could be only determined 
during the project implementation according to the project design, the resettlement impact could 
not be determined during the project preparation. A Resettlement Policy Framework will be 
prepared to address the issue at this stage. The RPF will be included in the project operation 
manual.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
N/A   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  6
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/07/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
The environmental assessment for the project was launched in October 2008.  A draft wsa 
submitted in March 2009.  The final assessment would be completed by the Decision 
meeting in July 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Iain G. Shuker 
07/07/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
07/09/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
