Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3451 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/16/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P090376 
Project Name: GEF Shanghai Agricultural and Non-point Pollution Reduction Project 
Task Team Leader: Hiroaki Suzuki 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (45%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (45%);Sewerage (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Pollution 
management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.79 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
26.87
26.87 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective and global environment objective is to reduce the rural and 
agricultural pollution to the East China Sea through demonstration of effective and innovative 
pollution reduction activities in Shanghai’s selected rural areas.  
 
The project will investigate, explore, and select appropriate pollution management technologies 
available in China and internationally, seeking overall cost-effective approaches and options. 
The project would serve as a demonstration of the approaches and technologies applied.  
 
In addition, the project would seek to strengthen dissemination of information and to provide 
training within the agricultural communities in the project areas. The activities would be 
designed to be readily suitable for replication elsewhere in Shanghai, China and beyond. The 
dissemination and replication of these activities on a large scale through a Replication Strategy 
including replication under Shanghai Four-round Three-year Environmental Protection and 
Page  2
Construction Action Plan and in future possible phases of the APL project in Shanghai, would 
significantly contribute to water quality improvement in the East China Sea.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project consists of four components. The total cost of the proposed project is 
estimated at US$31.66 million which will be updated during next mission when more detailed 
information is available, with an anticipated GEF grant of US$4.79 million.  
 
Component 1: Livestock Waste Management  
 
(a) 
Livestock waste management on large farm  
 
This sub-component is designed to convert livestock waste into organic fertilizer through 
anearobic or earobic treatment by implementation of a pilot bio-fermentation waste treatment 
facility on a large dairy farm.  
 
(b) 
Livestock waste management on medium farm  
 
Three potential sub-projects, two dairy farms and one pig farm, located in the modern 
agricultural park are proposed. This sub-component is designed to develop and implement pilots 
that convert livestock waste into organic fertilizer through anearobic or earobic treatment.  
 
(c) 
Integrated livestock and agricultural waste management  
 
The sub-component is designed to construct an anaerobic digestion facility for pig manure 
treatment and an ammonization facility for rice straw treatment to produce biogas for electricity 
generation for on-farm consumption.  
 
Component 2: Wetland Sewage Treatment System  
 
(a) 
Rural Town Wetland Sewage Treatment System  
 
The sub-component is to expand a wetland sewage treatment system from an existing facility in 
Gangyan Township of Chongming County. The design will take into consideration Bank-wide 
lessons and experiences including the latest achievement under Ningbo Water and Environment 
Project.  
 
(b) 
Village Wetland Sewage Treatment System  
 
The sub-component is to support up to five village wetland sewage treatment systems in 
Qingpu district which are located at the downstream of Taihu basin. Technical design for this 
component will ensure compliances of almost all effluent indicators with Class 1 discharge 
standards at lower cost.  
 
Component 3: Integrated Agricultural Pollution Reduction Techniques  
 
(a) 
Promotion of organic fertilizer  
 
The sub-project will demonstrate innovative techniques to reduce the utilization of chemical 
fertilizers by promoting use of organic fertilizer from Jinshan Dairy Breeding Farm, Chongming 
medium livestock farms supported under the proposed Project, and other plants at Shanghai 
Agricultural Extension and Service Center pilot sites as well as other farms to partially replace 
use of chemical fertilizers. About 25%-30% reduction in chemical fertilizer use is expected 
which will reduce chemical fertilizer-based pollution significantly and help gradually rehabilitate 
the soil structure at pilot sites. The sub-project will also promote accurate fertilizer application 
and use of crop-specific and nutrient-customized fertilization to improve efficiency of chemical 
fertilizer and develop more ecologically friendly and sustainable agriculture.  
 
(b) 
Scientific application of agricultural chemicals  
Page  3
The sub-project will also promote pollution reduction from agricultural chemicals (insecticides 
and pesticides) by (i) using high efficiency, low toxic, and low residual effect chemicals; (ii) 
using eco-friendly biological pesticides; (iii) upgrading sprayers; and (iv) using non-chemical 
technologies for insect and pest control such as insect net, moth-killing lamp, sticky paper, and 
sex-alluring agent.  
 
(c) 
Monitoring and extension  
 
The sub-project will set up check points for on-spot examination and to collect samples for 
monitoring the effect of the demonstration of such technologies by laboratory testing. The sub-
project will also establish an early warning network for epidemic of plant disease, insect and 
pest. The sub-project will also extend successful experience obtained.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Dissemination  
 
(a) 
Project Management  
 
This sub-component will support establishment and operations of the institutional structure 
including Project Coordination Group and Shanghai PMO at municipal level, similar structures 
at county/district level and those at participating agencies for efficient project implementation.  
 
(b) 
Replication strategy development  
 
Based on a replication strategy outline to be prepared by a consultant team during project 
preparation, this sub-component will add the details to the outline and implement the finalized 
replication strategy for demonstrated technologies in Shanghai, China and beyond in 
collaboration with PEMSEA. Seminars, workshops and an international technical exchange and 
dissemination conference with the aim of replicating the results in China and beyond will be 
organized.  
 
(c) 
Rural area environmental protection dissemination  
 
This sub-component, to be implemented by Shanghai Agricultural Broadcasting & TV School, 
will provide training for the participating entities, local farmers, school students, professionals 
and government officials during project implementation. The sub-component will also 
disseminate information and experience obtained from overall project implementation within 
project scope, to sector-wide coverage and to the general public in Shanghai and China through 
the School’s satilite broadcasting network, broadband digital network and traditional classroom 
and on-spot dissemination.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All project activities will be carried out within the jurisdiction of Shanghai Municipality. 
Locations of most project activities have been identified as shown in the following list which 
may be adjusted during next mission when a project feasibility study report is prepared.  
 
A. Livestock Waste Management Technology Demonstration  
 
1.
Livestock Waste Management on Large Scale Farm: Jinshan district  
 
2.
Livestock Waste Management on Medium Scale Farm: Chongming county  
 
3.
Integrated Livestock and Agricultural Waste Management: Chongming county  
 
B. Wetland Sewage Treatment System  
 
1.
Rural Town Wetland Sewage Treatment System: Chongming county  
 
2.
Village Wetland Sewage Treatment System: Qingpu district  
 
Page  4
C. Integrated Agricultural Pollution Reduction Techniques: Jinshan district, Chongming county, 
Qingpu district and Songjiang district (likely)  
 
D. Project Management & Dissemination  
 
1.
Project Management:At municipal, county/district and participating project site levels  
 
2.
Replication Strategy Development: At municipal, county/district and participating project 
site levels  
 
3.
Training and Dissemination: At municipal, county/district and participating project site levels   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
At Municipal level, a Project Coordination Group (PCG), comprising of representatives from, 
inter alia, the Municipal Development and Reform Commission, the Municipal Finance Bureau, 
the Municipal Environmental Protection Bureau and the Municipal Agricultural Commission 
will be set up. Its principal functions would be to (a) review and consolidate Project annual work 
plans, (b) provide guidance on municipal policies and priorities related to agricultural and non-
point pollution reduction to be followed and help resolve related issues, and (c) integrate 
activities of various agencies involved in the Project and ensure an inter-agency coordinated 
approach to Project implementation.  
 
Project Management Office (PMO) is based on existing institutional mechanisms for Project 
preparation and implementation. The Shanghai APL PMO has been serving as Shanghai PMO 
for this proposed Project and will take overall responsibility for Project implementation. 
Specifically, the PMO will (a) act as a coordinating body with the Project’s investment 
components implemented by various agencies; (b) implement the Project’s non-investment 
components; and (c) serve as the Project’s focal point with the World Bank. The DFV, 
established under APL 2, will beinvolved in Project implementation. Its roles will be specified at 
pre-appraisal.  
 
Various government agencies in participating Project county/district will be engaged in both 
Project preparation and implementation. An institutional arrangement for Project implementation 
will be made at each Project site.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Among four project components, Components 3 and 4 will not involve civil works for any 
physical construction. No domestic EA is required for components 3 and 4, while for 
components 1 and 2, an EA Report would be prepared for each sub-component required for 
domestic approval. The selection of EA institute and preparation of EA report for each sub-
component is underway.  
 
In order to reflect overall environmental impacts from both positive and negative 
perspectives, especially for this kind of packaged project, only one consolidated project
-
wide EA 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(CEA) and EMP document is required to comply with Bank’s EArequirements. Based on 
individual EA reports for proposed project investments, such a consolidated EA and EMP report 
in English language would be prepared to make a comprehensive analysis of the impacts of all 
four components for Bank review, including:  
 
(a) 
A consolidated project-wide EA report with detailed evaluation covering all 
proposed project components;  
 
(b) 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  
 
The selection of EA institute for preparation of CEA and EMP is under way. It is expected 
that such EA institute would have ample experience with preparing EA in line with Bank 
safeguard policies and requirements. The selection would be decided prior to July 25 2008.  
 
Considering the type, location, sensitivity, scale of the proposed project, and the nature and 
magnitude of its potential environmental impacts, it is expected that the project will bring very 
positive environmental and social benefits to Shanghai’s rural areas and significantly reduce the 
pollution load especially nutrients to the East China Sea. As an important content, CEA will 
assess the overall environmental, economic and social benefits of the proposed project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The proposed project consists of construction of some village wetland sewage treatment 
systems. However, the site selection and design have not been decided yet.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not involve any forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The Integrated Agricultural Pollution Reduction Techniques Component, to be implemented 
by Shanghai Agricultural Extension and Service Center (SAESC), will (a) disseminate the 
application of high efficiency, low toxic, low residual effect chemicals and biological pesticides; 
(b) prohibit the use of high toxic, high residual effect pesticides and those not recommended on 
the World Health Organization's Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and 
Guidelines to Classification (Geneva:  WHO 1994-95); (c) reduce the reliance on 
organophosphorus pesticides and other synthetic chemical pesticides; (d) upgrade chemical 
spraying equipments for increased efficiency; and (e) promote the use of non-chemical 
technologies for insect and pest control. This component is expected to bring significant benefits 
to the reduction of non-point sources pollution and food safety by greatly reducing the amount of 
pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
With the current project design, the project is not expected to have any impact on cultural 
property.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The majority population in Shanghai is Han.  The Bank’s existing projects in Shanghai 
suggested that no ethnic minority people are presented in or have collective attachment to the 
area. The proposed project sites are in the rural area of Shanghai Municipality. According to the 
Bank’s previous experience in the same area and introduction by local governmental staff, no 
ethnic minority groups are presented in and collectively attached to the Project area, therefore 
OP4.10 is not triggered and no Indigenous People Development Plan is needed.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Components 3 and 4 will not cause any civil works, so these components will not trigger the 
policy and no RAP is needed. According to the primary project proposals, all civil works for 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Component 1 will 
be
conducted on the beneficiaries’ own land, thus no land taking will be 
necessary. Component 2 will cause involuntary resettlement for wetland construction and a 
Resettlement Action Plan is needed. The hiring of the RAP consultant is underway and it is 
anticipated that an experienced consulting firm will be selected by July 25, 2008.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not involve any dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not involve any international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known area on territorial dispute as defined under the 
policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The task team has agreed with the client that draft EA, EMP, and RAP in Chinese will be 
submitted to the Bank by 11/30/2008 and draft EA, EMP, and RAP in English by 
12/12/2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
12/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/12/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
12/16/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
