Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4061 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/27/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P100455 
Project Name: Henan Yellow River Ecological Animal Husbandry 
Task Team Leader: Sari K. Soderstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Animal production (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
80.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would aim to reduce the quantity of environmental pollution from livestock 
production in the Yellow River Belt in Henan Province.  This project objective shall be seen in 
the context of Henan’s higher level, overall objective of supporting a sustainable development of 
animal husbandry and increasing farmers’ incomes by establishing and steering production to 
ecologically standardized livestock farms.  Henan Province expects the proposed project to have 
a
demonstration effect enabling scaling up of these ecologically standardized farms if successful.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is envisaged to have three main components:  
 
A.   
Strengthening of Public Institutions.  This would entail financing of activities that would 
enhance the various government levels’ ability to manage sustainable development of the 
livestock industry in terms of spatial planning and resource optimization.  This could include: (a) 
development of local policies and procedures for monitoring effluents on and off farm; (b) 
monitoring and sampling methodology and testing of soil, water, and effluents; (c) development 
and establishment of a Geographic Information System based planning and management tool and 
related technical assistance and training; (d) intra-provincial and inter-provincial information 
Page  2
sharing about innovations and management of public programs, enforcement and compliance 
strategies; and (e) communication planning and execution.  
 
B.   
Environmental Management in Existing and New Farms and Livestock Parks ensuring 
“ecological standardization.”  This would include funding for:  
 
i
Waste minimization infrastructure (silage pits, feed choppers, etc.) and technical 
assistance and training in nutrition and feed management.  
 
ii 
Waste management infrastructure (sheds that would allow for proper waste collection, 
waste removal equipment, etc.)  
 
iii 
Waste disposal (drainage systems, waste and urine collection tanks, manure basins, 
composting facilities, dry manure packaging facilities, biogas infrastructure – including 
generators, etc.).  Waste disposal strategies would take into consideration specific risks related to 
antibiotic residues and disease risks (HPAI, E. coli, salmonella, anthrax, zoonotic gastrointestinal 
parasites, etc.)  
 
iv 
Investments that would ensure farmers moving into the newly established parks.  This 
could include investments in milking stations and funding for animal health management related 
infrastructure, equipment, and technical assistance and training. Other activities to be financed 
could include technical and assistance and training programs to support on-farm Hazard Analysis 
and Critical Control Point (HACCP ) principles (no investments will take place in slaughter 
houses).  
 
v
Farm management support, including technical assistance and training for farmer’s 
organizations.  
 
C.   
Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation.  Activities to be financed would 
include project management costs, office equipment and vehicles, training, and progress and 
impact monitoring and evaluation (including a computerized Management Information System).  
 
The possibility of accessing carbon financing to off-set some of the current methane emissions 
will be investigated in more detail during preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is anticipated that the proposed project would be implemented over a five year period in about 
750 medium size cattle (beef and dairy) farms of about 300 heads each.  The exact number of 
farms will be determined as more precise cost calculations will be carried out during preparation.  
It is anticipated that a large part of the newly built farms would function as livestock parks which 
would receive relocated surrounding small livestock farmers mainly under cooperative 
ownership (farmers’ associations)- thus reducing the environmental pollution from the backyard 
farms in the surrounding areas.  It is also envisaged that each participating farm would function 
as a demonstration farm through structured outreach programs for surrounding farms so that the 
technologies introduced indeed can be spread.  
 
Currently, Henan is proposing to implement the project in eight prefectures in about 29 counties 
along the Yellow River Belt in order to start reducing agriculture’s contribution to the pollution 
of the Yellow River which is heavily polluted by point- and non-point source pollution.  The 
selection of farm/livestock sites will take into consideration livestock density and a risk 
assessment associated with run-off, surface flow and seepage to groundwater on each site.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Henan Province has carried out a number of World Bank financed agricultural projects and the 
proposed project is utilizing the same Project Management Office (PMO) system that was set up 
for the previously implemented projects - as has therefore experience in implementing Bank 
safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Mr Farzad Dadgari (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is categorized a "B" project, requiring a partial assessment.  An Environmental 
Assessment would serve at three key purposes: (i) development of a farm/park level baseline 
against which to monitor future progress and asses achievement of the project development 
objective; (ii) an assessment of pollution management options that would inform project design; 
and (iii) identify regulatory and institutional capacity building options.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Subprojects will not significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or natural habitats 
as the screening procedures will exclude any subprojects with these impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities that would involve conversion or degradation of 
critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not procure any pesticides, nor will an increased use of pesticides result from 
the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, 
religious, or unique natural values. Appropriate clauses will be included in all construction 
contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in the event of "chance finds" of culturally 
significant artifacts or sites.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Some of the project counties have Hui ethnic minority population.  A social screening is on-
going and will determine whether an Ethnic Minorities Development Plan will be required.  The 
scope of the Social Assessment will be tailor accordingly.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is likely that Component B of the project (Environmental Management in Existing and 
New Farms and Livestock Parks) will require limited, small scale land acquisition for the 
establishment of new farms and livestock parks.  For that purpose, the Borrower will prepare a 
Resettlement Policy Framework to guide in the preparation of Land Acquisition Plans for 
farms/parks which will fall under the Framework.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any large dams as defined under 
this policy.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no project components involving international waterways as defined under the 
policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/22/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of SA and EA has started.  At least inception reports are anticipated to be 
available for the first preparation mission in mid May 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sari K. Soderstrom 
04/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
04/24/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
