Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/10/2009 
Report No.:  AC4441
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P111421 
Project Name:  China: Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 25, 2010 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
207.00
207.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the project is to improve mobility on selected main 
corridors of the Project cities of Wuhu, Anqing, Huaibei and Luan in a safe and efficient 
manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is composed of four components.  A detailed description can be found in 
Annex 4 of the PAD.  Briefly:  
 
a. 
The Integrated Corridor Development Component (IC) Component (total cost 
US$ 207.4 million, World Bank proposed loan US$ 72.3 million) consist of improving 
the capacity, public transport service and traffic safety on key corridors in the Project 
Cities.  
 
b.
The Local and Freight Access (LA) Component (total cost US$ 81.5  million, 
World Bank proposed loan US$ 19.9  million) consists of construction of selected access 
roads in the Project Cities.  
 
c. 
The Public Transport (PT) Component (total cost US$ 17.4 million, World Bank 
proposed loan US$ 7.5 million) consists of constructing maintenance facilities, bus 
terminals, bus depots and stops in the Project Cities.  
Page  2
d. 
The Capacity Building (CB) component (total cost US$ 1.0 million, World Bank 
proposed loan US$ 1.0 million).  This component includes international study tours and 
training as well as technical assistance related to the project components.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project includes investments in the central cities of the Municipalities of An Qing, 
Huai Bei, Lu An, and Wuhu in Anhui Province.  All are medium sized cities with 
population less than 1 million. They are located in temperate zone with annual 
precipitation ranging from 800-1300mm. The project areas of these cities are on flat 
terrain long inhabited without critical natural habitats. The only two protected areas 
involved are in Huaibei and Anqing respectively, details see paragraph 7 and 8 under 
Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project includes building, widening and rehabilitating common urban roads, and 
construction of public transport facilities in urban context. As a standard urban transport 
project, environmental impacts will be mostly construction-related, such as noise and 
dust, construction waste disposal, damage of vegetation, soil erosion, sewage discharge, 
traffic impact, social disturbance and safety, and indirect impacts caused by resettlement 
and industries relocation.  There is no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts 
envisioned in the project.  
 
Environmental Assessment.    The project has been designated as #Category B# as per 
OP4.01 by the Bank due to its limited but material environmental impact.Each project 
city has developed an Environmental Assessment (EA) in Chinese. A consolidated EA 
Page  3
(CEA) was prepared in English and Chinese, by experts from a top-level certified EA 
institute, Anhui Provincial Academy of Environmental Science. Four city-specific 
standalone environmental management plans (EMPs) were also prepared in Chinese and 
English in order to facilitate implementation and supervision.  Both CEA and the four 
EMPs cover possible adverse impacts, mitigation measures and environmental 
monitoring and training based on experience of similar projects in China.  
 
Natural habitat.     A section of the proposed alignment of one the roads, TuoHe road in 
Huaibei, runs parallel to the boundary of the Nanhu urban wetland park.  This man-made 
park is designated as a national level urban protected area, created by land subsidence 
due to decades of underground coal mining. The alignment has been designed such that 
the shortest distance to the border of the park will be more than 200 meters. At the closest 
point, a ditch and railway line lie in between the proposed road alignment and the border 
of the park. Further, as part of the EA process, the wetland park authority has been 
consulted and their agreement obtained.  The CEA records this permission and the EMP 
for Huaibei specifies measures to protect the Park during the project implementation.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources.   The CEA has analyzed all protected areas and physical 
cultural resources in the project areas which are mainly Nanhu wetland park in Huaibei 
(discussed above) and an ancient Yingjiang temple in Anqing.  The project in Anqing 
rehabilitates a road abutting the boundary wall of this temple, a Provincial Level 
protected cultural relic.  The EA investigated the site, assessed the nature and extent of 
impacts from the project, and consulted and obtained consent from the responsible 
authority (Anqing Bureau for Cultural Relics and Religion). The EMP proposed concrete 
measures to mitigate impacts during construction.  Chance find procedures will follow 
the requirement of national regulations, i.e. excavation will be stopped immediately in 
case relics are found, and report should be made to city cultural property authority. 
Construction will only resume after the relevant authority has completed survey and 
necessary protection, and authorizes the resumption.  
 
Involuntary resettlement.  The project will affect 15 villages/urban communities in 11 
townships/urban community units in Wuhu, Anqing, Luan and Huaibei municipality. The 
project will require the permanent acquisition of 2059.9 mu (137.3 hectares) of land, 
including 1,089.4 mu in Wuhu (52.9 percent), 20 mu in Anqing (1.0 percent), 362.5 mu 
in Luan (17.6 percent) and 588.0 mu in Huaibei (28.5 percent). In the collective land 
acquisition, 813.61 mu is paddy field (39.5 percent); 320.49 mu of dry land (15.6 
percent); 52.53 mu of vegetable plots (2.6 percent); 27.5 mu of garden plot (1.3 percent); 
44.2 mu of woodland (2.1 percent); 351.1 mu of water pools (17.0 percent); 324 mu of 
housing plots (15.7 percent); 13.3 mu of other rural land occupied by buildings (0.6 
percent); 113.21 mu of unused land (5.5 percent). Some temporary land use would be 
required during project implementation by contractors and mitigation measures will be 
taken. The municipal resettlement office will supervise these activities.  
 
The project will affect 5,480 people in peri-urban areas, including 1,104 in Wuhu (20.1 
percent), 348 in Anqing (6.4 percent), 2,332 in Luan (42.6 percent) and 1,696 in Huaibei 
(30.9 percent).  538 families with a population of 1,808 people will be affected by land 
Page  4
acquisition (accounting for 33 percent of the total affected populations); 285 families 
with a population of 1,287 people will be affected by both land acquisition and 
demolition (accounting for 23.5 percent of the total affected population); and  640 
families with a population of 2,056 people will be affected by structure demolition only 
(accounting for 37.5 percent of the total affected population); excluding 11 enterprises 
with 158 employees (accounting for 2.8 percent of the total affected population) and 92 
people employed at 3 state-owned enterprises (accounting for 1.7 percent of the total 
affected population) and 85 people out of 16 shops are to be affected (accounting for 1.6 
percent of the total affected population).  
 
Indigenous People. Based on the information provided by the resettlement action plan 
and the task team interviews of the affected communities, the social development 
specialist in the task team confirmed there are no minority communities affected in the 
project area and an IPP was not required.  
 
Forest, Pest Management, Safety of Dams, International Waterways and Disputed 
Areas.   The project will not involve forest and pest management; will not finance 
construction or rehabilitation of any dams; will not involve international waterways; and 
the project is not located in any known disputed areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to cause any significant indirect or long-term impacts.  
Potentially the most significant long-term negative impacts could be those related to 
increased automobile use, including air pollution, noise, and road safety.  These impacts 
are mitigated by the proposed improvements in public transport and pedestrian and 
cyclist facilities on the key corridors where road capacity is being improved.  The bus 
depots built by the project will also generate wastewater which will be treated by the 
existing municipal wastewater system after initial treatment on-site (more detail below).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative Analysis.  Analysis of different design alternatives were undertaken for all 
project cities including a #without project# scenario.  Annex 9 of the PAD provides 
details.  At a design level, comparison was made for different road alignments of 
Sanhuan road in Wuhu in terms of resettlement, environmental impacts and engineering 
aspects.  A slightly longer alignment with fewer impacts on green area and resettlement 
was selected. For the Tuohe road in Huaibei, an alternative alignment as far as practicable 
from the Nanhu urban wetland park was chosen so as to minimize the impact on the park.  
 
Different lane configuration was compared for rehabilitation of Jiefang road in Luan, 
Huaihai road in Huaibei, Huxin road in Anqing and building of new Sanhuan road in 
Wuhu. In all cases, alternatives with less land occupation, fewer lanes for automobiles 
and more green belt areas were chosen.  
 
Page  5
Three types of building material currently available for urban roads in China were 
compared from an environmental, technical and investment perspective: modified 
asphalt, concrete and noise-reducing road surface.  Noise-reducing surface is being 
adopted for road sections with large amount of sensitive receptors so as to reduce 
negative impacts and modified asphalt surface for the rest.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project#s negative impacts could be readily avoided or mitigated by sound project 
design and construction management and operation practice. They were analyzed 
thoroughly in the EA for each city. Two rounds of public consultations have been carried 
out for all project components and the feedback were incorporated into EA documents 
and design alternatives. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was designed for 
each project city detailing comprehensive mitigation measures to address these impacts. 
The EMPs will be incorporated into bidding documents and civil work contracts to 
ensure their implementation.  
 
The EMP defines institutional arrangement for its implementation and supervision 
mechanism, specifies mitigation measures for all potential adverse impacts, and includes 
an environmental monitoring plan and a training plan with budget estimate.  Key 
elements of the EA and EMP are summarized in the following paragraphs.  
 
Air pollution and dust.  Dust is the major air-borne pollution during construction. Major 
measures typically adopted in similar projects include frequent water spraying on 
construction sites and access roads, covering trucks and materials on site, and timely 
clean-up. More attention will be paid near sensitive receptors.  
 
The result of modeling shows that although concentration for NOx and CO will meet 
relevant standards in future, they will increase as the traffic flow increases after the 
project roads are in operation.  A review of existing air pollution management in each 
city reveals that automobile air emissions are mainly controlled through compulsory 
annual inspection of vehicles, ban of those non-compliant from roads and road-side spot 
check of emissions during major campaigns. Major measures included in the CEA are to 
strengthen road-side spot check, speed up the phase-out of non-compliant polluting 
vehicles, tighten vehicle testing and maintenance, improve public transport to divert 
traffic volume, and increase tree belt along roads to absorb air emissions.  
 
Noise and Vibration.  Major measures include careful scheduling of construction 
activities near sensitive receptors such as school, hospital and residential areas. High-
noise and vibration machines will be avoided whenever possible, in particular on the site 
near Linjiang temple in Anqing. Maintenance of equipments will be carried out according 
to relevant domestic requirements to minimize heavy noise and vibration due to mal-
function. The construction supervision team will use portable noise meters to monitor 
routinely.  
 
Page  6
The modeling results suggest that noise level in many project roads may exceed relevant 
standards within urban planning red-line due to traffic increase.  To deal with the impact, 
development along new roads will be carefully planned not to add new sensitive 
receptors within red-line. As necessary, based on ex-post assessments, noise barriers will 
be set up and noise insulation windows be installed to protect sensitive receptors.  
 
Spoil and Solid Wastes.  The earth work balances were established for all project cities 
according to domestic requirements on EA. Sites for disposal of spoil, garbage and 
demolition wastes were identified including their location, status and capacity. Measures 
are included in the EMPs to control water and soil erosion control potentially caused by 
these activities on these sites.  
 
During operation, solid waste will be mainly generated from the bus depots and will be 
collected separately and disposed of respectively in municipal landfill or facilities for 
hazardous and oily wastes.  
 
Wastewater.  Construction wastewater and that from workers camps will be treated first 
by on-site septic tank to remove oil and solids before channeling into sewage system and 
eventually treated by the municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). Discharge into 
nearby water bodies will not be allowed as per domestic regulations.  
 
During operation, wastewater will be generated mainly by the bus depots facilities in 
Huaibei, Luan and Anqing which will all be connected to municipal sewage system. The 
effluents will first to through on-site sedimentation tank to remove solid and septic tank 
to remove oil before channeling into WWTP for treatment.  
 
Ecological Impacts.   Major potential impacts include water and soil erosion caused by 
temporary land occupation, spoil and borrow, and change of green belt.  In addition to 
those measures in earth work and dust control, other measures are careful balancing loss 
and increase in green area and protecting existing trees.  
 
Fuel Facility Risk Management at Bus Depots.   The fuel storage and filling facility at 
the bus depot will be designed and operated according to relevant domestic technical 
norms and requirements on safety and environment. An emergency response plan and 
safe operation measures will be in place and training will be provided to the staff on 
implementing the plan and measures.  
 
Indirect Environmental Impacts.  Resettlement of residence and relocation of industries 
due to the project might have indirect environmental impacts if not managed properly. 
The EA provides an inventory detailing number of people resettled and industries 
relocation, their nature, potential site contamination, and conditions in receiving areas 
(e.g. served by municipal sewage and garbage system) to ensure no new pollution will be 
transferred and induced to other areas as a result of the project.  
 
Impacts on Cultural Properties. In Anqing city, a provincial level cultural heritage site, 
Yingjiang Temple, is located by the western side of Huxin Road with about 5m green belt 
Page  7
and pedestrian sidewalk in between. The main entrance of the temple is not on this street 
(the main entrance of the temple faces an adjacent street). Although no widening of the 
road is needed for this section, the construction activities associated with the 
rehabilitation (e.g. vibration and noise of vehicles or equipment) may potentially risk 
affecting the temple due to its close proximity.  The EA team has reviewed the site, 
assessed the nature and extent of potential impacts on it, consulted with and obtained 
consent from the responsible authority (Anqing Bureau for Cultural Relics and Religion) 
and developed necessary protective measures in the EMP.For the overall project, 
standard chance-find procedure was included in EA and EMPs.  
 
Construction-related disruption.  Urban road work will have impacts on traffic flow and 
bus route, increase difficulties to access stores, workplaces, services and business, and 
affect road safety. Most of these negative impacts are of temporary nature and can be 
mitigated through well planned traffic diversion and prior information on construction 
schedule to the public. Safety shields will be set up wherever necessary.  
 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  These EMPs are largely similar in structure, 
supervision and management mechanism and mitigation measures, but different in 
monitoring plan and additional measures to deal with specificity of individual city.  
 
The EMP outlines the institutional arrangement and responsibility of each party in EMP 
implementation for the project. It envisages that overall responsibility for ensuring EMP 
implementation rests with the provincial PMO with routine operation by PMO at each 
city. Therefore each PMO should have at least one staff in charge of EMP 
implementation, supervision and reporting.  
 
The EMP specifies mitigation measures in tabular format for easier reference during 
implementation and supervision corresponding to major negative impacts as identified 
above during design/preparation, construction and operation phases. It also designs 
environmental monitoring plan for major negative impacts discussed above including 
indicators monitored, sampling method, location, frequency, as well as requirements and 
suggestions on monitoring agency.  
 
To ensure effective EMP implementation by PMO staff, contractors, workers and 
supervision team, a budgeted training plan was proposed with their budget as integral part 
of the project.  The environmental monitoring and training plan should be integrated into 
the overall implementation plan and budget of the project.  
 
Resettlement.  
 
The Anhui provincial PMO contracted Hehai University to guide the resettlement 
inventory aspect survey and the development of resettlement action plans in each project 
city. Hehai University has significant past experience working on Bank supported 
projects. The PMO has led the detailed socioeconomic survey on the resettlement 
inventory aspects in the four engaged municipalities and also analyzed the negative 
Page  8
impacts. The RAP has been reviewed by the Bank and has incorporated the results of the 
impact analysis; the location of the housing reconstruction and the mitigation measures to 
the village facilities affected by the project through public consultation and participatory 
approaches. The task team visited all of the municipal social affairs departments and 
learnt that some municipalities have already launched social security policy to benefit the 
displaced farmers who are affected by land acquisition. Some initiated the concept of 
benefiting to the displaced farmers by social security policies which are beyond land 
compensation. The task team visited each municipal land department and confirmed that 
the land policy in each resettlement action plan is the updated policy approved by the 
provincial land department, including the land compensation levels. The task team visited 
the 4 engaged municipal land and provincial land department in Anhui. That 
compensation data information, social security programs issued by some municipalities 
and to be issued by the municipalities, including the compensation to be issued in the 
near term, have been incorporated into the resettlement action plan.  
 
All of the project components will be located in urban downtown and peri-urban areas; 
areas where there is no waste land or unused land available to be reclaimed as farming 
land in the peri-urban area.  The RAP sets up a number of mechanisms to ensure 
restoration of incomes for farmers# who lose land:  
 
a. 
Development of the farmer#s remaining farm land to vegetable land as a strategy 
that insulates incomes from the decline in total land.  For instance; one family with two 
labors could only afford to work on 0.02 hectares of vegetable land but the yearly 
outcome of the land is above RMB 5,000, on the other hand, there is no any family losing 
their entire farming land in the project area;  
 
b.
Ensuring that the displaced farmers will receive replacement cost for their land 
loss.  
 
c. 
Social security is an another alternative measure to mitigate the negative impacts 
by land loss, the task team observed that the displaced farmers  welcome the country 
long-term strategy, in return, they could get extra financial supports from local 
government.  
 
Moreover, displaced farmers will receive replacement cost for land, plus basic monthly 
income as the income loss of their farming land and their retirement programs if they are 
willing to invest their social security programs and the project entities could support 
certain funds for support.  
 
In order to enhance women's roles in family income restoration activities, women are 
entitled to endorse the expenditures of their compensation as one of the policies in the 
RAP.  
 
Linked Projects.  The northern endpoint of Sanhuan road in Wuhu connects to a 
proposed bridge under construction over Qingyi River as well as two nearby dikes. This 
bridge is being constructed as a separate project with domestic funding, and for the 
purposes of OP4.01 is regarded as a linked project to the Bank financed Sanhuan Road.  
A
copy of the EA for this bridge, as well as an approval letter from Wuhu Environmental 
Protection Bureau, was provided to the Bank. The due diligence review verifies that if 
Page  9
executed according to its EA and relevant domestic requirements, this should pose no 
reputational risk for the Bank project.The resettlement activities in the vicinity of the 
bridge comply with the resettlement policy stated in the RAP by Wuhu municipality.  
 
Assessment of borrower#s capacity to plan and implement the measures:  One of the 
project cities, Lu An has just completed a World Bank financed project on sewage 
treatment plant headed by the same PMO staff who are quite familiar with the WB 
procedures and requirements.  There is also considerable institutional capacity and 
knowledge of World Bank Safeguard policies at the Provincial level where there is a lot 
of experience with World Bank financed investments.  
 
In addition, the technical assistance and capacity building component of the project is 
designed to provide training for project cities in project management and EMP 
implementation following the detailed training plan designed by the CEA.Both the 
provincial and city authorities are committed to carrying out the necessary actions in 
accordance with the Bank safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation.   Public consultations were undertaken in two ways. First, 
consultations with a broad array of stakeholders were conducted as part of the project 
identification process to provide input into component design and refinement. 
Additionally, consultations were conducted as part of the 9 month EIA and RAP 
preparation process that focused on the concerns of and impacts on the people potentially 
negatively affected by the project such as farmers and citizens. Focus groups, interviews 
to the citizens and displaced persons, and identification to the vulnerable people were 
undertaken and documented. Those public consultations will be continued during project 
implementation.  
 
Consultation with potential beneficiaries and other stakeholders were of crucial 
importance in the EA process. Following China#s law on EA, methods used included 
posting of public letters in project areas, publishing notices in local TV channel and 
radio, placing notice in local government offices, organizing meetings and interviews 
with project affected people, and distributing questionnaires.  
 
Public disclosure:   The first round of solicitation of public opinion was announced in 
the government website of each city during November-December 2008 with a brief 
description of the project, its objectives, potential environmental impacts and the name of 
institute that will conduct the EA process. The second round was conducted during April-
May 2009 when the draft EA was ready for each city. During this round, Luan and 
Huaibei posted the full EA on the same website and Wuhu and Anqing at the offices of 
city construction bureaus. Subsequent public consultation was carried out during the 
same period in all project cities.  
 
As part of the EIA process, more than 400 persons of wide range of background were 
interviewed, surveyed or consulted through meetings and questionnaires. The majority 
Page  10
was unsatisfied with current traffic conditions, associated noise and air pollution thus 
believed the project was necessary for improving mobility and urban environment. The 
major negative impacts of the project were perceived to be noise, air pollution, solid 
wastes and water pollution in descending sequence. Despite of these concerns, more than 
90 percent of surveyed supported the project and generally concurred with the measures 
proposed by the EA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/26/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/23/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  11
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
07/27/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Xin Ren 
07/10/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zhefu Liu 
07/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
08/10/2009 
Comments:   
