Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4555 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/03/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P117107 
Project Name: Liaoning and Shandong Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
Project (TVET II) 
Task Team Leader: Xiaoyan Liang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 8, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (80%);Education for all (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the quality and relevance of technical education 
in nine schools in two provinces and produce lessons from this experience as a guide for future 
school reforms and policy development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project has two components: (i) school-based reforms and innovation, and (ii) knowledge 
sharing and capacity building.  
 
Component One.  School-Based Reforms and Innovation.  This component will: (i) strengthen 
the linkage between schools and industry; (ii) improve school management; (iii) introduce an 
updated modular, Competency-Based Training (CBT) curriculum; (iv) train instructors to use the 
new curriculum; (v) improve student assessment and quality assurance at the school level; and 
(vi) expand and upgrade facilities and equipment.  CBT specialties developed will vary among 
the schools, but in some cases will overlap.  The Provincial Project Management Offices will 
play an important role in coordinating activities such as capacity building for management and 
Page  2
instructors, developing guidelines for school-industry committees, and preparing templates for 
monitoring project performance in order to achieve uniformity where this is important and 
realize cost savings.  
 
Component Two.  Knowledge Sharing and Capacity Building.  This component will: (i)  
improve monitoring and evaluation, (ii) knowledge sharing and dissemination and (iii) capacity 
building in project management and coordination.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will support activities in 9 project schools located in Shandong and Liaoning 
Provinces.  
 
The location of the schools and the expected beneficiary groups do not involve communities of 
ethnic minorities or the relocation of people and acquisition of land.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Provincial Project Management Office in Liaoning province has more than 20 years of 
experience in implementing World Bank and other donors' projects thus has sufficient capacity 
for preparation and implementation of Environmental Management Framework.  The PMO in 
Liaoning Province however is new to implementing WB projects and will require training.  
Further, the Project schools also need to be brought up to date with Bank requirements in 
environmental aspects of the rehabilitation and construction.  
 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) based on the China Guangdong Technical 
and Vocational Education and Training Project will be developed.  At preparation, the Bank will 
provide assistance to develop the EMP.  During implementation, the Bank will supervise the 
project's environmental aspects once a year. The progress reports from the PMO will include a 
section/chapter on the environmental management, along with any revision proposed to the EMF 
to achieve its objectives.  
 
To ensure above measures/plans are implemented efficiently; the EMF includes training 
programs for managerial and technical personnel from project proponents and operational units, 
contractors, and construction supervisors. Mandatory environmental training for contractors and 
construction supervisors will be held prior to the commencement of construction.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (SDV) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Screening has been done and no any ethnic minority communities will be affected   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
All civil works will be within existing school, and no land acquisition and house demolishing 
will be involved   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NA   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaoyan Liang 
07/14/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
07/23/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
