Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3637
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P100968 
Project Name:  Shanxi Coal Bed Methane Development and Utilization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jianping Zhao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Oil and gas (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
47.30 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
54.80 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
102.10 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to increase the production and utilization of 
CBM/CMM to replace coal as a fuel for thermal use and to reduce GHGs and local air 
pollutants associated with coal combustion. The project development objective will be 
achieved by (a) enhancing the subsector
’s policy framework and institutional capacity, 
and (b) supporting the exploration, production and liquefaction of CBM to increase 
market access.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would comprise the following two components:  
 
Investment Component:  The investment component would include: (i) the exploration 
and development of about 350 vertical CBM production wells with an estimated CBM 
production capacity of 250 million Nm3 annually; (ii) the construction of about 150.6 km 
pipeline (15.6km collecting feeder line+ 135 km gas recovery pipeline), three CBM 
gathering stations, one gas metering and pigging station, wastewater treatment plant, 11.7 
km station entrance roads and 57 km well entrance roads. and (iii) the construction of a 
Page  2
LNG plant consisting of four modular, transportable liquefaction plants with individual 
production capacities of 50,000 tons/year for an ultimate processing capacity of 200,000 
tons/year.  
 
Technical Assistance Component (TA): The technical assistance component includes 
two sub-components: (i) a technical assistance program to assist the project entity in 
developing the capacity to construct and operate the facilities efficiently and safely, and 
to expand business activities in the area of CBM/CMM development and achieve long-
term financial sustainability; (ii) a technical assistance program to assist the key 
stakeholders in Shanxi province to enhance the institutional and technical capacity for 
policy making and implementation to scale up CBM/CMM industry in Shanxi.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The investment component (i) and (ii) will be in Zhengzhuang Block, representing an 
approximate area of 49.14 km2, which is located in northwest of Zhengzhuang Town, 
Qinshui County, Shanxi Province.  The LNG plant is located in the east of Guxian River 
and the south of Dongshan Village, Duanshi Town, Qingshui County, representing an 
area of 71,775.3 m2. Both of the Zhengzhuang Block and the LNG plant are in an area 
known as the Qinshui Gas Basin, a sedimentary coal basin located in southern Shanxi 
Province.  The area is surrounded by mountains with a terrain of low hills and with an 
obvious continental climate characterized by long winters and short summers. This area 
has been explored sporadically over the years for both conventional oil and gas and coal 
mining. There are currently a number of rigs drilling in the immediate area to explore the 
coal bed methane as a viable and economic energy resource for the area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EAPCO) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Mr Feng Ji (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will result in environmental benefits as this project supports the utilization of 
coal bed methane to reduce coal consumption in China, indirectly contribute to improve 
the safety of mining operations over the long term, and help to achieve significant 
reductions in China’s greenhouse gas emission.  
 
The project will potentially cause a variety of short-term impacts during construction, 
e.g. drilling mud, drilling cuts and wastewater generated from well drilling, dust, noise 
from machinery and vehicles, air pollution from compressor exhaust gases, spoiled 
materials, temporary occupation of land and damage of trees and greens due to the 
construction of gas collection stations, CBM wells and access roads, and impacts from 
construction camp activities.   A series of mitigation measures have been planned to 
reduce the impacts to acceptable levels, including proper disposal of drilling mud, drilling 
cuts and wastewater, water spray on construction sites on dry and windy days, adequate 
buffer zone to reduce noise to nearby villages, use of low noise construction machines, 
proper disposal of spoiled materials, compensation for temporary land occupation and 
environmental management system for the construction camps.  All mitigation measures 
related to contractors will be included in the bid documents and the contracts so that they 
will be part of the contractual obligations for the contractors. In addition, mandatory 
training will be provided to all contractors and construction supervision companies for 
environmental policies and standards, mitigation measure implementation, and site 
environmental supervision and reporting.  Regular environmental supervision of all 
construction sites will be provided by construction supervision companies as well as 
environmental staff of the project implementing agency. Compliance monitoring will also 
be provided periodically throughout the construction phase by independent monitoring 
institutions to determine compliance status and provide basis for further mitigation, as 
required.  
 
The construction of gas pipelines and entrance roads will also potentially cause a variety 
of short-term negative impacts, e.g. noise generated by construction machinery and 
vehicles, dust raised from excavation, piling and construction material, temporary 
occupation of farmland and damage of greens and soil, and disturbance to streams from 
the construction of the pipelines crossing seasonal rivers.  Mitigation measures include, 
inter alia, water spray at construction sites on windy and dry days to prevent dust, use of 
low noise construction machines and scheduling of construction activities to reduce noise 
to an acceptable level, and immediate restoration of vegetation and farmland after 
construction.  To mitigate the disturbance to the rivers, pipelines would cross-stream in 
the shortest distance possible, and the construction would be scheduled during dry flows. 
The application of good construction practice will be a mandatory requirement for 
contractors.  
 
Potential negative environmental impacts from CBM Development during the 
operational phase include, mainly, impacts to groundwater regime from pumping water 
Page  4
out of the coal bed seam, and disposal of CMB produced water.  Groundwater table 
within a 27 meter radius of the CBM wells may be drawn down due to the water 
extraction.  As mitigation, casing tube will be set up in the CBM wells to protect other 
aquifers. The volume of pumping water from CBM wells is estimated to be maximum 
910.2 m3/d in the third year, and will gradually reduce to 307.5 m3/d in the fifth year. 
They will be collected and treated by a reverse-osmosis facility to remove salinity before 
reused or discharged to surface water.   Negative environmental impacts from the LNG 
plant during the operational phase include, mainly, wastewater and sewage discharged 
from the LNG plant. Wastewater facility will be established to treat the sewage and 
wastewater before they are reused or discharged to surface water.  
 
Potential negative environmental impacts from the LNG plant during the maintenance 
phase include, mainly, spent activated charcoal which absorbs mercury from the coal bed 
methane. As mitigation, the spent activated charcoal is to be returned to the 
manufacturer- Nanjing Woods Chemical Industry Limited which is a certified company 
by Nanjing EPB to recover spent activated charcoal.  Spent molecular sieves (non-
hazardous waste) would be collected and sent to Jincheng Solid Waste Treatment Center 
landfill.  
 
During maintenance phase, methane discharged from the CBM wells, gas collection 
stations, gas metering and pigging station, and the LNG plant will be collected and flared. 
A
small amount of waste and wastewater generated in the maintenance phase will be 
collected, stored and/or disposed of.  
 
In terms of social impacts, the construction of these three investment components will 
involve with certain amount of permanent land acquisition and temporary land 
occupation. According to the impact survey, about 671 mu or 44.7 ha of land areas would 
be acquired permanently and 1522 mu or 101 ha of land areas would be occupied 
temporarily. Among them, less than one quarter would be farmland. Such land 
acquisition or occupation would affect 333 households and 1,031 persons in 8 villages 
from Zhengzhuang Town and Duanshi Town in Qinshui County. No house demolition 
and relocation is expected. Among affected people, there are no ethnic minorities.  
 
The collected gas will be transported to LNG Plant through a pipeline built by Petro 
China, which connects gas collection station in Zhengzhuang and the Central Gas 
Treatment Station in Duanshi. Both the Central Gas Treatment Station and the gas 
pipeline between Zhengzhuang and Duanshi will be considered as direct linkage 
components. The construction of these two components will involve permanent 
acquisition of 200 mu (13.3 ha) of land areas, and temporary occupation of 120 mu (8 ha) 
of land areas, which will affect 65 households and 214 persons from 11 villages, 
including 22 households and 72 persons affected by permanent land acquisition.  To 
ensure that implementation of land acquisition for linkage project follows both national 
law and provincial regulations and complies with the Bank policy on involuntary 
resettlement, a resettlement plan with same compensation policies and rehabilitation 
measures has been prepared and included in the RAP. Based on current practice of 
NCBPC on related projects and adopted procedures and compensation policies, the task 
Page  5
team is confident that implementation of land acquisition for linkage project will comply 
with the Bank policies and national laws, and basic interests of affected people will be 
protected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The exploration and development of about CBM production wells and the establishment 
of LNG plant will convert existing mostly unused land into industrial land. The original 
lands will lose their current land features and functions, and the area environment will 
receive higher pollutant loads from increased population and the LNG plant operations.  
The improved road network will also result in increased traffic to the LNG plant and the 
drilling wells. As an indirect and induced impact, the preemptive extraction of methane 
from coal bed designated for mining will significantly decrease venting of a powerful 
greenhouse gas into the atmosphere and will increase the safety of future underground 
mining operations.  
 
The acquisition of farmland (164 mu) will affect seven villages in Zhengzhuang Town 
and Duanshi Town. Most of them are dryland. The land acquisition will result in a 
reduction of one percent of farmland among these villages. The average per capita land 
holding after land acquisition will still be 3.1 mu. Due to relatively large land holding and 
limited amount of land acquisition, the land acquisition impacts would be limited for the 
affected villages. This is particularly true since most affected villages have relatively high 
income (Y3,450 in 2006) and half of them came from non farm activities. With adequate 
compensation and appropriate rehabilitation, such limited impacts could be easily 
mitigated. In fact, the implementation of the Project by building access roads and creating 
temporary employment could further improve general welfare for the affected villages.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Various alternative project designs and sites have been identified, evaluated and 
compared by the EA consultant, in close consultation with project engineers and the 
project owner. Alternative treatment processes for the CMB produced water, alternative 
gas gathering stations sites, completion methods for CBM wells, alternative LNG sites, 
and alternative routes for pipeline connecting the Central Collection Station and the LNG 
plant have been evaluated. Environmental and social considerations have been given in 
the analysis of the alternatives and those with the least adverse environmental and socio-
economic impacts have been recommended for the project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for each of the project components have been 
prepared by the Coal Industrial Taiyuan Design Research Institute (CITDRI) and are 
expected to be approved by Shanxi Provincial Environmental Protection Bureau (SPEPB) 
by in April 2008. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and EA Summary for the 
project have also been prepared. The EIAs have been prepared in compliance with 
Page  6
applicable Chinese regulations and standards, as well as safeguard policies of the World 
Bank.  
 
An organization structure has been established which identifies institutions to be 
involved in the environmental management, mitigation measure implementation, 
environmental supervision, and environmental monitoring, etc. The organizations with a 
role in environmental management include the SECBMIH, engineering design 
consultants, construction supervision companies, contractors, environmental monitoring 
agencies as well as regulatory agency. The EMP outlines in detail the specific 
responsibilities of each of these organizations in project construction, operation and 
maintenance, as well as the relationships among these organizations when it comes to 
environmental management for the project.  The Borrower’s capacity to plan and to 
implement the mitigation measures is deemed adequate.  
 
For the limited land acquisition, a RAP was prepared based on detailed impact survey, 
social economic survey and consultation with affected people. According to the RAP, the 
proposed compensation for acquired farmland is set at 23 to 27 times of annual average 
output value by following most recent national laws and local regulations. These rates are 
considered as adequate by local governments and villages. In terms of economic 
rehabilitation, most of affected people will be provided with replacement farmland by 
using village reserved lands. The compensations will be paid directly to affected villages 
to improve farming conditions, and develop other income generation activities. For 
temporary land occupation, the affected households will be provided with adequate 
compensation for the lost yield during occupation; and the project sponsor will be 
responsible for restoration of cultivated land into their original productive conditions.  
 
The resettlement implementation responsibilities belong to the project sponsor and local 
governments. A resettlement office has been set up within SECBMIH, which is 
responsible for coordinating overall resettlement planning and implementation activities. 
The actual implementation will be carried out by county resettlement office located in 
Qinshui County Land Resources Bureaus which is responsible for conducting site survey, 
keeping records, organizing consultation, developing and implementing RAP, managing 
and allocating the resettlement funds, training resettlement staff, signing compensation 
agreements with relevant township and villages, and being a main channel of grievance 
for the resettlers. In the affected townships, resettlement working teams will be 
established, which will work closely with the county resettlement offices for carrying out 
resettlement implementation for the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are Shanxi Energy CBM Investment Holding Co., Ltd., Jincheng 
Monitoring Station, and Shanxi EPB.   Project affected people from local villages were 
consulted during EA TOR stage and again during draft EA report stage. Concerns over 
impacts of project activities were addressed in the EA and opinions for mitigation 
planning and environmental management have been incorporated in the EA documents. 
These EA documents in draft were disclosed in local village associations in December 
Page  7
2007. The project information and access to these documents were announced through 
local newspaper on December 26, 2007 and through public notice in the local villages on 
December 10, 2007.  Summary project background, major EA findings and mitigation 
measures where appropriate were also distributed during the public consultation to the 
directly project affected people to provide the basic information about the project and 
about the project adverse impacts to the public.  The final EA documents will be 
disclosed in local village associations, SECMMIH PMO and its website on May 14, 
2008.  
 
In the process of identifying resettlement impacts, formulating compensation policies, 
and preparing the resettlement action plan, extensive consultation and community 
participation have been organized by the project owner in the project affected areas. 
Survey results show that about 98% of local residents support this project; and 73% 
believe that the project will benefit them. More efforts will be made during the 
resettlement implementation to encourage further participation by the resettlers. To 
ensure that all compensations will be used effectively, they will be delivered directly to 
affected villages and the use of such funds will be approved by all villagers and 
monitored by the township governments. Following both Chinese law and the World 
Bank policy, the content of RAP will be disclosed to DPs through distributing 
resettlement information booklet to affected people, and making RAP available in the 
concerned township and villages. To effectively address any complains by DPs, a 
grievance procedure will be set up by the project and included in the RAP and 
information booklet.  
 
As the project involves the production, transmission and liquefaction of CBM, which 
possess the same characteristics as conventional natural gas, and is explosive and easy to 
catch fire, the safety issue is a major concern for the project during construction and 
operation. A draft SMP was prepared by the design institutes, as part of the feasibility 
studies. The draft SMP was reviewed and evaluated by National Risk Assessment Center 
for Petrochemical Projects (NRACPP), a third party certified by the State to conduct 
independent assessment of the safety measures proposed for high risk projects. The SMP 
was also reviewed by the Bank team. The SMP is now being revised by SECBMIH and 
the design institutes.  
 
The SMP takes into account the entire spectrum of potential safety risk areas throughout 
the production, transportation and processing chain. The key risk is the leakage of CBM 
into atmospheres to mix with air, and then catch on with natural or artificial fire to cause 
explosion.   The other significant safety risk are associated with the design, construction 
and operation of the LNG plant. Major mitigation measures include the proper design, 
procurement and construction of gas pipelines, processing equipments and storage tanks 
to prevent erosion and leakage; forbidden of artificial fire in the project area, design and 
procurement of electric equipment and switches to prevent electric fire, installation of 
detector-alarms and automatic fire-extinguishing and water-spray cooling systems; 
installation of an emergency release stack; adoption of lighting arresters and blast-proof 
electrical equipment, switches, and lighting apparatus; and strict enforcement of safety 
Page  8
management regulations, rules and procedures, and adequate training of contractors, 
operators, safety supervisors and managers.  
 
Following the government regulation, SECBMIH employed the National Risk 
Assessment Center for Petrochemical Projects (NRACPP) to conduct independent 
assessment of the safety measures proposed under the project. Furthermore, SECBMIH 
will retain the services of an independent oversight panel/consultant during construction 
and operation phase, to review all aspects of the project and to provide independent 
periodic monitoring reports. SECBMIH have adopted this approach to ensure adequate 
management of the safety risks of this project. SECBMIH and the Bank are to jointly 
develop and agree on the Terms of Reference for this independent oversight panel.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/02/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/06/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/02/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jianping Zhao 
05/13/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
05/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
05/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Feng Ji 
Mr Youxuan Zhu 
05/22/2008 
05/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
06/16/2008 
Comments:   
Page  10
