Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4123 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/08/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P086446 
Project Name: Chongqing Urban-Rural Integration Project 
Task Team Leader: Paul Kriss 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 16, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (30%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(30%);Vocational training (20%);Water supply (10%);Health (10%) 
Theme: Water resource management (50%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(25%);Other rural development (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
84.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
84.00
84.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to: (a) increase access of rural residents in 
participating counties to improved basic public services (water supply, roads, sanitation, primary 
healthcare, and vocational education) towards achieving urban service levels in the Municipality; 
and (b) improve the administrative capacity of participating counties to design and manage 
facilities constructed under the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total estimated cost of the proposed project is US$168 million (IBRD loan of US$84 
million) and it will comprise five components.  The counties# roads and water infrastructure 
component will focus on improving water and road infrastructure mainly in county capitals.  The 
townships and villages infrastructure component will provide packages of infrastructure 
improvements to smaller settlements (townships and villages).  The labor transfer employment 
component will focus on enhancing education training institutions# capacity to design and 
deliver migrant worker training, improving the functioning of the training market, and improving 
Page  2
the employment services for migrant works. The community health care services component will 
focus on reforming the primary health care system.  Feasibility Study Reports (FSR) were 
completed for 72 sub-projects which are in full compliance with the selection criteria and fall 
under the five components listed below.  
 
Component 1- Counties# Roads and Water Supply Infrastructure:  
 
This component will focus on the most cost effective way of providing water and transport 
infrastructure to selected counties.: Road works include: (i) Banan District: 27.19 km class II 
road, from Huimin to Yipin; (ii) Xiushan County: 3.8 km class I road from Neiao to 
Yangjiadong; (iii) Tongliang County: 44 road sections in 14 townships totaling 36km; (iv) 
Yongchuan City: Four trunk roads in Sanjiao township, totaling 4.0 km; and (v) Shizhu Zhanqian 
Avenue: 4.2 km road and 2 bridges. Water works includes: (i) Tongliang County Water Supply: 
construction and rehabilitation of 7 water supply schemes and water pipe network; (ii) Fengjie 
County Water Supply: construction and rehabilitation of 5 water supply works and water pipe 
network; (iii) Shizhu County Huangshui Town Water Supply: construction of water treatment 
plant and pipe network; and (iv) Xiushan County Water Supply: 7 towns involved in 
construction of 3 new water treatment plants, expansion of existing 4 plants and construction of 
pipe networks  
 
Component 2 - Township and Village Infrastructure Improvements:  
 
This component will finance infrastructure services packages to townships and villages.  The 
idea is to develop a prototype of an infrastructure services package that could be replicated and 
expanded in the follow-on projects to upgrade access to infrastructure in rural areas of 
Chongqing.  Current component will finance: (i) Jiulongpo District: main and secondary village 
roads; sidewalks, 2 bridges; water transfer trunks and branches; service connections of waste 
collection stations and supporting facilities; and 2 community service centers; (ii) Qijiang 
County: main road, sidewalk, 3 community service centers, 3 water treatment plants and 
distribution pipes, service branches, sewerage pipes, 6 waste collection sites and biogas tanks; 
(iii) Biqiao Village, ShapinTown and Dianjiang: Road, sidewalk, street lights, landscape, 
drainage network;  (iv) Wutu Village, Dazhou Town of Wanzhou District: road, pavement, 
sidewalk, small water reservoirs and channel treatments, a water diversion project (water 
cleaning tank pipe network), construction of a community service center and playground; and (v) 
Chengkou County:  road, water treatment plant, main pipe, service branch pipes, service center, 
sets of wastewater treatment tanks and sets of biogases tanks.  
 
Component 3- Migrant Workers# Training for Transfer and Employment: This component will 
support training institutions by improving their institutional capacity to provide quality training 
and employment services to migrant workers, and support local authority by strengthening the 
functioning of the training market.Project activities include: (i) equipment for selected training 
institutions, or support distance learning centers; (ii) develop or adopt modular, competence-
based curricula and instructional materials, training instructors and managers, develop industry 
linkage mechanism; (iii) develop provincial-level accreditation framework for training providers; 
improve testing and the certification system for new curricula, develop financing services to 
migrant graduates (e.g., job fairs and group counseling), train the employment services staff and 
management.  The Chongqing Technology & Business University would provide TA to the 
Page  3
training institutions involved (Yubei District Training Base, Yunyang County Vocational 
Training Base, Wushan and Shizhu County Vocational Training Base).  
 
Component 4 - Community Health Care Services:  This component will pilot the setting up of 
primary health care systems in both urban and rural areas in order to improve access and reduce 
costs of health care services.  It will provide support in developing county and village level 
health clinics.  Activities could include: (i) the expansion and construction of community health 
clinics in urban and rural areas; (ii) the equipping and staffing of such facilities; (iii) training of 
health workers, facility managers, and associated medical staff; and (iv) provision of 
complementary capacity building activities to support the transition.  
 
Component 5- Institutional Support and Technical Assistance:  This component will help 
project implementation by financing: (i) consulting engineers to supervise project 
implementation; (ii) additional consultancies  required to strengthen executing agencies# skills in 
the area of project management, procurement and contract management, and review and monitor 
all Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs); (iii) independent monitoring of project compliance with 
safeguard policies; and (iv) several TA activities and associated studies that will help research 
the rural-urban linkages agenda, providing a learning platform for the follow up projects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project will be implemented in 16 selected districts and counties in Chongqing 
Municipality.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Chongqing Municipal Government (CMG) established a project leading group, headed by the 
Vice Mayor, Ms. Tong Xiaoping as Director, to oversee the preparation of the proposed project.  
It nominated the existing Project Management Office (PMO) to coordinate all preparation 
activities.  The PMO has previous experience in coordinating projects# preparation and 
implementation, such as the Chongqing Urban Environment Project (CUEP) and Chongqing 
Small Cities Project (CSCP), including safeguard policy compliance.  These Project 
Implementation Units (PIUs) have been set up to carry out the day-to-day subproject preparation 
and implementation.  A lesson learnt from previous projects# implementation is that better 
coordination between the PMO and the PIU is needed.  It was discussed and agreed with the 
PMO that, under the Chongqing Urban-Rural Integration Project (CURIP), the PMO will assign 
1-2 representatives to each PIU to provide policy guidance and coordinate between the PIUs and 
higher authorities of MG, ensuring a smooth preparation and implementation of the relevant 
subcomponents.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Mr Ximing Zhang (EASCS) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered. EA and EMP documents need to be prepared for Component 1, 2, & 
4.  
 
The Environmental adviser of the PMO informed the Bank team that there are 26 EIA 
documents to be prepared in various document formats, according to National policy and 
requirement. The 26 EIA documents are: 4 EIA reports for road infrastructure, 4 EIA reports for 
town/county water supply, 5 EIA report in table format for community health care services, 2 
EIA reports in table format for rural water supply, and 11 EIA registration tables for small 
components of rural road, water supply and training of rural labors. The PMO will consolidate 
and summarize the information from above 26 documents into one EIA/EMP document. The 
consolidated summary EIA/EMP document will be translated in to English language and 
submitted to the Bank for review, clearance and information disclosure. All documents will be 
prepared prior to project appraisal. In addition, all Chinese language EIA/EMP documents for 
sub-components will be disclosed at localities.  
 
For sub-projects or activities that are not well defined at the time of appraisal, the EA 
document will include a Guideline Section (equivalent to Environmental Management 
Framework # EMF) with an identification of possible environmental issues, work/analysis to be 
considered and developed, and steps/procedures for implementation of measures for 
environmental safeguards during project implementation.  
 
The translation waiver for the Environmental Assessment (EA) will be applied. The revised 
guidelines on English translation waiver (March 2008) will be followed. Task team member will 
review English Language Comprehensive Summaries to ensure consistency between the original 
Chinese full length documents and the English Language Comprehensive Summaries.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Based on the information provided, there is no significant natural habitats be found in the 
proposed project areas. However, since there would be a large number of villages be involved in 
the Component 2 of the project,  the EA consultant is required to collect the necessary 
information in the EA to allow Bank staff to determine whether the policy to be triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Based on current information available, the proposed project components are not located in 
forest areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The proposed project will neither procure pesticides and nor will result in increased use of 
pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Based on current information available, there are no any physical cultural relics found in the 
proposed project areas. In the EA process, related information will be checked and confirmed by 
relevant authorities and the task team, and the triggering of this policy will be evaluated.  In case 
any relics to be found during construction, "Chance-Find" procedure and relevant clauses should 
be included in all construction contracts.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project components will spread over 16 counties/districts of Chongqing Municipality, 
where rural society reflects ethnic intermingling. The Bank task team made a social screening 
and confirmed the presence of some ethnic minority groups (such as Tujia and Miao) while 
finding their acculturation with one another and with the mainstream society to a great extent. 
Through further field survey and consultation, the task team member social development 
specialist finally confirmed that the Tujia and Miao groups in the project areas are not socio-
economically vulnerable but share the same kind of local culture with neighboring Han 
communities. There is therefore no ethnic minority group or indigenous people as defined under 
OP4.10 in the CURIP area of influence; and the Bank#s IP policy dose not apply to this project. 
Proper documentation and arguments will be made to this effect in PAD.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be a Project Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide site resettlement 
action plans (RAPs) for all future identified subprojects, given the fact that no subprojects have 
been truly designed at the current stage. This RPF will cover all project components including 
also those projects which are not financed by, but directly and significantly related to, this 
project. The first year subprojects which have been identified to have resettlement components 
will prepare full RAPs before project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The proposed project will not directly finance construction and rehabilitation of any new 
dams.  However, there are eleven existing dams (one medium and ten small sized) would provide 
water source to the water supply facilities proposed to be financed by the Project. The proposed 
water supply subprojects will rely on the performance of the upstream existing dams; failure of 
the upstream dams could cause extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-funded structure; 
the water supply projects will depend on the storage and operation of those existing dams for 
their supply of water and could not function if the dams failed. Among these eleven dams, two 
are Class III and are being remedied; the others are Class II which needs normal operation, 
maintenance and surveillance.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/17/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
It is expected that the first draft EA/EMP document for sub-projects will be available for 
review and discussion before Pre-appraisal mission in field in the mid June 2009. With 
regard to social safeguard concerns, project social assessment (SA) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework have been discussed to be initiated under qualified experts# assistance. The 
social experts have been contracted to work on SA and RAP since April 2009, and all the 
necessary safeguard documents need to be prepared before the pre-appraisal mission.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Kriss 
04/03/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
06/08/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
05/12/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
