Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/10/2008 
Report No.:  AC4016
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P114107 
Project Name:  Wenchuan Earthquake Recovery 
Task Team Leader:  Mara K. Warwick 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (44%);Roads and highways 
(39%);Health (13%);General education sector (4%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Pollution management and environmental 
health (S);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
710.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To restore essential infrastructure, health, and education services to at least levels existing 
prior to the Wenchuan Earthquake, and where appropriate, to provide for expansion of 
services while reducing the vulnerability to seismic and flood hazards.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is divided into two provincial parts: one for Sichuan and one for Gansu.  The 
first part, the Sichuan Recovery Program, will finance reconstruction and appropriate 
expansion of infrastructure and health sub-projects in about 16 counties in the five 
municipalities of Mianyang, Guangyuan, Bazhong, Nanchong and Ya’an. The following 
sectors will be eligible for support: roads and bridges,water supply and sanitation, 
municipal solid waste management collection and disposal, drainage, flood control, slope 
protection and stabilization, and restoration of waterways and canals. The health 
component will finance reconstruction and enhancement of health services in about 21 
counties in the seven municipalities of Mianyang, Guangyuan, Bazhong, Nanchong, 
Ya’an, Chengdu and Deyang.  The component focuses primarily on the establishment of 
Page  2
first level inpatient care and key outpatient and public health service restoration. The 
following types of facilities will be eligible for support: township health centers, 
Maternal and Child Health (MCH) centers, and county level health facilities, including 
hospitals and Community Disease Control (CDC) Centers.  
 
The second part, the Gansu Recovery Program, will finance reconstruction and 
appropriate expansion of infrastructure, health and education sub-projects in seven 
counties in Longnan Municipality with a focus on Cheng, Hui, and Xihe Counties. The 
following sectors will be eligible for support: roads and bridges, water supply and 
sanitation, municipal solid waste management collection and disposal, drainage, flood 
control, slope protection and stabilization, and restoration of waterways and canals. The 
health component focuses primarily on the establishment of first level inpatient care and 
key outpatient and public health service restoration. The following types of facilities will 
be eligible for support: township health centers and clinics, and county level health 
facilities, including hospitals and supporting services.  The education component will 
finance (a) the rehabilitation/reconstruction of primary schools, secondary schools, and 
vocational/technical school facilities, (b) the provision of necessary equipment 
(laboratories, libraries, etc.), and (c) selective capacity building activities in project and 
school management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
On May 12, 2008, a devastating earthquake of magnitude 8.0 struck southwestern China.  
The epicenter of the earthquake was located in the mountainous Wenchuan County, 
Sichuan Province, approximately 80 kilometers northwest of the provincial capital of 
Chengdu.  
 
Six provinces have been affected by the Wenchuan Earthquake: Sichuan, Gansu, 
Shaanxi, Henan, Yunnan, and Hubei.  Total direct economic losses have been estimated 
by the GoC at RMB 844 billion (US $123 billion: source, National Masterplan for the 
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Wenchuan Earthquake, Aug. 2008).  The two most 
affected provinces are Sichuan and Gansu, accounting for 91% and 6% of the total direct 
economic losses, respectively.  
 
The proposed project will be located in the earthquake's "severely-affected" impact 
areas in Sichuan and Gansu Provinces, which are characterized by two specific 
geographic regions with marked differences in topography and socio-economic 
development level: the sparsely populated Longnan Mountain alpine plateau and the 
densely populated Sichua
n
Basin, historically named “the rice bowl of China.”  
 
The infrastructure, health and education sectors suffered significant damage during the 
earthquake.  Typical damage to urban wastewater and water supply systems includes 
fracturing of pipes, opening of joints increasing leakage and loss of water supply 
pressure, and damage to system structures including pumping stations and treatment 
plants.  Typical damage to roads includes settling and surface cracking over large areas, 
as well as weakened foundations, which has been exacerbated by damaged water supply 
Page  3
pipelines, sewerage networks, and drainage systems. Damage to bridge load carrying 
capacities occurred as a result of secondary flooding events (e.g., downstream of 
breached barrier lakes) which resulted in significant slope erosion around bridge 
embankments, abutments and piers.  
 
In the education sector, the earthquake caused extensive damage to school buildings and 
facilities including equipment and libraries. In the health sector, many township health 
centers and village clinics collapsed or have had to be condemned as a result of 
earthquake damage.  Structural damage to county and municipal hospitals was also 
experienced, as was a significant loss of equipment and facilities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The social and environmental impacts of sub-projects are expected to vary widely in 
terms of scale and type, leading to a range of safeguard planning and implementation 
requirements. Potential sub-projects include the reconstruction and construction of 
infrastructure such as roads, bridges, urban infrastructure (water, wastewater, and solid 
waste) as well as health facilities and schools. Many of these sub-projects will likely be 
located in county seats and towns, though some may be in rural areas.  
 
As the specific sub-projects that the project will finance have not yet been identified or 
appraised, the safeguards methodology adopts a framework approach.  The project is 
considered overall as a Category A project to allow for the possibility of a limited 
number of sub-projects that may be classified as Category A during screening.  
 
Page  4
During the project appraisal mission in October 2008, a preliminary sample of possible 
sub-projects was visited by the provincial governments and Bank team. On the basis of 
this initial visit, as well as preliminary meetings with potential counterparts, it is expected 
that most of the potential sub-projects will require environmental and social studies and 
approvals for compliance to Chinese laws and regulations.  In addition, the following 
Bank policies will or are likely to be triggered:  
 
•
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment:  Given the nature of the proposed 
project, this policy will be triggered. Individual sub-projects will be screened and 
assigned the appropriate environmental categorization and environmental due diligence 
will be conducted in accordance with OP 4.01.  A technical guidance note on 
“Preparation and implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and 
Environmental Management Plan/mitigation measures (EMP), including use of standard 
Environmental Codes of Practices for contractors” will be included in the Operations 
Manual (OM).  
 
•
OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats:  Field visits and the location of potential sub-
projects in urban areas indicate that natural habitats are unlikely to be adversely affected.  
Nevertheless, all sub-project proposals will be screened for potential impacts on critical 
and non-critical natural habitats.  
 
•
OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources (PCR):  Whenever a sub-project 
includes reconstruction or preservation of historic or archeological sites, PCR 
management plans would be prepared for those sub-projects, either as part of the sub-
project specific EIA or as a stand alone document.  All sub-projects will be reviewed for 
their potential impacts on PCR in the context of their respective EIA/EMP, and 
procedures will be included in all relevant standard bidding documents to deal with 
chance finds during construction. A technical guidance note on “Preparation and 
implementation of PCR management plans” will be included in the OM.  
 
•
OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams:  Given the damage to existing dams and the possible 
need for additional water storage capacity in certain localities, local governments may 
propose repair works to existing reservoirs or propose new investments in water storage 
facilities.  In case of such requests, it is anticipated that OP 4.37 will be triggered. A 
technical guidance note on “Preparation and implementation of dam safety plans, 
including commissioning of dam safety panel of experts” will be included in the OM.  
 
•
OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement:  Land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement are anticipated, particularly for sub-projects involving service expansion or 
reconstruction at new sites.  For this reason, OP 4.12 will be triggered.  Sub-projects will 
be screened for land-related impacts and resettlement action plans will be developed and 
implemented.  A technical guidance note on “Preparation and implementation of 
resettlement documents” will be included in the OM.  
 
•
OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples: Field visits, initial discussions with expertsof 
ethnic minorities in the region, and a desk review have indicated that communities of 
Page  5
ethnic minority people are unlikely to be present in the project areas.  Nevertheless, all 
sub-project proposals will be screened as required by OP 4.10 to confirm these findings.  
A
technical guidance note on “Preparation and implementation of Social Assessment and 
Ethnic Minority Community Plans” will be included in the OM.  
 
Retroactive financing of previously completed or ongoing works related to the impacts 
of the Wenchuan Earthquake may be proposed and will be subject to thorough 
safeguards-related review prior to approval.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will support the following principal types of investments: (a) the repair and 
reconstruction of assets in situ that were damaged by the earthquake; (b) the 
strengthening of assets in situ that may or may not have been damaged by the earthquake 
as a means of mitigating against seismic and flood hazards; (c) construction of assets in 
new locations when the damaged assets cannot be rebuilt in situ; and, in a limited number 
of cases, (d) construction and/or expansion of assets in new locations to serve people 
who, as a result of the earthquake, must relocate from highly hazard-prone areas.  
 
A
program containing a mix of all these types of investments, with clear emphasis on 
categories (a) and (b) above, is considered both necessary and prudent to ensure a balance 
between reconstruction and long-term sustainable economic recovery in the project areas.  
 
As sub-projects are identified, the Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF) prepared for the project will provide guidance on dealing with 
potential indirect and/or long term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In accordance with the project framework as set out in the OM and the legal agreements, 
all sub-projects will be identified using a set of standard selection criteria.  Under these 
criteria, the sub-projects shall be: (a) designed based on a rational and efficient option 
analysis including technical, financial, social, environmental and safety considerations; 
and (b) scaled and phased in accordance with current and appropriately projected 
demand.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In accordance with OP/BP 8.00, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF) was developed to guide the environment and social safeguard 
planning and compliance during implementation of sub-projects.  As sub-projects will be 
identified and proposed for financing in a continuous manner during the project 
implementation period, screening for potential environmental and social impacts will be 
conducted and mitigation and management measures will be developed in line with the 
agreed ESSAF.  
 
The ESSAF establishes the objectives, procedures, institutional framework, and 
implementation arrangements for identifying and managing potential environmental and 
Page  6
social impacts from project activities.  It also addresses mechanisms for public 
participation and redress of possible grievances, and includes the specific screening tool 
that is recommended for use on all sub-projects. The ESSAF will form part of the 
project’s OM and is referenced in the legal agreements.  
 
The ESSAF will be supplemented with relevant technical Guidance Notes to provide 
guidelines for both environment and social screening and assessment and a set of tools 
for environmental and social specialists associated with the project – including those 
working with both the implementing agencies and the Bank.  These Guidance Notes 
include important materials for capacity building under the project, and will be further 
revised and updated during project implementation to incorporate lessons learned.  
 
The following steps will be followed, as per the ESSAF:  
 
-
Identification of sub-projects according to the selection criteria;  
 
-
Screening for potential environmental and social safeguard impacts and 
determination of safeguards instruments required according to Chinese regulations and 
Bank policies;  
 
-
Review and confirmation of the safeguards screening by the Bank;  
 
-
Preparation of safeguard documents, consultation and disclosure;  
 
-
Review and clearance of the safeguard documents within the government or/and 
by the Bank;  
 
-
Implementation of agreed actions; and supervision, monitoring, and evaluation.  
 
The various institutional roles and responsibilities for the ESSAF are given below:  
 
Overall responsibility:  The Provincial PMOs (Sichuan) and Longnan Municipal PMO 
(Gansu) will assume the overall responsibility for the planning and implementation of 
safeguard instruments under the project.  The Bank will support the process through 
periodic supervision and training.  
 
Environmental and social impact screening:  The Provincial PMOs, with the assistance 
of specialized staff and/or qualified consultants, will undertake environmental screening 
of each proposed sub-project, the findings of which will be reviewed by the Bank on a 
selective basis, depending on the nature of the sub-project.  
 
Preparation of safeguard documents:  Individual sub-project proponents are responsible 
for planning, design and implementation of individual sub-projects, including 
environmental and social safeguard documents and mitigation measures, and will engage 
qualified consultants as needed.  
 
Domestic review and clearance of the safeguard documents:  Safeguard documents will 
be reviewed and cleared by the government as part of the overall sub-project approval 
process. This should follow the government’s procedures and regulations for capital 
investment review and clearance.  
 
Page  7
Bank review and clearance of the safeguard documents:  As mentioned above, safeguard 
documents for all Category A sub-projects will be forwarded to the Bank for prior review 
and clearance.  The Bank will also review and clear the social safeguards documents 
before approving the sub-projects that require them. For all other Category B sub-projects 
projects, the Bank will carry out sample post-reviews during supervision missions.  
 
Safeguard instruments implementation:  The sub-project proponents will be responsible 
for the implementation of the safeguard instruments, under the direction and supervision 
of relevant government line agencies (e.g. environmental protection bureau, land 
administration bureau, cultural relics bureau).  
 
Supervision, monitoring and evaluation:  The county and municipality PMOs, as the 
immediate project management offices, will guide, supervise and manage the process of 
safeguard planning and implementation. The Sichuan and Gansu Provincial Governments 
will assume the overall responsibility for the supervision, monitoring, and evaluation of 
the safeguard implementation.  The Provincial PMOs will plan, organize and lead the 
oversight effort, including appointing the external environment and social monitors.  
 
Capacity building: Local capacity building will be critical to the implementation of the 
above safeguard-related activities.  With the current institutional arrangements, local 
governments, particularly at the county level, will need strong support in building their 
capacity to fulfill their designated responsibilities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Information disclosure and public consultation will be an integral part of sub-project 
preparation and implementation.  These enable people affected by sub-projects and other 
stakeholders to participate in and contribute to the sub-project planning and 
implementation, and thereby help minimize adverse impacts and maximize benefits.  The 
level of public consultation and the scope of information dissemination will 
commensurate with the environmental category of the sub-project and the significance of 
the social impacts.  
 
Safeguard documents will be subject to consultation and disclosure in an accessible 
place, in a timely manner, in a form and language understandable to key stakeholders, 
prior to finalization. Particular attention will be given to ensure projected affected 
persons have adequate time and access to draft documents before consultation takes 
place.  
 
Consultation for Category A sub-projects, and sub-projects that require RAPs, DSPs, 
SAs or EMCPs, will be undertaken at least twice during preparation: at the beginning of 
the preparation of documents to scope environmental and social issues, as well as prior to 
finalization into account public concerns before submitting final documents to the Bank.  
 
Page  8
Furthermore, a grievance redress mechanism for the project is necessary for addressing 
legitimate concerns of affected individuals and groups who may consider themselves 
deprived of appropriate treatment under the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/02/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/02/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/02/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/02/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
As mentioned before, this being an ERL operation, the public disclosure and consultation 
of the environment and social screening and assessment framework will occur shortly 
after appraisal and will continue during implementation.  
 
Information disclosure and public consultation will be an integral part of sub-project 
preparation and implementation.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
Page  9
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mara K. Warwick 
11/06/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Carter J. Brandon 
11/06/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
11/07/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
11/06/2008 
Comments:   
