Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3902 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P114107 
Project Name: Wenchuan Earthquake Recovery 
Task Team Leader: Mara K. Warwick 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (44%);Roads and highways 
(39%);Health (13%);General education sector (4%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Pollution management and environmental 
health (S);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
710.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To restore essential infrastructure, health, and education services to at least pre-earthquake levels 
and reduce vulnerability to seismic and flood hazards in project areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed emergency recovery loan (ERL) will span Sichuan and Gansu provinces and will 
be processed using a programmatic approach, which will include the following key areas: (a) 
identification, selection, and appraisal of individual investment projects, including technical 
standards; (b) safeguards; (c) procurement; (d) financial management; and (e) monitoring and 
evaluation.  During preparation, frameworks will be developed to guide the selection, appraisal 
and implementation of the individual investments during project implementation.  
 
The components of the ERL cover three main sectors: infrastructure, health and education. For 
Sichuan province (US$510 million), investments would be financed in 21 counties/cities/ 
districts within 7 municipalities (Chengdu, Deyang, Mianyang, Guangyuan, Bazhong, Nanchong 
Page  2
and Ya’an).  Two components will be covered: a) infrastructure; and b) health.  The 
infrastructure component would comprise a range of investments in roads, bridges, water supply 
pipelines, drainage and sewerage networks, solid waste management, and embankments.  The 
health component would support reconstruction/rehabilitation of county hospitals, maternal and 
child health care facilities and township level health clinics.  
 
In Gansu, investments will total US$200 million with three components: infrastructure, health, 
and education. The infrastructure component would be similar to that of Sichuan Province. The 
health component would include repair/reconstruction of city and county hospitals. The 
education component would comprise the repair/ reconstruction of primary and secondary 
schools.  
 
The project financed investments in both provinces will mostly comprise the reconstruction of 
destroyed or damaged assets, although some system enhancements may also be included. These 
details will be finalized during appraisal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The geographical areas for the ERL will include seven municipalities (Chengdu, Deyang, 
Mianyang, Guangyuan, Bazhong, Nanchong and Ya’an) in southern and eastern Sichuan, and 1 
prefecture (Longnan) in southern Gansu; the two most affected provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Implementation arrangements for the project are still under consideration.  Where possible, the 
project will use existing provincial and municipal PMOs to manage the project including 
safeguards implementation.  In Sichuan, the urban infrastructure PMO within the Sichuan 
Provincial Construction Commission is experienced in managing category ‘A’ World Bank-
financed loans (e.g., the Sichuan Urban Development Project, and previously the Sichuan Urban 
Environment Project), and is therefore experienced in both safeguards analysis and 
implementation of mitigation measures.  This PMO will likely manage the urban infrastructure 
component in Sichuan, which is the largest component.  However, there is no comparable PMO 
for the health sector in Sichuan Province or for any sectors in Longnan Prefecture in Gansu 
Province.  Therefore, the capacity of local agencies for these components will be assessed during 
appraisal.  
 
Overall, the safeguards management approach is designed to facilitate standardized approaches, 
from the screening of potential sub-project impacts to the contracting of reconstruction works 
with the incorporation of technical standards to guide contractors in adequate environmental 
mitigation practices.  
 
The social impacts of potential subprojects will be more carefully assessed in the forthcoming 
missions to both provinces.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Carter J. Brandon (EASCS) 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Page  3
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Although the majority of the investments are for reconstruction/repair works, and given that 
investment levels are likely to be in the range of USD 7 to 40 million per county (with each of 
the individual investments being much less), it is expected that some category A activities may 
be financed by the project and therefore cat
egory ‘A’ is proposed.  
 
Consistent with the Procedural Guidelines for the OP 8.00 operations, a safeguards 
management framework (Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework - 
ESSAF) will be prepared by the Bank staff, in collaboration with the implementing agencies and 
their consultants, prior to the Decision Meeting.  
 
For the majority of investments that are expected to be reconstruction of existing 
infrastructure at the county level, significant environmental or social (including resettlement and 
land acquisition) impacts are not foreseen. Therefore, the safeguards requirements for such 
investments would be handled through simplified screening and standard environmental and 
social management procedures.  
 
For new or significant expansion activities funded under the project, such as expanded 
water supply networks, new landfills, etc, a review would be needed on a case by case basis. The 
ESSAF developed during appraisal will include criteria to determine whether expansion 
activities are considered significant or not.  If yes, the EASSF will include procedures that will 
be used to prepare (when necessary) the required Environmental Assessments (EAs), 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and/or Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPPs) (called Minority 
Development Plans in China, or MDPs).  
 
The Bank team will work closely with the client and their consultants to fully understand 
and incorporate the national requirements (including many special-purpose reconstruction 
regulations) into the safeguards framework, to ensure consistency and alignment within the 
project’s safeguards requirements.  
 
Responsiveness to client needs and providing adequate and timely support to ensure the 
client’s technical and institutional capacity during preparation and implementation will be 
cornerstones to the environmental and social safeguard management approach. Frameworks, 
processes, and other instruments to be developed within the Earthquake Reconstruction Loan for 
the Sichuan and Gansu Provinces will build upon country, regional and local regulations, 
institutions and knowledge to ensure maximum ownership of the process by the client and the 
beneficiaries.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The extent to which natural habitats may be present in the project area will be assessed 
through screening during project appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
No impacts on forests will be caused by the project.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
No pesticides will be procured under the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The extent to which physical cultural resources may be present in the project area will be 
assessed through screening during project appraisal.  A chance finds clause will be included in 
all project construction contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Peoples are likely to be present in some of the project counties, especially in 
Longnan Prefecture in Gansu.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While most of the proposed investments will be reconstruction of existing assets damaged by 
the earthquake, and therefore unlikely to cause IR impacts, some land acquisition and 
resettlement may be required for expansion projects.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Based on the preliminary project information available, it is not anticipated that OP 4.37 on 
Dam Safety will be triggered. However, if the proposed investments include dam/reservoir 
repairs and/or significant potential impacts on upstream dams, OP 4.37 on Dam Safety may be 
triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no international waterways in the project area.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
There are no disputed areas in the project area.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/12/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/12/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EASSF will be prepared during the combined preparation/appraisal mission to be 
conducted from October 7, 2008 - November 6, 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mara K. Warwick 
10/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
10/09/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
10/31/2008 
Comments:   
