Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/06/2009 
Report No.:  47055
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P098654 
Project Name:  GEF China Thermal Power Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jie Tang 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (80%);Power (10%);Central 
government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Regulation and competition policy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
19.70 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.50 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
73.75
89.25 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to reduce coal consumption and GHG emission per 
unit of electricity production in Shandong, Shanxi and Guangdong provinces in China, 
through (i) mitigating the financial impact of closing inefficient small-sized coal-fired 
units to achieve targeted closure on schedule; (ii) demonstrating the viability of 
investments in efficiency improvements in existing mid-sized thermal units; and (iii) 
developing effective regulations for supporting the pilot programs for transition to 
efficient generation dispatch.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has five components: (i) mechanisms to support the closure of inefficient 
small coal-fired generation units; (ii) demonstration of power plant efficiency 
improvements; (iii) transition to efficient generation dispatch; (iv) technical assistance for 
project implementation; and (v) project management.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Government launched a mandatory closure program nation-wide in 2007, targeting 
the closure of 50 GW small units by 2010, with replacement by large and more efficient 
units, to achieve coal savings in power generation. The Project includes a pilot financial 
incentive Mechanism for Closure of Inefficient Small Coal-fired Units (MCSU). The 
MCSU pilot will provide output-based payments for each MW of capacity closed to 
small power companies that are facing financial difficulties to ensure the closure of their 
small units on schedule and compliance with satisfying government’s environmental and 
social regulations (proper settlement of affected plant workers) at the same time. The 
pilot program, to be financed mainly by Government funds (more than 75%) and GEF 
Grant proceeds, will be implemented in Shandong and Shanxi provinces, targeting the 
closure of 2,910 MW small units in late 2009 and 2010. It will involve around 60 to 100 
units and 20 to 40 small power companies spread out the two provinces.  The pilot 
program-supported closure may result in decommissioning of the small units and 
associated transmission lines and site restoration works.  
 
The Project also includes investment activities for retrofitting three thermal power 
plants located in Shanxi and Shandong provinces. The retrofitting activities are for 
efficiency improvement and will not extend the economic life of the units. These 
activities may involve civil works and mechanical engineering works at the three power 
plants: (i) Huangtai Thermal Power Plant in Jinan City, Shandong Province; (ii) Jinan 
Beijiao Thermal Power Plant in Jinan City, Shandong Province; and (iii) Yangguang 
Thermal Power Plant in Taiyuan City, Shanxi province.  
 
The investment activities at Yangguang Thermal Power Plant in Taiyuan City, Shanxi 
Province do not entail civil works outside the plant. The activities within the plant facility 
include mainly mechanical engineering activities -- refurbishment of the turbine seals and 
replacement of the existing auxiliary equipment (electric drives) with high-efficiency 
equipment (variable speed drives).   
 
The investment activities for efficiency improvement at Jinan Beijiao and Huangtai 
Thermal Power Plants in Jinan City, Shandong Province will include construction of a 
heat exchange station for Huangtai and installation of district heating pipes in urban and 
peri-urban areas for both plants. The pipes will follow existing roads except for 9 km of 
trunk pipes of Huangtai, which will follow a new road, 9 km long, under construction. 
Within the facilities of both plants, the investment activities include mainly mechanical 
engineering works -- retrofitting turbine blades, adding steam extraction systems and 
pipes and modification of the turbines condensing and cooling systems.  
 
Project activities financed by others but linked to Huangtai project are the construction 
of the 9-km new road, along which part of the trunk pipes for heat supply by Huangtai 
will be installed according to the plan completed. The road construction had already 
commenced, and more than 50% of land acquisition and associated resettlement work 
had been completed prior to the Bank’s involvement in the project.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Most of the project activities are for technical assistance and will not involve major civil 
works except for the projected-supported closure of small units, which may result in 
decommissioning plant facilities and site restoration, and the plant efficiency 
improvement projects, which include mechanical engineering works within the plant 
facilities and civil works outside the plant facilities.  
 
A. Social 
 
 
Closure of inefficient small coal-fired units may lead to negative social impacts on 
unemployment of plant workers in some of the cases. Data from the Social Economic 
Survey conducted in 2007 by two consulting firms, covering 15 small power companies 
including 13 plants in Shandong and Shanxi provinces, indicated that (i) on average about 
2.38 worker might be laid off for each MW closed; (ii) the MCSU pilot targeted closure 
of 2,910 MW might involve 60 to 100 units, 20 to 40 small power companies and may 
affect up to about 7,000 workers in the two provinces; and (iii) additional financial 
support would bee needed to ensure closure of the small units on schedule and 
satisfactory settlement of the affected workers.  
 
Plant Efficiency Improvement Projects involve three thermal plants in Shanxi and 
Shandong provinces, among which only the Jinan Beijiao and Huangtai Thermal Power 
Plants in Shandong trigger resettlement while the Yangguang Thermal Power Plant in 
Shanxi will not entail land acquisition and resettlement. The Jinan Beijiao Subproject is 
to pose temporary resettlement impacts during the installation of its 28 km heat pipes, of 
which the detailed routing, planning and implementation will be carried out in later stage 
Page  4
of the project implementation. Huangtai Subproject will include construction of a heat 
exchange station, trunk pipes and branch pipes outside the plant facilities. For 
construction of the heat exchange station, about 1,300 m2 will be acquired.   Its trunk and 
branch pipes will possibly cause land acquisition and resettlement. To date the layout 
design of the 9 km trunk pipe under a road is already completed, while the branch pipes 
are to be designed in later stage of the project implementation. The trunk pipe will be 
installed and constructed in parallel with a 9-km new road which is under construction 
and directly results in relevant resettlement. The trunk pipe installation has no direct 
resettlement impacts but has a linkage to the resettlement for the road construction.  
 
The linkage resettlement impacts cover acquisition of 44.3 ha of land, including 23 ha of 
farmland, as well as demolition of 79 houses, with impacts on 225 households with 702 
persons in there communities(villages) in Lixia District of Jinan City. Further there are 
eight small enterprises are affected partly. Before the Bank was involved in the project, 
resettlement for the road was under way. By the end of November 2007, 23.9 ha of land 
had been acquired and 79 households been relocated already, for which a due diligence 
review was conducted by the Bank. So the residual resettlement work is associated with 
land acquisition of 20.4 ha and the treatment of seven affected enterprises.  
 
Jinan Beijiao Plant has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to be applied 
in the planning and implementation of its pipe installation. Huangtai Plant has developed 
a
RPF for its branch pipe installation and a Resettlement Plan covering a thorough review 
of the ongoing resettlement for its trunk pipe and the heat exchange station.  
 
Due to no minority community presented in project area, the OP 4.10 is not triggered.  
 
B. Environmental  
 
Closure of Small Units. Closure of small coal-fired units to be supported by the pilot 
MCSU will bring significant environmental benefits in coal consumption and emission 
reductions. It will also bring negative impacts, for e.g. noise and dust during the 
dismantling and site restoration process and pollutions due to improper treatment of solid 
wastes, which may include radioactive wastes in some of the cases, liquid wastes, use of 
chemicals and explosives. It may also result in some site-specific impacts.  
 
In some small coal-fired plants which were built 20-30 years ago, radioactive 
instruments might have been used, such as for feeding metering. These kinds of 
instruments were shielded during the operation. In China, all the similar instruments were 
registered by professional radioactive management department of the government; and 
the dismantling and disposal of such radioactive instruments or waste can only be 
conducted by professional radioactive management department of the government (see 
the EMF for the process). The workers of plant will not be exposed to such environment.  
 
Some dismantling of the small units may involve the dismantling of cooling tower and 
chimney (stack) by use of explosive. The use of explosives was under strict control by 
police (see the EMF).  
Page  5
However, specific impacts could not be identified until the specific units to be closed 
and supported by the pilot MCSU in the two provinces are identified around mid 2009.  
 
Plant Efficiency Improvement Projects. The project is classified as a “CategoryB” 
project according to the magnitude of the environmental issues involved, the coverage 
area and the nature of the project activities associated with the thermal power plant 
efficiency improvement.  
 
The EIA shows that the investment projects for thermal power plant efficiency 
improvement in Taiyuan City, Shanxi Province and Jinan City, Shandong Province will 
result in significant benefits to the natural and socio-economic environment in the project 
areas, including avoided coal handling and combustion due to efficiency improvement in 
power generation as well as the dismantling of distributed coal-fire boilers and with 
consequent reductions in emissions of PM10, CO2, SOx and NOx. No serious adverse or 
irreversible environmental impacts were envisaged.  
 
All significant adverse environmental and social impacts identified are limited and can 
be avoided or mitigated to acceptable levels, provided the mitigation measures developed 
in the EMPs, EMF, RPFs and the Resettlement Plan are properly implemented.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project, once completed, is expected to achieve significant positive social and 
environmental impacts in the project areas and China in general, as well as global 
environment benefits. The project will result in coal savings and GHG emission 
reduction. It will have a positive impact by increasing the coverage of heat supply, 
reducing air pollution, avoiding coal handling and combustion with consequent 
reductions in emissions of PM10, CO2, SOx and NOx and avoiding other environmental 
damage associated with coal use. The Project will improve the quality of life for the 
people in the project areas and contribute to mitigation of climate change.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives considered include two options to meet the same power and heat demands in 
the project areas -- with and without the investment activities for the thermal plant 
efficiency improvement.  
 
Without the proposed investment activities for plant efficiency improvement, additional 
capacities for power and heat supply have to be built to meet the demands.  With the 
proposed investment activities, construction of additional power generation and heat 
supply capacities could be avoided or delayed and coal savings will be achieved. 
Consequently, the adverse impacts related to building additional power generation and 
heat supply capacities and associated coal handling and combustion will be avoided or 
minimized.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A. Social  
 
Closure of Small Units. To ensure satisfactory settlement of affected workers during the 
closure process, the central, provincial and local governments have issued a number of 
policies and regulations. The policies and regulations emphasize proper settlement of 
affected workers and include adequate specifications of responsibility and accountability, 
preparation of settlement plan for affected workers, process for consultation, institutional 
arrangement for implementation and supervision and provisions for channeling financial 
resources to and ensuring new capacity expansion investment opportunities for the 
affected power plants. The policies and regulations are systematic and comprehensive. 
Benefiting from and complying with these policies and regulations would lead to 
satisfactory settlement of affected workers, as the cases for large power companies.  
However, small power companies, mostly established at the county and municipal levels, 
could not fully benefit from these supportive provisions of the policies due to limited 
technical and financial capacities. Without additional financial support, these small power 
companies would not be able to close their small coal-fired units on time, as concluded 
by the social economic survey in Shandong, Shanxi and other provinces completed in late 
2007 with GEF grant support. The pilot MCSU, mainly funded by the Government, is to 
test the effectiveness and adequacy of additional financial support to those small 
companies to achieve targeted closure of small units on schedule, meanwhile satisfying 
all relevant environmental and social safeguard requirements.  The Government intends 
to replicate the incentive mechanism to other provinces in China if proven successful, to 
scale up the positive impact.  
 
The MCSU pilot does not trigger Bank’s social safeguard policies. However, to ensure 
adequate management of social risks associated with the MCSU pilot, full compliance to 
the current government policies and regulations regarding settlement of affected workers 
is a condition for approval and disbursement of the output-based payment. The pilot 
program will follow a MCSU Operational Manual, of which the contents have been 
agreed in principle among all the parties involved, including the pilot provinces, 
eligibility criteria for selection of beneficiary power plants and targeted small units, 
proposed rate of the output-based payment per MW closed, procedures and process for 
verification of the closure and disbursement of the output-based payment, institutional 
arrangements for implementation, supervision, monitoring and verification, financing 
plan, detailed social and environmental compliance requirements and arrangement for 
impact assessment and replication. The Manual is to be finalized at the beginning of the 
project implementation and is subject to review and approval by the Government and the 
Bank.  
 
Plant Efficiency Improvement Projects. Shandong Project management Unit (PMU) has 
engaged an experienced consultant, Eastern China Hydropower Design Institute, to help 
assess impacts and prepare resettlement documents, including reviewing the ongoing 
resettlement activities for Jinan Beijiao and Huangtai Plants in Shandong. During the 
resettlement documents preparation, the Bank Task Team provided comments, which 
Page  7
were reflected in the revised documents. Jinan Beijiao Plant has prepared a RPF to be 
applied in the planning and implementation of its pipe installation. Huangtai Plant has 
developed a RPF for its branch pipe installation and a Resettlement Plan covering a 
thorough review of the ongoing resettlement for its trunk pipe and the heat exchange 
station.  
 
The RPF defined that any resettlement impacts found during the project construction 
will be investigated, compensated, restored and managed.  
 
In the Resettlement Plan for the trunk pipes of Huangtai, the resettlement already 
implemented was reviewed and further the remaining part of resettlement was also 
planned. The former includes resettlement of the 79 households, acquisition of 23.9 ha of 
land and the compensation to one enterprise affected. Those who lost land, 160 persons, 
were paid with compensation in cash and resettled with social insurance as well as trained 
by local government. The affected households had got contracts for new houses in 
downtown, with at least 40 m2 per capita and were waiting to move into the new houses, 
which were under construction. The affected enterprise was paid in cash in line with 
reached agreements. Based on its site visit and review, the consultant concluded in the 
Resettlement Plan that the affected persons were satisfied with the resettlement outcomes. 
On the other hand, the residual resettlement assignment will be addressed with the same 
compensation rates, settlement standards, procedures and management methods as the 
implemented part, as agreed and specified in the Resettlement Plan.  
 
The Resettlement Plan for Huangtai Subproject has confirmed that there is a proper 
resettlement management system in the ongoing resettlement implementation. The RPFs 
have also documented a management system of project resettlement, which will be setup 
prior to project commencement. It has also agreed that an external monitor will be 
engaged to monitor the resettlement implementation.  
 
B. Environment  
 
Closure of Small Units. To identify and mitigate negative environmental impacts, an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared to provide guidance 
on identification of potential negative impacts, preparation of mitigation measures and 
arrangements for implementation, supervision and internal and external monitoring. 
Compliance with this EMF will be specified in the MCSU Operational Manual as a 
condition for approval and disbursement of the output-based payment under the MCSU.  
 
Plant Efficiency Improvement Projects. Environmental assessment (EA) documents, 
including Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Environment Management Plan 
(EMP) and Environmental Audit Report were prepared for each power plant efficiency 
improvement project in accordance with the relevant Chinese national requirements and 
the Bank’s safeguard policies and procedures.  The EA documents have covered: (i) 
baseline environmental and socio-economic conditions; (ii) alternatives considered under 
the project design; (iii) environmental auditing and public consultation; (iv) potential 
impacts, mitigation measures and monitoring; and (v) information disclosure.  
Page  8
C. Implementation and Capacity Enhancement  
 
It has been agreed with the Shandong PMU, Shanxi Project Execution Unit (PEU), the 
implementing agencies for the MCSU pilot, and the two thermal power plants in 
Shandong Province, the implementing agencies for the thermal power plant efficiency 
improvement investment activities, on the implementation of the agreed EMF, EMPs, 
RPF, and the Resettlement Plan.  
 
For the impacts of road construction linked to the project activities for efficiency 
improvement at Huangtai Plant, it has been agreed that the residual resettlement work 
will follow the same compensation rates, settlement standards, procedures and 
management methods as the portion already implemented.  
 
Technical assistance will be provided under the Project for preparation of the detailed 
MCSU Operation Manual. Training will be provided for financial management and result 
monitoring and consulting services financed for external monitoring.  
 
For implementation of the EMF associated with the closure of small units, a workshop 
will be organized to inform the plants of the EMF once the targeted small power 
companies are identified.  Given the limited capacities of the power plants and typical 
contractors for dismantling of small units, experienced consultants will be hired for 
implementation of the EMF. A third-party consultant will be hired as an independent 
monitor for external monitoring.  
 
As Huangtai and Jinan Beijiao Plants have limited capacity, qualified environmental and 
social specialists will be hired by each plant to support implementation of the associated 
EMPs, RPFs and the Resettlement Plan. Third-party agents will be engaged for external 
monitoring. Safeguards training will be provided to the power plant staff before and 
during the project implementation.  
 
The environmental and social specialists of the Bank's Task Team will provide timely 
support as needed to the three power plants for ongoing safeguard management and to 
carry out regular supervision with due diligence throughout the project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for the closure of small units and investment activities for the 
efficiency improvement at the three thermal power plants include: affected people in the 
project area, affected small enterprises, municipal and provincial government agencies 
responsible project review and approval, environmental management and project 
implementing agencies and entities, including the National Project Management Unit, 
Shandong Project Management Unit, Shanxi Project Execution Unit, Provincial 
Economic Commissions, Provincial Development and Reform Commissions,  
Environmental Protection Bureaus, Finance Bureaus, local banks, Environmental 
Monitoring Stations, Government Resettlement Offices, design institutes, municipal heat 
Page  9
supply companies, thermal power plants, contractors and supervision engineers for the 
road construction, and future contractors and supervision engineers to be hired for closure 
of small units and implementation of the investment activities.  
 
For preparation of the EA documents, two rounds of public consultations have been 
conducted for each power plant in addition to the consultation conducted to obtain inputs 
into project design.  The first round was conducted during the EA preparation stage to 
canvass the public’s opinion about the project. The second round of public consultation 
was conducted after the draft EA reports had been prepared to explain the EA findings, 
the intended mitigation measures, the EMP and to confirm public acceptance and 
satisfaction. All the concerns raised in the two rounds of public consultation were 
addressed in the EA/EMP and passed on to the project owner for incorporation into the 
next step of project design and implementation. As a result, it was found that the project 
has strong public support in terms of its significant economic, environmental and social 
benefits.  
 
The project’s basic information, major anticipated adverse and positive impactsand 
mitigation measures have been disclosed to the public through bulletins, posters, as well 
as local newspapers. Each of the municipalities with authority over the project areas has 
disclosed information regarding the availability of the relevant draft EA documents, and 
how to access them through local newspapers (Jinan Time Newspaper, Yangguang 
Daily). The draft final EIA reports, EMPs and Environment Audit Reports, in both 
Chinese and English versions, have also been disclosed at the PMUs/PEU, power plants, 
EA Institutes, as well as the World Bank Beijing Office and World Bank InfoShop in 
January 2008.  
 
The EMF for closure of small units was prepared by an experienced consultant based on 
findings of the consultation stated above. The EMF also specifies the consultation and 
information disclosure requirements to be followed during the implementation stage, by 
the small power companies once indentified. The EMF, both Chinese and English 
version, was also disclosed on November 18, 2008 at the InfoShop and Beijing Office of 
World Bank, Shandong Province and Shanxi Province.  
 
For preparation of the RPFs and Resettlement Plan, Government procedures for power 
and heat supply planning and review and approval of the projects and their design have 
ensure consultation and consensus building among all the key government agencies, 
design institutes and local banks involved. For consultation to the affected people and 
enterprises as well as contractors and supervision engineers, an experienced consulting 
firm has been hired by the three power plants and conducted field survey, interview and 
consultation in November 2007 following relevant Bank policies and procedures. 
Findings of the field consultation were incorporated in various policies frameworks and 
action plans prepared for the proposed investment activities.  
 
For design the MCSU pilot to support the closure of small units, two consulting firms 
have been hired for a social economic survey in 2007, which included extensive site 
visits and consultation in Shandong, Shanxi provinces as well as other provinces in 
Page  10
China. The survey took almost one year and the associated site visits and consultation 
were focused on the plant workers.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  11
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jie Tang 
11/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
11/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Songling Yao 
11/30/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
12/02/2008 
Comments:  The safeguard review is delegated to the region. 
