                                                                                       49672
                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 28, 2009

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: China                                   Project ID: P115878
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Shandong Provincial Biogas CDM Program
Task Team Leader: Ms. Qun Li
Estimated Appraisal Date: October, 2009          Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit:                                   Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset
Sector: Rural Development
Theme: Climate Change
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount ((Euro$m.):          4.8
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                  Simple [ ]                 Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project           Yes [X]                     No [ ]

B. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed project is to promote large-scale rural greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions reductions through household biogas development in Shandong province. To meet
this objective, the project would: (i) help about 150,000 households located in 45 comparatively
poor counties install bio-digester/biogas facilities; (ii) reduce coal consumption by substituting
use of biogas; (iii) establish an innovative operation and maintenance (O&M) system and
monitoring and evaluation system for rural household biogas development and related GHG
reduction activities in the rural sector; and (iv) demonstrate a new financing mechanism for
household biogas development in rural China through use of incentive payments to households
based on carbon offset revenue, integrated into the national and local government subsidy
programs for biogas development. The proposed project would help meet China's national
climate change mitigation targets, and improve rural living conditions by changing human and
animal waste treatment techniques.

C. Project Description

Project Components

Component A: Development and Construction of the Bio-gas Facilities, including the technical
design and construction of about 150,000 household-based biogas digesters in 45 counties in

Shandong. The biogas digester is composed of six parts as a whole system, including the
fermentation chamber, gas storage, inlet tube, outlet chamber, removable or sealed cover, and a
gas pipe line;

Component B: Development and Establishment of a Sustainable Household Biogas Operation
and Maintenance (O&M) System, including the establishment or improvement of the bio-gas
service stations at county and township levels, procurement of the necessary service equipment
and supplies, and development and implementation of biogas O&M plans for local project areas;
and

Component C: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management, including: (i) specific
CDM training program design and implementation (training for farmers, technical service staff,
and project management officials); (ii) establishment of the project monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) system including a M&E database management system, designed as a model for use with
other rural household biogas development and related GHG reduction activities in the rural
sector; and (iii) a M&E center for key monitoring information collection and evaluation (based
on the data from township and village level) in each county.

Project Costs and Financing

A typical 10m3 biogas installation in Shandong costs around Y 4,000. The national and
provincial subsidy would be Y 1,000 and Y 200 respectively. The remaining Y 2,800 would be
self-financed by the farmer. A total of Y 600 million would be needed for bio-digester
construction for the 150,000 households, of which Y 150 million would come from the national
budget, Y 30 million would be the province subsidy, and Y 420 million would be raised by the
farmers themselves. The designed life of bio-digesters is 20 years, with estimated annual energy
cost savings of Y 1,370 per household, including savings from replacing coal/electricity by
biogas (Y 800), and application of bio-fertilizer (Y 250), as well as revenue from promotion of
pig breeding (Y 300). According to a conservative estimate, the total Carbon Finance revenue
based on emission reduction estimates would total about EUR 4.8 million.

The total O&M costs estimated for the additional required services are about Y 22.7 million, and
will be fully financed by the provincial Finance Bureau from the government budget. Shandong
Finance Bureau and Agriculture Bureau need to provide an agreed financing plan and make
proper arrangements for financing the rural energy stations and groups at county and township
levels, with consideration of carbon revenue support. The Bank pre-preparation mission
suggested that a part of the estimated EUR 4.8 million of carbon revenue should be used to
support the necessary O&M activities.

The detailed investment costs for Institutional Strengthening and Project Management
component, including establishment of the new M&E system, will be estimated by Shandong
Provincial PMO, and included in the related cost and financing plan. The Shandong Finance
Bureau will finance the whole component through provincial government budget.

D. Project location (if known):
Project Scale and Scope. It has been confirmed that 45 counties with a target to install a total of
about 150,000 household bio-digesters will be included in the project. Based on experience with
other similar CDM projects under the World Bank Carbon Finance program, and assuming
average GHG emission reduction to be 1.5 ton of CO2e per household, the annual ERs of the
Project are expected to be 220,000 tons of CO2e at full project commission, estimated based on
the technical assessment. Bank project management experience could be built into Project
implementation and arrangements for project organization and management.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
To ensure a successful implementation of the project, Shandong has set up a project management
leading group composed of provincial Finance Bureau (FB) and Agricultural Bureau (AB)
mainly including the AB Comprehensive Agriculture Development Office, Livestock Division,
Eco-farming Division and Project Management Office (PMO) for Introduction & Utilization of
Foreign Loans, which are responsible for overall coordination during project preparation and
implementation. The executive body of the management committee is the PMO, which had
experience with implementation and management of the Bank's Irrigated Agriculture
Intensification Phase I Project and Shandong Agricultural Development Project.

The PMO will take the lead to coordinate project preparation and implementation supported by
the AB's Eco-farming Division and its county Rural Energy Service Stations (the bio-gas
subsidy program implementing agency). The provincial Eco-farming Division under AB will
support data collection, project management and monitoring, with its lower level county Rural
Energy Service Stations which are the main project implementation agencies in each county
(responsible for all technical design and construction works in each county).

Various government agencies in participating Project Counties will be engaged in both project
preparation and implementation. Organization and management arrangements for project
implementation will be made by each Project County.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
    Mr. Yiren Feng (EASCS)
    Mr. Zong-cheng Lin (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                 Yes          No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
The proposed project will be implemented in 45 Counties in Shandong Province with target to
install 150,000 household bio-digesters, about 3000 households for each County.

The proposed project will build a 10m3 bio-digester within each farmer's household yard. For
such environmentally friendly small size biogas projects, there is no EA requirement in China.

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                    Yes           No          TBD
This project is a Category B project since the potential adverse environmental impacts are very
limited, site-specific, reversible in nature, and mitigation measures can be designed readily,
Considering the type, location, sensitivity, scale of the proposed project, and the nature and
magnitude of its potential environmental impacts, it is expected that the project will bring very
positive environmental and social benefits to Shandong's rural areas. However, there may be
limited adverse impacts on the surroundings during the construction and operation if no proper
environmental management measures are in place.

The households (HHs) for each 45 Counties will be determined during the implementation. To
maximize the project's positive impacts and eliminate or minimize the potential minor impacts, a
Project Management Manual including environmental friendly design, construction management,
and O&M Procedures would be prepared by the client to comply with Bank safeguards policies.
Shandong Provincial CDM center was contracted for the preparation of the Manual. These
procedures will be distributed to all the participating HHs and appropriate training will be
provided. In addition, Safeguards documents are individually disclosed locally (in local
languages) and in the InfoShop prior to departure of the appraisal mission.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
The project is constructed within the farmer household yard; there will be no adverse effects on
natural habitats. Subprojects will not significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or
natural habitats as the screening procedures will exclude all subprojects with such impacts.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
The project will not involve any forests. The project will not finance activities that would involve
significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as
defined under the policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
The project will not procure any pesticides nor will an increased use of pesticides result from the
project
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
With the current project design, the project is not expected to have any impact on cultural
property. The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological,
historical, religious, or unique natural values. Appropriate clauses will be included in all
construction contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in the event of `chance finds' of
culturally significant artifacts or sites.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
Shandong is not a province where ethnic minority groups traditionally live. During project
preparation, the task team will conduct social screening for ethnic minority concerns and consult
with relevant local authorities and line agencies (such as the Ethnic Minority and Religious
Affaires Bureaus) for confirmation of absence of ethnic minority communities in the project
counties.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                               X
The project will help build a 10m3 biogas digester within each project household yard on a
voluntary basis, and there will be no resettlement or involuntary taking of land under the
proposed project.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
The project will not involve any dams. The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                       Yes               No               TBD
of, or relate to, any large dams as defined under this policy.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
The project will not involve any international waterways. There are no known project
components involving international waterways as defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: Does not apply.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: The safeguard-related documents will be prepared and disclosed before project
    appraisal in September-October, 2009.

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1 will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Name Ms. Qun Li                                                    Date
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards                             Name Mr. L. Panneer Selvam                                         Date
  Coordinator:
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                 Name Mr. Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                  Date
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

