Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4440
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P105872 
Project Name:  Integrated Forestry Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jin Liu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 5, 2010 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (67%);Climate change 
(33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective would be to demonstrate the establishment and 
management of sustainable, multifunction forest plantations with significant 
environmental benefits.   
 
3. Project Description 
In order to achieve the above objective, the project would finance the following three 
components:  
 
(a)   
Component One:   Establishment of new multifunction forest plantations. Under 
this component the project would finance the establishment of around 92,000 ha of new 
multifunction forest plantations on degraded and erosion-prone lands in Shanxi, 
Liaoning, Hebei and Anhui Provinces.  These activities would include, inter alia, 
plantation of adapted trees to create: (i) wind break and sand break forests; (ii) soil and 
water conservation forests; and (iii) farm land shelter belts. The newly afforested areas 
are expected to be developed into multi-storied forests with a variety of grasses, shrubs, 
and tree species capable of reducing soil and water erosion and developing into a 
functionally effective and more diversified forest landscape.  The establishment of the 
Page  2
multifunction forests would be largely undertaken directly by individual farmers or 
farmer groups and communities on their own land.  
 
(b)   Component Two:  Improving Existing Plantation Forests.  Under this component, 
the project would finance upgrading 40,300 ha of existing degraded forest plantations 
into sustainable multifunction forests in Anhui and Zhejiang Provinces, through the 
introduction of a number of broadleaf species to the degraded monoculture plantations to 
form the mixed forest plantation structure and improve the forest plantation management, 
to increase their vegetative cover, resiliency, erosion control potential, and reduce pests 
and disease occurrence rate.  Individual forest land owners, communities of farmers and 
rural dwellers would actively participate in the transformation and upgrading of their 
existing plantations.  The cutting edge technology and long-term research results that 
have been proven to successfully modify and transform monoculture forests have been 
adopted into the technical design. As in the case of Component One, participation in the 
project would be strictly voluntary and the upgrading of existing forests would be subject 
to agreed technical and quality criteria.  
 
(c)  Component Three: Institutional Support, Project Management and Monitoring & 
Evaluation. Under this component, the project would complement the latest 
Government's efforts in reforming collective forestland tenure and strengthen the 
implementation, management and monitoring capacity of government institutions at all 
levels as well as to increase the capacity of project beneficiaries to manage their land and 
forest resources in a manner that optimizes the environmental benefits and reduces the 
exposure to water and wind-induced erosion.  The project would finance (a) piloting the 
establishment of new farmer associations at the township or village levels; (b) training 
and technical services to build up project management capacity; (c) piloting of the 
formulation and implementation of management plans; and (d) helping establish an 
efficient M&E system that would monitor project implementation progress and impacts 
as well as generate lessons for scaling up and dissemination of project experiences to 
other areas in China.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in 69 counties in the provinces of Shanxi, Liaoning, 
Hebei, Anhui and Zhejiang. The project areas in Shanxi Province are largely located in 
the Loess Plateau, which has many hills and gullies and suffers from serious  erosion; the 
areas in Liaoning Province are windy and sandy areas of Keerqin desert and other sand 
areas, which have significant wind erosion; the areas in Hebei Province cover the old 
lower reaches of the Yellow River and the Yongding River where wind erosion has 
imposed negative impact on local farmers and dwellers, as well as agriculture production; 
and areas in Zhejiang and Anhui Provinces are located in soil water erosion areas in  the 
downstream Yangtze River watersheds and the areas surrounding an area of World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage.  The salient physical characteristics of the proposed 
project sites are those areas where have no/or very few forest cover, or degraded existing 
plantation forests which are subject to further deterioration and degradation and need to 
Page  3
increase forest and other vegetative cover to control soil, water and wind erosion and to 
improve the environment condition and natural landscape.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) and Social Assessment (SA) conducted during 
project preparation have not identified any potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts. No involuntary relocation or land acquisition is expected under the 
project. There are also no known archeological and historical sites that would be put at 
risk under the project.  More specific assessment is the following:  
 
(1)   Environmental Assessment.   An EA was undertaken covering possible impacts, 
mitigation measures and monitoring, building on the implementation experience of 
previous World Bank-financed forestry projects in China. The project is expected to have 
a
significant positive impact on soil erosion and sand storm control, and forest 
sustainability and rehabilitation of degraded forests.  The negative impacts are expected 
to be moderate to insignificant and can be readily mitigated and minimized if the 
environmental management plan (EMP) is implemented properly.  
 
The EMP includes institutional arrangement for EMP implementation, budget 
requirements for monitoring and training. For easier reference during implementation, 
operation procedures and mitigation measures for each step of planting establishment and 
maintenance are contained in a stand-alone Environmental Protection Guidelines for 
Plantations and a separate Pest Management Plan.   
 
(2)    Natural Habitats.  The EA indicated that the proposed sites are those areas where 
have no/or very few forest cover, or degraded existing plantation forests. Both plantation 
Page  4
establishment and existing plantation management are not located in or near any critical 
natural habitats. The site selection criteria exclude such areas from being included under 
the project.  During project implementation, further site screening process will be 
undertaken for each of the candidate sites to confirm that no critical natural habitats or 
cultural heritage exist in the project area and the information about each site will be well 
documented. On-site screening and ex-post checking has proven to be an effective tool in 
previous World Bank-financed forestry projects.  
 
(3)    Forests.  The project complies with the Forest Policy.  The project aims to increase 
forest and vegetative cover and improve forest plantation quality to contribute to the 
improvement of environment condition and sustainable management of multifunction 
protection forests. The activities to establish forests and improve existing degraded forest 
plantations will largely be carried out by the community (e.g., village level). The project 
will not introduce any invasive species and would not finance plantations involving any 
conversion or degradation of critical natural habitat.  
 
(4)    Pest Management.  Since the establishment and management of plantations require 
the use of pesticides or herbicides, a Pest Management Plan has been developed based on 
implementation experience of previous Bank financed forestry projects in China. An 
integrated pest management (IPM) approach has been incorporated into the project 
design during preparation and the IPM will be implemented during the project 
implementation period.  
 
(5)    Physical Cultural Resources.  The SA indicated that there are no physical cultural 
resources in the project areas. Furthermore, the project's site selection criteria exclude 
such areas from being included under the project.  
 
(6)   Indigenous People. The SA indicated that there are no ethnic minority communities 
in the project areas in Zhejiang, Anhui, Hebei and Shanxi provinces, although there are 
individual households who are ethnic minorities in those provinces. However, there are a 
few ethnic minority communities living in the proposed project areas of Liaoning 
Province consisting mostly of Mongol and Mandarin. Therefore, OP 4.10 applies.  
 
During project preparation, all the project sites have been selected and related 
communities identified and consulted. An EMDP for Mongol communities in Liaoning 
Province has been developed. However, the Mandarin groups in the project areas prove 
to be acculturated with local Han communities and do not fall in the IP definition in 
OP4.10, as confirmed by the social screening done by the Bank task team.  
 
(7)    Involuntary Resettlement. The project SA and technical design confirmed that 
there will not be any physical relocation or land acquisition under the project and there 
would be no restrictions of access of resources in protected areas (e.g. nature reserves, 
forest parks, scenic areas).  All project activities would be undertaken on a voluntary 
basis, that is, the project will include only those lands that the land users agreed 
voluntarily to be included.  The project has developed a Participatory Planning Manual 
which was applied during project preparation and will continue to be applied in the 
Page  5
implementation period to ensure full and voluntary participation of farmers and 
communities.  
 
(8)   Safety of Dams, International Waterways and Disputed Areas. The project will not 
finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams; there are no project components 
involving international waterways; and the project is not located in any known disputed 
areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project has been assigned an EA category B in the World Bank's classification 
system.  As indicated above, the project EA and SA have been undertaken. The EA report 
and the EMP (covering mitigation measures, monitoring, and institutional strengthening), 
and a separate SA report and its safeguards documents were prepared, building on 
implementation experiences of previous World Bank financed forestry projects in China.  
Overall, the Project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits in terms of 
water, soil and wind erosion control, and improvement of degraded existing plantation 
forests by developing and demonstrating models that would improve the environmental 
conditions and increase the sustainability of the forests.  The key potential impacts on the 
environment include: short-term impact to ground vegetation, potential soil and water 
erosion due to temporary land clearance for planting and pesticide application at the 
planting site.  If the mitigation measures proposed in the EMP are implemented, the 
negative impacts during implementation/planting phases will be minimized.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Some project activities were modified during preparation in order to increase the 
environmental benefits. For instance, the focus of activities in Zhejiang was shifted from 
increasing the productivity of bamboo forests to increasing the resilience of existing, but 
degrading forest plantations of Chinese fir, masson pine and nuts plantation by increasing 
a
number of local broadleaf species in the plantations to minimize pest and diseases 
occurrence rate and promote multi-story canopies to reduce soil erosion.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project agencies readily endorsed the principle of carrying out all project activities in 
accordance with the Bank safeguard policies.  To this effect the project agencies 
developed and would apply the Ethnic Minority Development Plan, the Environmental 
Protection Guidelines and the Pest Management Plan, as well as the Participatory 
Planning Manual. Above documents have been reviewed by the Bank and the relevant 
standards, requirements and procedures have been incorporated into the project design 
and its implementation plan to guide the project implementation process.  
 
All project implementing entities at the central and provincial levels have participated in 
several previous Bank-supported forestry projects and implemented Bank safeguards 
policies. The central and provincial project agencies will provide training to county, 
Page  6
township and village staff on these policies and will be responsible for monitoring the 
safeguard policies compliance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key project stakeholders are participating communities and households,  as well as 
the provincial and county forestry bureaus, ethnic and religion bureaus and environmental 
Protection bureaus, township government including forestry station and.  During project 
preparation, the consultation process has been carried out in each of the proposed project 
village and with other stakeholders.  
 
(a) 
As the first step, an information campaign was carried out with more than 
302,000 copies of project information leaflets distributed to the communities within the 
proposed project counties.  The leaflets informed the communities and households about 
the proposed project activities and opened options to the households to participate in the 
project.  
 
(b) 
For the second step, consultation with relevant stakeholders was undertaken, 
particularly in each project village to collect feedback on whether the communities and 
households would like to participate in the project. A participatory planting design 
process was further carried out in the villages that plan to participate in the project 
activities in the first year. Farmers' preference on species selection as well as operation 
and contractual arrangements were sought and incorporated into the planting design.  
 
The consultation results showed that around 42,870 individual households, 4,290 
household groups, 113 village collective farms within 2,164 villages of 448 townships in 
5
participating provinces applied for and were approved to participate in the project. 
Around 386,600 households will participate in and benefit from the project through 
various management arrangements.  In addition, small portions of plantations (around 5% 
of total sites) will be established by 2 forestry management bureaus which are designated 
by Shanxi provincial forestry bureau for ecological forest management and anticipated 
benefits would be strictly be of a public goods nature. The consultation process ensured 
that all the land users would participate in the project on a voluntary and transparent basis 
and the poor farmers, vulnerable groups, and ethnic minorities had equal access to 
participate in and benefit from the project.  The participatory exercise will be continued 
throughout project implementation in the design of subsequent year plantation 
establishment and management activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/10/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/06/2009 
 
Page  7
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/10/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/06/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/10/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/06/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
Yes 
Page  8
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jin Liu 
07/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Xin Ren 
07/09/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
07/09/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
07/10/2009 
Comments:  a)It was signed by the WBOB Safeguard Focal Person of COSU as a delegated PAD 
project review; b) the print-out ISDS copy might show-up Resettlement Action, which should be 
caused by system error. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
07/13/2009 
Comments:   
