Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3700
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P096707 
Project Name:  Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) (formerly N.E. 
Skills Development Project) 
Task Team Leader:  Dingyong Hou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 6, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.70 
 
KOREA, Rep of: Economic Development Cooperation Fund 
0.60
21.30 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to expand capacity and improve the quality and 
relevance of technical and vocational education and training in secondary and tertiary 
institutions and the efficiency of its delivery with enhanced policy development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components: (i) school-based reforms and innovation and (ii) 
policy development and capacity building.  
 
Component one.  School-Based Reforms and Innovation.  This component will: (i) 
strengthen the linkage between schools and industry; (ii) improve school management; 
(iii) introduce an updated modular, competency-based curriculum; (iv) expand and 
upgrade facilities and equipment; (v) train instructors to use the new curriculum; and (vi) 
improve student assessment and quality assurance at the school level.  
 
Component two.  Policy Development and Capacity Building.  This component will: (i) 
support evidence-based policy research and knowledge sharing at the national and 
Page  2
provincial level, (ii) improve monitoring and evaluation, and (iii) support capacity 
building for planning and management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in 3 project schools in Guangzhou and Yang Jiang city 
in Guangdong Province.  
 
The location of the schools and the expected beneficiary groups do not involve 
communities of ethnic minorities or the relocation of people and acquisition of land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project supports school-based innovations and reforms and policy development that 
would increase the capacity, quality and relevance and efficiency of these schools and 
through the policy and knowledge development component inform policy and spread the 
impact to the TVET system in Guangdong and beyond.  
 
The project does not involve any community of indigenous/ethnic minority, relocation 
of people and or acqusition of land. It will not affect sites with archeological, historical, 
religious or unique natural values.  
 
The anticipated social impact would benefit the secondary age cohorts for pre-
employment training and adult in-migrants for initial entry level job training including 
women, low income and vulnerable groups. The project design has incorporated in the 
M&E plan stakeholder satisfaction surveys that capture the impact of the project on these 
groups.  
Page  3
Regarding environment, the project will finance remodeling and construction of 
additional training space, workshops and laboratories.  To ensure the maximization of 
environmental benefits as well as avoidance, minimization or mitigation of any 
potentially negative environmental impact, an Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF) has been prepared to provide guidance to project schools for the school building 
program and its environmental management issues. A series of mitigation measures have 
been planned accordingly to reduce the impacts to acceptable levels during construction 
and operation phase.  
 
Construction phase: Project components would likely have a variety of short-term 
impacts during construction, such as noise, dust, traffic, solid wastes, wastewater etc. 
These concerns are relatively minor, and measures to reduce them to acceptable levels, as 
well as to supervise their effective implementation, have been discussed and detailed in 
the EMF.  
 
Operations phase: the main environmental issue is the management of solid waste. 
Appropriate mitigation measures are established and detailed in the EMF.  
 
The
 Bank will supervise the project’s environmental aspects once a year. The progress 
reports from the PMO will include a section/chapter on the environmental management, 
along with any revision proposed to the EMF to achieve its objectives.  
 
To ensure above measures/plans are implemented efficiently; the EMF includes training 
programs for managerial and technical personnel from project proponents and operational 
units, contractors, and construction supervisors. Mandatory environmental training for 
contractors and construction supervisors will be held prior to the commencement of 
construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project will be coordinated by Guangdong Provincial Financial 
Department, which has rich experience with Bank supported projects. At the provincial 
level, PPMO (Department of labor and social security of Guangdong Province) and PIUs 
(or subproject PMOs) will take the responsibility for environmental management and 
compliance with required environmental standards during construction and operation 
phases. This arrangement helps assure the proper preparation and implementation of 
safeguard policies.  
Page  4
In order to maximize environmental benefits and to avoid, minimize and mitigate 
potential short-term adverse environmental impacts, Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) was prepared for each subcomponent. The EMF includes policy 
introduction; environmental management mechanism; supervision mechanism and 
institutional arrangements; mitigation measures; environmental monitoring and reporting 
system; and capacity building measures etc.  
 
The environmental staffs were assigned for PPMO and PIUs to coordinate, inspect, 
supervise and report the environmental management issue. Budget will be allocated for 
environmental management including project environmental management, training, 
monitoring and report. The three PIUs are new to Bank-supported project procedures and 
will need guidance during the implementation of the project. Mandatory environmental 
training programs will be provided for managerial and technical personnel from PPMO, 
PIUs, contractors, and construction supervisors on safeguards policies and environmental 
management prior to construction work to ensure the proposed project fully compliance 
with the safeguards requirements, and the mitigation measures are implemented 
efficiently.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultations have been conducted for each project school. All the concerns raised 
in public consultation were addressed and passed on to the project management offices 
for incorporation into the next step project design and implementation. As a result, it was 
found the project has strong public support.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
the EMF is disclosed to the public through the website of the Bank Beijing Office, PPMO 
and PIUs in Chinese and Infoshop of the Bank Headquarters in Washington in English.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dingyong Hou 
09/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
09/12/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
09/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
09/16/2008 
Comments:   
