Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4072 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/18/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P112359 
Project Name: NanGuang Railway Project 
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5,685.00
5,685.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Project is to provide additional transport capacity and reduce transport time 
between the relatively poor provinces of Guangxi and Yunnan in southwest China and the ports 
and economic growth centers in the Pearl River delta region.  The project addresses the growing 
demand for rail passenger and freight services by providing a much shorter and quicker transport 
link between these provinces. The assessment of the achievement of the Project development 
objective will be carried out through the measurement of outcome indicators comprised of the 
number of trains run and respective travel time.  
 
With the building of this line, the distance between Nanning and Guangzhou would be reduced 
by about 250 km as compared to the existing rail route via Lizhan-Guangmao railways. The 
travel time of passenger trains would be reduced from the current 14 hours to 3.2 hours. With the 
rebuilding and upgrading of the NanKun Railway between Nanning and Kunming, fast corridors 
between the provincial capital cities of Yunnan, Guangxi, Guangdong and Fujian would be 
established. The new line will also provide a high-quality logistics corridor between Nanning and 
the Pearl Delta ports.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project is a part of a railway line between Nanning in Guangxi province and Guanzhou in 
Guangdong province. The project consists of a new double track electrified railway line of about 
570 km between New Litang and Sanyanqiao, 16 km short of Guangzhou. (NanGuang line).The 
line consists of three parts: (a) Western section, Nanning Station to New Litang Station (92 km), 
(b) Central section, New Litang Station to New Zhaoqing Station (400 km), and (c) Eastern 
section, New Zhaoqing Station to Sanyanqiao Station (61 km). The project will construct the 
center section and two of the four tracks in the Eastern section (462 km).  On the eastern end its 
tracks will run parallel with those of the proposed GuiGuang Railway line, within the same right-
of-way, between New Zhaoqing and Sanyanqiao stations. The Western section will also have 
four tracks; two of these would be constructed as part of another on-going project from Nanning 
to Guilin and two tracks would be constructed as an extension of the project line to Nanning.  
 
The maximum operating speed of trains on the new line will be 200 km/h for passenger and 120 
km/hr for freight trains.  It is expected that the travel time for passengers between Nanning and 
Guangzhou will be reduced from the present 14 hours (express) to a little over 3.5 hours.  This 
line will provide additional capacity for freight trains also to handle growing demand.  
 
The proposed alignment of the  NanGuang line is relatively direct between New Litang (located 
on the proposed LiuNan Passenger Dedicated Line) and  Sanyanqiao via New Zhaoqing (located 
on the proposed GuiGuang Railway line) and touches major urban centers such as Litang, 
Guigang, Wuzhou, Zhaoqing and Foshan. The line traverses through lightly-populated country, 
passing through a limited number of major centers en- route.  The proposed alignment traverses 
through a variety of terrains including flat alluvial terraces and eroded basins and hilly/river 
valley basins. The line will have 199 bridges and viaducts (approximate length 152 km, 33%), 
and 106 tunnels (approximate length 94 km, 20%). Thus, about 53% of the new construction will 
be on bridges and through tunnels.  
 
The planned construction period is about 4 years. It is planned to commence construction of this 
line in early 2009 and commission the line in 2013.  The project cost (2005 prices) including the 
cost of locomotives and working capital is estimated at RMB 29.5 billion (US$ 4.3 billion).  
Though yet to be decided, the Bank loan will most likely finance goods and equipment possibly 
consisting of signaling, electrification, bridge beams, and/or concrete sleepers and will most 
likely not finance civil works or rolling stock.  This is similar to the last two China Railways 
projects financed by the Bank. Once the procurement list is agreed, the appropriate disbursement 
profile will be determined.  As has been the standard procedure for railway projects in China, the 
Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies will apply to the entire project and the Bank 
will perform due diligence on the technical content.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project rail line is between Nanning in Guangxi Province and Guangzhou in Guangdong 
Province, China.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This project will be the 13th Bank financed project for Ministry of Railway in China.  The 
continuous cooperation between the Bank and MOR has been very satisfactory.  Previous 
experience indicates strong commitment from MOR on the Bank's safeguards policies and a 
Page  3
good record on implementation.  MOR has developed good capacity to implement, supervise and 
monitor both the environmental management plan and the resettlement action plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (IEGSE) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is a Category A project due to its scale of potential environmental and 
social impact and the sensitivity of the project areas.  Full EIA and EMP will be prepared 
according to OP4.01.  A single EIA and EMP reports are being prepared for the entire project 
The major environmental issues envisage include:  
 
Analysis of alternative alignments:  Given the presence of a number of ecologically 
sensitive areas and highly developed urban areas along the project corridor, analysis of 
alternatives for the selection of the final alignment is the most important environmental and 
social impact mitigation tool for this project.  Several alternative alignments are being 
considered. The final choice of alignment is to be based on multiple criteria that will include (i) 
compatibility with existing urban development plans and minimization of land acquisition and 
resettlement; (ii) minimum environmental degradation in or near sensitive ecosystem such as 
nature reserves, forest parks and areas of poor geology and/or potential natural hazards; and (iii) 
connectivity of potential areas of economic development.  
 
Ecological impacts:  The project runs along a well developed corridor, parallel to a major 
river.  The area has a dense road network and is crossed by many electrical transmission 
corridors.  Urban areas and agricultural areas are prevalent throughout the entire corridor.  As 
such, the area of the project presents moderate to low sensitivity from an ecological perspective.  
The design has dealt adequately with crossing of some protected areas (mainly forest parks).  
Most areas were either avoided or will be crossed by tunnel or tunnel-bridge-tunnel systems.  
The alignment does not traverse any karstic ecosystems.  A limited karstic erosion plain will be 
crossed towards the end of the line, with little significant ecological value and absence of caves. 
Aesthetic and scenic impacts will be analyzed in the EIA and mitigated appropriately.  
 
Access roads:  The area has a good road network, so the potential need for new access roads 
will be limited.  However, construction of new access roads may cause adverse impacts if not 
well managed.  Special emphasis is being placed on proper design and specifications for the 
construction of such roads to ensure that they are properly constructed, maintained and operated 
with minimum environmental impacts after mitigation.  The existing rural network will be used 
to the maximum extent to access tunnel portals, bridges and other key infrastructure.  Opening of 
any new access roads and tunnel shafts will be subject to restrictions (no new access roads and 
tunnel shafts in or through protected areas for instance) and will be required to follow strict 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
specifications and review / approval procedures to be developed in EMP.  
 
Waste management:  The railway line will include around 106 tunnels (approximate length 
93.68km, or 20.1% of the total length).  8 tunnels will be over 3 km long and the longest tunnel 
will be about 12.3 km in length.  Given the large percentage of tunnels on the line, and the 
reduced need for embankments, proper handling of large amounts of excess excavation materials 
will be an important issue for the EIA, especially considering the scarce number of places 
available for spoil disposal.  The EA consultant, in consultation with local governments, has 
identified about 106 disposal sites that meet the environmental criteria at this stage (no disposal 
inside protected or scenic areas, in agricultural lands, unstable areas, or upstream of water supply 
intakes). Meanwhile, EIA teams have also consulted with local governments/communities to 
identify opportunities to reuse such spoil materials to the extent possible.  In addition, a 
framework that specifies clear criteria and approval procedures will be developed in the EMP for 
additional spoil sites or changes of site locations during construction stage.  
 
Other issues such as stability and erosion, rural connectivity, noise, vibration, safety and 
occupational health issues, camp and construction management, will also be addressed in EIA as 
following standard environmental practices for design and construction. The EIA and EMP will 
also address potential impact to cultural resource, scenic impacts, cumulative impact and social 
impacts (a summary of resettlement and ethnic minority impacts). Environmental supervision of 
construction and environmental monitoring will also be included in the EMP.  In EIA, the EMF 
as environmental management framework will be developed to address impact associated with 
temporary works that are left to the contract to design.  
 
Disclosure and public consultation: In August 2008, information disclosure, including 
information release and simplified EIA report, have been conducted through China Environment 
News and public accessible website. Meanwhile, onsite consultation with local 
governments/authorities, communities and residents were also conducted through questionnaire, 
meeting, online forum, etc.  
 
Linkage: No linkage issues have been identified.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This policy is triggered.  During EA preparation, a total of 6 nature reserves, forest parks and 
scenic areas have been identified in the vicinity of the project corridor.  Careful alignment 
selection has avoided two of them.  However, the alignment will go through two county-level 
forest parks, one-city level nature reserve, and will pass by the outskirts of the national-level 
Xinghu Scenic Area.  A tunnel system will be adopted for these sections to minimize loss of 
vegetation and environmental impacts, thus effectively minimizing the project footprint in these 
areas.  Strict construction management will be enforced during construction, e.g. no new access 
roads, no tunnel shafts, no disposal sites, no construction camps, minimum clearing, restoration 
of affected areas, etc.  The alignment doesn’t traverse any karstic ecosystem.  A limited karstic 
erosion plain willbe crossed towards the end of the line, with significant ecological value and 
absence of caves.  Overall, no significant/irreversible degradation of natural habitats is to be 
expected.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
This policy is not triggered.  The project is unlikely to cause significant conversion or 
degradation of natural habitats. Although a few hundreds hectares of forestland will be occupied 
by project facilities, the project will not lead to loss of protected, old, or valuable plants under 
Chinese laws.  The loss of vegetation will be common plants species and farmland crops; no 
forests of scale will be cleared.  This determination is also in agreement with China’s laws and 
practice.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The will be no use of herbicides in the right-of-way along the railway. The project will not 
involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on pest management practice. This policy is 
not triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Initial cultural property survey by local cultural institutes identified a site of ancient tombs 
along the project corridor in Guigang city.  Field surveys showed the project corridor of the 
section is highly urbanized and no significantly visible tombs were found.  Nonetheless, the 
alignment is being fine-tuned to reduce the possibility of potential impacts on the tombs.  It is 
noted that the area is till officially designated as a Cultural Property Protection Area, and the 
alignment passes through the edge of it.  Therefore, the policy is triggered.  As a result, close 
consultation with Guigang Cultural Property Authority was conducted, and an official approval 
has been issued by the Authority. According to the approval, a detailed field archeological 
survey is required to be conducted prior to construction of this section. Chance-find procedures 
will be included in the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Guangxi is a Zhuang Ethnic Minority Autonomous Region, with several other ethnic 
minorities present in the region.  The social assessment is being completed to carry out a 
screening for the presence of ethnic minority groups in the project impact zones, assess whether 
they, if identified, meet the World Bank policy definition of indigenous people, and whether an 
ethnic minority people’s development plan needs to be prepare.  The World Bank will review the 
recommendations of the social assessment and make a decision as to the following steps in 
compliance with this policy.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will have significant resettlement impacts.  The MOR has entrusted the 
Southwest Communication University (SWCU) to lead resettlement planning, together with the 
engineering design institute.  
 
The planners have started the resettlement planning process and, on the basis of the 
following planning exercises,  
 
-
Significant efforts in engineering design, in coordination with resettlement planning, to 
reduce resettlement impacts.  Key measure is to adopt more bridges and tunnels whose total 
length takes more than 50 percent of the total railway;  
 
-
On the basis of the project feasibility study and primary engineering design, the planning 
team has carried out a socioeconomic survey that covered over 2,200 households (28% of those 
losing houses and 31% of those losing land).  
-
Full inventory survey of physical impacts and census survey of the affected population 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
within the impact zones as defined according to the preliminary engineering design and to be 
updated with detailed technical design;  
 
-
Initial rounds of consultations with the affected people, disseminating project information, 
getting feedback from the communities over their preferences and recommendations for 
resettlement planning and feedback from local governments on the approach and practice on 
resettlement.  
 
-
Review and development of the resettlement policies for the project, following local laws, 
regulations and the Bank resettlement policy and based on consultation with all the key 
stakeholders, including compensation rates and livelihood restoration approach.  
 
A
draft resettlement action plan has been prepared.  The project will affect 170 villages in 
43 townships of 15 counties in Guangxi Autonomy Region and Guangdong Province. Permanent 
land acquisition is estimated at 27,777 mu and temporary leasing 12,780 mu. The project will 
require the relocation of 6,931 people in 2,029 households, and affect 189 enterprises, 23 shops 
and 7 schools.  
 
The RAP has adopted a two-phased planning approach.  Based on general experiences in 
China in linear infrastructure development and initial consultations with the affected 
communities and local governments, the RAP has developed a strategy and a generic package of 
measures for livelihood restoration and compensation for communal village land.  This includes 
land allocation, land redistribution, cash compensation, non-farm employment, social security 
program and vocation training etc.  The second phase of planning is the detailed village planning 
process that will develop specific implementation actions and details for livelihood restoration in 
each and every individual village.  The village councils will also discuss and agree with the 
relocating village households on the new house plots.    Detailed implementation measures will 
also discussed and developed by the project resettlement office and relevant agencies over the 
relocation of the urban households, the restoration and reconstruction of affected infrastructure, 
enterprises and schools.  This is the responsibility of the village committees as decreed under the 
Village Organization Law.  Local governments and project agencies will advise and monitor the 
process to make sure it complies with relevant laws and the RAP.  
 
The RAP contains all essential elements, including detailed impact data, policy and legal 
framework, resettlement and rehabilitation approach and program, cost and budget, 
implementation arrangements, organization and monitoring arrangements. The team has 
reviewed the draft RAP and has provided technical comments for its improvement.  They are 
required to take these into consideration when revising the RAP.  It is expected that a revised 
RAP will be available for Bank to review mid-March 2009.  
 
A
resettlement policy framework has been prepared and attached to the draft RAP for 
construction related resettlement impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  7
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/16/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
03/10/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
03/16/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
