                                                                                       48096


                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                    Report No.:



Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 02/03/2009

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                                  Project ID: Pll1325
Project Name: Dashiqiao Central Heating Supply Project
Task Team Leader: Gailius J. Draugelis
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 31, 2009         Estimated Date of ERPA Signing:
                                                                         August 30, 2009
Managing Unit: EASCS                            Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services
Theme: Climate Change, Municipal Finance
Financing amounts by source:
Carbon Financing: $5.26 million
Total: $5.26 million
Environmental Category: B



B. Project Objectives

The proposed development objectives ofthe Carbon Offset Project are:
    ·  To improve the energy and environmental efficiency of heating services in the city of
       Dashiqiao.
    ·  Reduce global emissions ofcarbon dioxide.

The objectives of this World Bank Carbon Offset Project are therefore consistent with the
developmental and poverty reduction objectives of the Country Partnership Strategy, dated May
23,2006.

C. Project Description

The project consists of the sale of the first 400,000 emission reductions (ERs) resulting from the
use of a new centralized heating system that will supply existing and new heating areas currently
supplied by small, inefficient and polluting hot water boilers, to the World Bank-managed
Spanish Carbon Fund.      This project will be implemented by the Yingkou Dashiqiao Urban
Construction and Investment Company (YDUCIC) and then after construction, it will hand over
operation and maintenance to an existing operator under a lease agreement. Carbon revenues
will provide an additional revenue stream, which will provide additional fmancial comfort to
YDUCIC and its lenders.

The project will produce greenhouse gas reductions through the more efficient use of coal for
district heating. Efficiency in coal use will be increased by replacing use of 64 boiler plants
operating with 76 small boilers located throughout the city of Dashiqiao with a more efficient
central heating system consisting of (a) boiler plant, one 4 x 64 MWth in the city (b) 35 km of
primary network; (c) 31 group substations; (d) heat meters; and (f) ancillary and control
equipment (SCADA), and covering existing and new heating areas.

This carbon offset project falls under the large-scale clean development mechanism (CDM)
project activity category and applies the newly approved methodology AM0058, which is
applicable to project activities that introduce a new primary district heating system to supply heat
to residential and commercial consumers, where the heat comes predominantly from a
cogeneration plant (CHP) and can also involve introduction of new modern heat only boilers to
supplement heat from CHP or where the project boundary includes only existing buildings.

Monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken through the specific plan for Verification of
Emissions Reductions that will be developed in the clean development mechanism (CDM)
Project Design Document. The Yingkou Dashiqiao Urban Construction and Investment
Company will be accountable for overall reporting on implementation progress, preparation of
financial monitoring reports, and preparation ofaudited project accounts.

D. Project location (if known)

The project activities would be implemented in selected areas of the city of Dashiqiao, Yingkou
Municipality, Liaoning Province. Dashiqiao has an urban popUlation of 266,360. The project
activities will replace use of a total of 64 boiler plants and 76 small boilers in the project area,
representing nearly 80% ofthe total heating area ofthe city.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

As the development and implementation of the CF Operation is within the Dashiqiao Central
Heating Supply Subproject under the                approved IBRD Liaoning Third Medium Cities
Infrastructure Project (LMC3) (P099224)1, that has previously been appraised by the Bank and is
now under supervision, the environmental and social due diligence carried out for the proposed
project, including the monitoring and supervision ofthe Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), satisfactorily addresses all safeguards issues and no
new issues are raised by this Operation.

The Yingkou Dashiqiao Urban Construction and Investment Company (YDUCIC) is the
implementing agent and is responsible for management of the IBRD loan to the Yingkou
Dashiqiao Central Heating Supply Subproject and the proposed Carbon Offset Project.



1Liaoning Third Medium Cities Infrastructure Project (P099224). The CF Operation is within the scope of
Component 1: Central Heating Infrastructure, which covers six cities and includes the construction ofnew and
rehabilitated central heating systems.

The YOUCIC will also be responsible for operation and maintenance of all COM related tasks to
ensure that CERs are monitored and accounted for and for compliance with all environmental
and social safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

    Ms. Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 

    Mr. Chaogang Wang (EASSO) 


    II.       SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                                             Yes             No            TBD
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                                   [X]             [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                            [ ]            [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                [ ]            [X]
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                 [ ]            [X]
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                   [X]             [ ]
Indigenous Peoples CQPlBP 4.10)                                                          [ ]            [X]
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                     [ ]            [X]
Safety ofDams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                               [ ]            (X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)"                                                 ( ]            [X]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                         ( ]            [X]
Piloting the Use ofBorrower Systems to Address Environmental
                                                                                         [ ]            [X]
and Social Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OPIBP 4.00)


Environmental Category: B

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

The development and implementation of the Carbon Offset project involves no changes
whatsoever in the LMC3 Project objectives, components, implementing agencies or
implementation schedule. Consequently it involves no Environmental and Social safeguards
issues beyond those that have already been identified in the LMC3 Project ISOS.

The LMC3 Project was assigned a Category B, therefore this proposed Carbon Offset project is
assigned a Category·B as well; however, no additional safeguard instruments are required other
than those that have been prepared under the LMC3 Project.

Safeguard issues that have been triggered in the LMC3 Project are:

Environment. In accordance with World Bank's OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment policy, the
project was assigned "Category B" reflecting the limited extent and duration of any adverse
environmental impacts associated with the construction and operation phases in each of the sub
projects. Chinese language Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared with full
English translations. For all sub-projects at least one public consultation was conducted. An

·By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination ofthe parties' claims on the
disputed areas

English language Environmental Assessment Comprehensive Summary was prepared and a draft
submitted to the Infoshop on September 19, 2007.               The Environmental Assessment
Comprehensive Summary for the entire LMC3 Project and Environmental Management Plan for
the Dashiqiao subproject will be re-disclosed to the Infoshop as part of the proposed Carbon
Offset Project.

Involuntary Resettlement and Land Acquisition. As part of the safeguard requirements for the
LMC3 Project, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) were prepared for the different components in
accordance with local laws and regulations and the World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement. Among eleven subprojects, five of them involve resettlement and the impacts are
limited. For the Dashiqiao subproject about 90.26 mu of collective land was acquired for this
project and 44 mu of land will be temporarily used during construction, affecting 327 project
affected persons. To address any resettlement impacts caused by project design changes during
implementation, a resettlement policy framework is in place. A Summary RAP and RFP
covering all relevant subprojects was prepared in English and disclosed through the Bank's
InfoShop as part of the LMC3 Project. The Summary RAP and RPF will be re-disclosed to the
Infoshop as part ofthe proposed Carbon Offset Project.

IV. APPROVALS

                                                                                  -
           d submitted by:
          m Leader:
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Panneer Selvam                   __ \.
   Comments:
  Sector Manager:                   Mr. Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez~
   Comments:                                                    ---

