Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3296 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/07/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P100968 
Project Name: Shanxi Coal Bed Methane Development and Utilization Project 
Task Team Leader: Jianping Zhao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Oil and gas (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
88.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
88.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to further promote the development and utilization of 
CBM/CMM, by enhancing the policy framework and institutional capacity for CBM/CMM 
development and utilization, and by exploring and producing coal bed methane and converting to 
LNG for thermal use by residential households, industrial and commercial establishments to 
replace coal as a fuel.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would consist of the following four components: (i) a technical assistance 
component to assist the Shanxi government in developing and implementing policy and 
institutional changes, optimizing CMM/CBM development and utilization plan and 
strengthening institutional capacity so as to foster a sustainable CBM/CMM industry in Shanxi 
province; (ii) the exploration and development of 350 vertical production wells to produce coal 
bed methane with a CBM production capacity of 250-300 million Nm3; (iii)  the construction of 
a
LNG plant consisting of four modular, transportable liquefaction plants with individual 
production capacities of 50,000 ton/year for an ultimate LNG capacity of 200,000 ton/year; (iv) 
Page  2
the construction of gas gathering and transportation pipeline to transmit the CBM form the gas 
wells to the LNG plant.  
 
The implementing agency of the physical component is Shanxi Energy Industrial Group 
Corporation (SEIG).  SEIG is a large state-owned enterprise authorized by the Shanxi Provincial 
Government to develop coal bed methane and other energy resources in Shanxi.  It has a large 
operation in developing coal mines, sales of coal, methane development, processing and 
utilization, and other downstream coal businesses.  SEIG will establish an independent 
subsidiary for the construction and operation of the gas production and liquefaction project. The 
implementing agency of the technical assistance component is the Shanxi provincial government. 
The organization for the proposed technical assistance component is yet to be determined.  
 
The total project cost is estimated at $197 million including the foreign exchange cost of $100 
million and local currency cost of $97 million. A Bank loan of $100 million is proposed to 
finance the direct foreign exchange cost and the remainder of the cost will be provided by an 
equity contribution of $40 million from project sponsors and a domestic loan of $57 million from 
local commercial banks.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project is located within the administrative jurisdiction of Jincheng municipality, 
in the south-western part of Shanxi province. It is about 500 km from Taiyuan, capital of Shanxi 
province, and 230 km from Zhengzhou, capital of Henan province. The Project spans across a 
total area of about 300 km2. The project area is mainly hilly dry-land.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Shanxi provincial government will be the borrower of the Bank’s loan proceeds. A special 
purpose project company, Shanxi Energy Coalbed Methane Investment Holdings Co. Ltd 
(SECBMIH), has been created to be responsible for preparing, financing, constructing and 
operating the proposed project facilities. The project company has equity investment from three 
corporations in Shanxi: Shanxi Energy Industries Group Ltd (51%); Shanxi Coal Import and 
Export Group Corporation (30%) and Shanxi Taihang Anthracite Development Group Co. Ltd 
(19%). Shanxi as a whole appears to have strong capacity to implement the project, and has 
significant experience in implementing other Bank projects.  
 
SECBMIH is responsible for safeguard policies and it has basic capacity to implement the 
safeguard policies. The key staff is from the main shareholder SEIG. SEIG has experience in 
conducting EA for other infrastructure projects such as coal mines, gas development and 
transmission projects. However, its experience of Bank’s safeguards policies is limited although 
EA regulations in China are fairly close to that of the Bank. SEIG also has experience with Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) financed project which has similar safeguard polices with the Bank. 
External environmental and social consultants will be hired to assist SEIG to prepare and 
implement EIA and RAP according to Bank’s policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EAPCO) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Page  3
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Mr Feng Ji (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project will have significant net positive impact on environment by reducing 
CO2 emissions and reduce local pollutants such as particles, SO2 through coal substitution. It 
will not produce any significant environment impacts.The major negative environmental issues 
are possible ground water contamination, noise, dust, waste water and soil erosion during the 
construction and operation phase, which are site specific and can be mitigated with known 
measures and technologies.  An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared and 
implemented to mitigate and manage these issues to acceptable level.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The exploration and production of gas wells and the construction of the LNG plant and 
associated pipeline system will involve no household reallocation is expected. No minority 
people are known to live in the project area.  But the construction of the project facilities will 
involve a permanent land acquisition of 30 ha and temporary land acquisition of 180 ha. The 
affected land is owned by 7 villages with a total population of 5292. A RAP in compliance with 
both the government policy and Bank requirement will be prepared and implemented. The first 
consultation with the affected people will be done in late November 2007 and a second 
consultation is scheduled to be done in mid December 2007.  
 
Linkages Issues: The Bank financed project will uses some of the gas transmission and 
processing facilities constructed/to be constructed by Petro China to handle its CBM and also 
purchase any shortfall of CBM for the LNG plant from Petro China. SECBMIH will coordinate 
closely with Petro China on environmental and resettlement issues for its facilities and conduct 
due diligence review to be sure that related environmental and resettlement are managed 
properly.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/12/2007 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EIA and RAP final versions will be ready by end December 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jianping Zhao 
11/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
11/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
