Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4696 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Original Project ID: P081346 
Original Project Name: LIUZHOU 
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT 
PROJECT 
Country: China 
Project ID: P112626 
Project Name: Liuzhou Environment Management Project Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Victor M. Vergara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (86%);Solid waste management (12%);Sub-national government 
administration (2%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (67%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to improve the water quality of Liujiang River, within the urban 
area boundary of Liuzhou Municipality through investment of the wastewater systems in four 
county towns located upper stream of Liuzhou Municipality as well as institutional development 
and capacity building of the LMWTC.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project design contains nine sub-projects in four counties, two districts, and core urban area 
of Liuzhou Municipality.  The corresponding total project cost is RMB 1.62 billion (US$ 250 
million) and the agreed Bank loan US$ 150 million, with a targeted World Bank financing 
percentage of about 60%.  The proposed project falls into three sub-components, namely: 
Page  2
Component 1: Wastewater; Component 2: Solid Waste; Component 3: Institutional 
Strengthening and Capacity Building.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Liuzhou is located in the Guangxi Autonomous Region, which is one of 12 provinces in the 
Western Region.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is the second Bank urban project for Liuzhou city. At Municipal level, a Project 
Management Office (PMO), comprising of representatives from, inter alia, the Municipal 
Development and Reform Commission, and Liuzhou Sewage Company will take overall 
responsibility for project implementation. Liuzhou PMO is very familiar with the Bank#s 
policies and procedures, and also has strong capacity for the implementation of the project. The 
Liuzhou urban environment project phase I was well implemented.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project includes building of six waste water treatment plants (WWTPs) and 
associated sewer pipelines, a separate component of suburban sewer network, and sludge 
treatment by an existing cement plant. Initial review of project documents and field visit to all 
the project sites and pipeline alignments found no special environmentally sensitive receptors 
except a few village and suburban houses located close to some project sites. Further 
investigation will be undertaken by the EA consultant to clarify the potential impacts.  
 
The project activities are common small scale WWTPs all with capacity ranging between 
10,000 to 40,000tons/day. Based on Liuzhou#s successful experience in implementing Phase-I 
project which has very similar activities but at a larger scale, no significant or unprecedented 
adverse impact are foreseen during construction and operation stage. Major environmental 
impacts are expected relating to operation of WWTPs and construction of sewer pipeline. These 
adverse impacts could be readily minimized by sound project design and standard mitigation 
measures in construction and operation management if followed strictly.  
 
Sludge generated by WWTPs in Liuzhou city will be transported to Yufeng cement plant 
for treatment. Its two rotary kilns that will be used for sludge treatment under the proposed 
project were installed and put into operation in 2006 and 2009 respectively. Field visit and initial 
literature review suggest that the calcination process should be able to destroy major air 
pollutants typical from sludge incineration (SO2, NOx, dioxins and furans) due to high 
temperature (1100-
1400ºC) and alkaline environment inside the kilns. Emissions from the kiln 
currently passes through cyclone separator, spray tower, waste heat recovery to generate power 
for self use, and ele
ctrostatic precipitator before being discharged into atmosphere. It is noted 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
that one of plant#s other two kilns has been used to treat hazardous wastes (mainly waste paints) 
since 2005. The emissions have been in compliance with relevant standard according to on-line 
monitoring and quarterly on-site testing by city Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB). Given 
the amount of fed-in sludge will be no more than 5% of clinker production, environmental 
impacts are anticipated to be predominantly those from normal cement production. Therefore, if 
standard pollution control for cement plant be implemented effectively, adverse impacts caused 
by mixed calcination of small portion sludge can be mitigated to acceptable level. The EA 
consultant will carry out detailed impact assessment for this component.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
According to current data and field observation, no natural habitat or any protected area was 
found in the vicinity of all project sites, given the urban context of the proposed project. The EA 
consultant will conduct further field study and consult with relevant authority. At this stage, this 
policy is considered not applicable.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project will not involve any forest.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not involve any pesticide.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The initial field survey has identified some ancient trees and associated worship temple along 
some of the sewer alignments for WWTPs at Sanjiang County. Even though not assigned by any 
level of government as protected area or cultural property, sacred trees and sites revered by local 
people should be protected by the proposed project according to OP4.11. The EA consultant will 
conduct a systematic survey for all project sites through field investigation, data collection and 
consultation with relevant authorities and local public. The EA report will also include a chance-
find procedure in case cultural relics are uncovered during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Within the project sites, the Sanjiang subcomponent and Rongshui subcomponent will be 
constructed in the Sanjiang Dong Ethnic Minority Autonomous County and Rongshui Miao 
Ethnic Minority Autonomous County which have large ethnic minority population. However, the 
Bank-financed projects will be located in the urban parts of the county, not in the remote rural 
areas where ethnic minority often collectively attached on. During the project identification, the 
Social Specialist of the TT visited all project sites and found although there are ethnic minority 
populations in the project areas, they are not live collectively as communities in the project areas, 
and instead, in the urban area of the counties, different ethnic minority populations and Han 
populations live together.  
 
A
Social Assessment will be conducted to double check the ethnic minority group#s 
presence during project preparation. The SA will also include a Poverty Impact Assessment and 
Affordability and Willingness Study.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition and structure demolition will be unavoidable for the Component 1 project 
construction.  A  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will need to be prepared for each 
subcomponent according to the policy.  It is agreed by the PMO to prepare a Consolidated 
Resettlement Action Plan for the entire project and translate into English and each subcomponent 
will also prepare their individual RAP in Chinese.  
Guangtan subcomponent will be constructed to support the dev
elopment of the eastern 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Liuzhou new area, and the development is on-going. The service area of the subcomponent, 
according to the master plan, will cover about 12 km2. Some land had already being acquired 
and some will be acquired in the future. To avoid potential social risk, the task team suggested 
the client to conduct a due diligence review on the land acquisition practices in the area to 
evaluate 1) whether the land acquisition practice in line with domestic regulations; 2) are there 
any legacy issues remain; 3) are there any evidence to show the affected people's livelihood 
being worsen off due to the land acquisition; and 4) future land acquisition plan.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not involve any dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not involve any international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known area on territorial dispute as defined under the 
policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/04/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/04/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of SA and EA will start in August 2009 and should be completed by January 
2010.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Victor M. Vergara 
11/04/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/04/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
09/10/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
