Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/25/2008 
Report No.:  AC3535
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P090335 
Project Name:  China:  GEF-World Bank Urban Transport Partnership Program Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Regulation and competition policy (S);Municipal 
governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
21.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project development objective:  Help achieve a paradigm shift in China’s urban transport 
and land-use policies and investments toward the promotion of public and non-motorized 
transport, modes that are less energy intensive and polluting than those fostered by 
current urban land-use planning and transport systems in China.  
 
Global Environment Objective:  Slow the forecast growth of urban transport GHG 
emissions in China’s cities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project includes 3 components.  
 
Component 1: Strategy Development and Capacity Building at the National Level 
(Total GEF co-financing: USD7.00 million)  
 
Page  2
Component 1 will support the development of financial mechanisms, capacity building 
initiatives, and dissemination mechanisms to effectively bridge the gap between the 
national government’s interests in sustainable urban transport and the local decision-
making environment at the municipal government level. The activities in this component 
will help address the key institutional barriers to effective implementation of sustainable 
urban transport measures by supporting (i) the identification and adoption of financial 
and other mechanisms for the national government to influence urban transport 
investment decisions at the local level, providing incentives to favor sustainable transport 
solutions; (ii) the development of institutional knowledge products, such as databases, 
manuals, planning guidelines and regulations to help local governments effectively 
implement sustainable transport solutions; (iii) dissemination activities that increase the 
awareness of sustainable urban transport among local decision-makers, the public and 
concerned professionals; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation activities that will underlie a 
larger replication effort.  It comprises 1A - Development of a National Urban Transport 
Strategy; 1B - Training and Capacity Building Efforts at the National Level; 1C - 
Dissemination and Awareness-Raising Activities; and   1D - Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 
Component 2: Pilot Demonstration Projects in 14 Cities and 1 Province (Total GEF co-
financing: USD13.00 million)  
 
Component 2 catalyzes a series of high profile demonstration projects that will create 
models of sustainable transport solutions for other Chinese cities to replicate.  
Demonstration projects in 14 cities and 1 province have been selected through an 
extensive competitive process initiated and driven by the national government.  The GEF 
component of the financing would cover technical assistance related to the pilot projects.  
The primary initiatives proposed for financing in the demonstration cities include 
support:  
 
1. 
Development of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) systems in Chongqing, Dongguan 
(Guangdong), Luoyang, Zhengzhou (both Henan), Jinan, Weihai (both Shandong), and 
Urumqi (Xinjiang);  
 
2.
Development of strategic plans to provide priority to public transport, leading to 
enhanced public transport service, integrated with non –motorized modes in Changzhi, 
Linfen (both Shanxi), Jiaozuo (Henan), Xianyang (Shaanxi), Nanchang (Jiangxi), and the 
cities of Benxi, Fushun, Jinzhou, Liaoyang, and Panjin in Liaoning;  
 
3.
Development of a short-term low cost action plan to increase ridership on 
Chongqing’s urban rail line that has been under operation since 2005.  
 
4.
Development of demand management measures in Guangzhou (Guangdong), 
Jinan (Shandong) and Xian (Shaanxi); and  
 
5.
Transit-oriented development in the Binjiang and Chaoyang districts of Nanchang 
in Jiangxi and between the second and third ring roads in Xian (Shaanxi).  
 
Component 3: Project Management (Total GEF co-financing: USD1.00 million)  
 
This component will support the PMO at the national level to implement the national 
component as well as support and supervise the pilot cities component.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The National Policy task will consist primarily of consultancy and equipment contracts.  
No works contracts are anticipated.  For the Pilot City Projects, 14 cities (selected as part 
of a competitive process), and the province of Liaoning have been selected as pilots.  The 
cities are:  Xian, Guangzhou, Zhengzhou, Chongqing, Nanchang, Jinan, Urumqi, 
Luoyang, Jiaozuo, Dongguan, Weihai, Changzhi, Linfen, Xianyang.  World Bank loans 
will provide co-financing in Xian (under preparation) and Liaoning (under 
implementation).  
 
No Safeguard analysis was required.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will only support technical assistance activities related to sustainable urban 
transport, and hence is classified as Category C project according to OP4.01. No potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impact is expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As a Category C project, no further safeguards action is required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Since the project co-finances only technical assistance and no works will be co-financed 
with GEF funds, none of the Safeguard policies are triggered.  That said, all the terms-of-
reference for the technical consultancies of both components will incorporate  
 
•
State of the practice considerations for alternatives analysis;  
 
•
Appropriate reviews of all environmental and social considerations.  
 
•
Public consultation processes to ensure that priorities will be identified and 
projects will be designed getting input from the citizens expected to be the ultimate 
beneficiaries.  
 
Furthermore, if the GEF is financing the development of pre-investment documents 
such as detailed designs, the Bank team will conduct a due diligence of the 
Environmental Assessment, (as appropriate) Resettlement-or other Safeguard related 
documents to ensure they are consistent with the Bank’s Safeguards policies.  Any 
investments related to these works that will be financed by the Bank (as is likely to be the 
case in the proposed Xian urban transport project and the Liaoning Medium Cities 
Infrastructure Project) will be subject to a separate Bank Safeguard review as is the norm.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
03/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
03/20/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
03/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/24/2008 
Comments:  This being a transferred category 'C' project, ISDS doesn't require my review/clearance. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
Page  6
