Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/06/2009 
Report No.:  AC4009
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P101829 
Project Name:  CN Xining Flood and Watershed Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ximing Zhang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (70%);Irrigation and drainage (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
88.00
88.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective (PDO) of the project is to improve the protection of property 
and safety of people from flood events and bring about sustainable utilization of land and 
water resources within Xining Municipality. The PDO is to be achieved through the 
provision of (a) a greater level of flood protection and enhanced flood management; (b) 
improved wastewater collection; (c) improved soil and water conservation of catchments; 
and (d) institutional strengthening and capacity building in Xining Municipality.   
 
3. Project Description 
The PDO would be delivered through: (a) investment in flood control works that would 
improve the level of flood protection in selected areas of Xining Municipality; (b) 
investment in a comprehensive flood forecasting and warning system; (c) the collection 
of about 33 million cubic meters of wastewater and storm water drainage from selected 
locations within the project area, to be delivered to existing or proposed and leading this 
to wastewater treatment facilities; (d) sustainable watershed development in selected 
watersheds, and (e) enhanced institutional capacity building at City and County levels, as 
well as the establishment of new community-based, participatory management 
institutions. The total investment of the project is estimated to be about US$207.57m, 
Page  2
with financing from IBRD of US$100m and the Municipal Government, including the 
three Country governments within the municipality. The delivery of the PDO would be 
accomplished through the implantation of 6 components.  
 
Component 1: Flood Control and Management (US$105.02million)  
 
This component would include both structural and non-structural activities including 
dikes strengthening, access roads, cross dike structures, and water level controls 
structures, an integrated flood warning system and riverbank landscaping works. This 
component would invest in three sub-components for flood control works that would 
improve the level of flood protection in selected areas of Xining Municipality; and in a 
comprehensive flood warning system.  
 
•
Sub-Component 1.1 Dike Strengthening, River and Waterway Improvement 
(US$77.13 million)  
 
This sub-component would fund the strengthening of about 53.76km of main rivers and 
35 km of minor tributary water and drainage courses within the Municipality. The main 
rivers to be strengthened include Huangshui River Truck in Xining Downtown area and 
Huangyuan County, Nanchuang River in Downtown area, Beichuan River in Downtown 
area and Datong County, and Dongxia River in Huangyuan County. The minor tributary 
water and drainage courses to be strengthened include 28 key gullies in remote districts 
of Xining Downtown administrative areas, Datong, Huangyuan and Huangzhong 
Counties.  
 
•
Sub-Component 1.2 Flood Warning System (US$2.97 million)  
 
This sub-component would fund the development of flood forecasting, flood warning 
and emergency preparedness for the Xining Municipality, including strengthening the 
capability of the Xining Municipal Flood Control and Drought Relief Organization 
(FC&DRO).  
 
•
Sub-Component 1.3 Landscaping Recreation Areas (US$24.92 million)  
 
Conjunction with the dike strengthening works, this sub-component also includes river 
bank landscaping works. Three landscaping recreation areas would be constructed 
consisting of Xichuan landscaping recreation area along Huangshui River Truck, 
Nanchuan landscaping recreation area along Nanchuan River, and Beichuan landscaping 
recreation area along Beichuan River. Total landscaping area is 2.72km2.  Landscaping 
works are mainly constructed in Xining city areas.  
 
Component 2:  Wastewater Collection (US$ 10.13million)  
 
This component would invest the construction of about 72.5 km of both wastewater and 
urban storm water collection pipeline systems to intercept an estimated 33 million tons of 
wastewater and storm water drainage, which at present flows freely to the river systems 
Page  3
in the Municipality,  to deliver to existing or planed wastewater treatment facilities. This 
component includes Xining Wastewater Collection Main Pipe construction, Xiaoqiao 
Rainstorm Collection Improvement, Rainwater Drainage Truck Improvement in 
Huangzhong County, and Water Supply and Drainage Main Pipe Network Improvement 
in Qiaotou Town of Datong County.  
 
Component 3: Participatory Watershed Management (US$19.49million)  
 
This component would involve three integrated sets of sub-activities to support three 
integrated sets of sub-activities for community based soil and water conservation, land 
use, and socio-economic development in seventeen high priority sub-watersheds within 
the Municipality. These three sets activities would be packaged into an integrated set of 
interventions for each sub-watershed.  
 
This component would first support three pilot sub-watersheds by using the 
participatory measures; then the experiences and lessons learned from these three sub-
watersheds would be applied to the other fourteen sub-watersheds in late project 
implementation stage. Participatory Watershed Management Plans (PWMPs) for each of 
the three pilot watersheds have been prepared and accepted by the Bank. A Participatory 
Watershed Management Manual (PWMM) guiding the preparation and implementation 
of the Plans has also been prepared and accepted by the Bank. The PWMP for each of the 
other fourteen (14) sub-watersheds would be prepared prior to watershed rehabilitation of 
the each sub-watershed during the project implementation.  
 
•
Sub-Component 3.1 Soil and Water Conservation Measures (US$4.26 million)  
 
This sub-component would include predominately physical investments (works and 
goods) aimed at improving soil and water conversation.  Activities to be financed would 
be (i) afforestation by planting a mixture of selected species  of trees and shrubs about 
3053hm2; and (ii) vegetation protection about 6185hm2.  
 
•
Sub-Component 3.2  Engineering Measures (US$9.37 million)  
 
This sub-component would include (i) silt retention and water/erosion check and control 
structures, designed to slow the flow of flood water in the tributary gullies and sub-
watersheds including 7 bigger check dams and 1082 small check dams; and (ii) terracing 
of the slope land 795.5hm2.  
 
•
Sub-Component 3.3 Livelihood Improvements (US$5.87million)  
 
This sub-component would include predominantly physical investments (works and 
goods) that are primarily designed to improve the livelihood of farmers, but at the same 
time, bring about a change in the prevailing unsustainable land use practices. The project 
would provide sub-grants to finance (a) animal husbandry activities, including building 
sheds and procuring animals; (b) renewable energy activities, including constructing bio-
gas facilities and procuring solar stoves; (c) construction of green houses; (d) procuring 
Page  4
grass choppers; and (e) construction of village level infrastructure, including 
improvement of access roads and farm access tracks.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$11.12million)  
 
This component would support construction of a flood warning center, provision of 
office equipment, consulting services, technical study and research, training and study 
tours. The component includes two subcomponents: (i) flood warning management center 
construction; and (ii) consulting services and training.  
 
•
Sub-Component 4.1 Flood Warning Management Center (US$3.51 million)  
 
This sub-component would finance a building for the flood warning center to operate 
the flood warning system.  
 
•
Sub-Component 4.2 Consulting Services and Training (US$7.61 million)  
 
This sub-component would fund provision of office equipment, consulting services, 
technical study and research, training and study tours.  
 
Component 5:  Resettlement and Environmental Management (US$35.00 million)  
 
This component would support carrying out resettlement and rehabilitation of displaced 
persons in connection with the implementation of the Project, and managing the adverse 
environmental impacts resulting from the implementation of the Project through 
establishment and operation of environmental management offices, provision of 
consulting services and carrying out monitoring and supervision. The component 
includes two subcomponents: (i) Resettlement Action Plan Implementation and (ii) 
Environmental Management Plan Implementation.  
 
•
Sub-This sub-component would fund the resettlement action plan activities to be 
developed for the project. A total of 1635.1 mu of collective land is to be requisitioned 
from 39 rural villages that will affect 3549 farmers in 888 households. In addition, 538 
people in 132 households will be relocated for their house demolition (among them, 313 
people in 89 households are affected by loss of both land and houses). In addition, 22 
commercial enterprises will be also partially affected that employ 66 staff.  
 
•
Sub-Component 5.2 Environmental Management Plan Implementation (US$1.14 
million)  
 
This sub-component would fund the implementation of activities for managing the 
adverse environmental impacts resulting from the implementation of the Project through 
establishment and operation of environmental management offices, provision of 
consulting services and carrying out monitoring and supervision.  
 
Component 6: Project Management (US$18.11 million)  
Page  5
This component would support development and operation of a management 
information system and strengthening the capacity of Xining Municipality to carry out 
procurement, construction supervision, quality control, financial management, and 
monitoring and evaluation with Component 5.1 Resettlement Action Plan 
Implementation (US$33.86 million)  
 
respect to the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Xining Municipality, Capital city of Qinghai Province in 
Huangshui River Basin. The Huangshui River is a tributary of the Yellow River.  
 
The Huangshui River Basin is heavily impacted by human activity, consisting 
predominantly of grassland (25%), wasteland and marginal land (41%), and only 10% of 
the watershed is covered by forest or woody vegetation. Sixty-one percent of the 
watershed is considered vulnerable to soil erosion. In the summer months, the watershed 
experiences intense rainfall episodes lasting an average of several hours which causes 
periodic but intense flooding in many areas that is accompanied by soil erosion. As a 
result many areas are dominated by gullies that have grown over time limiting land use 
and threatening infrastructure.  
 
The project areas in Xining Municipality comprise a small portion of the Huangshui 
River Basin. They include 17 gullies in four sub-catchments (Datong County, Xining 
City, Huanzhong County and Huanyuan County) that will be subjected to small 
watershed management interventions; and 28 gully mouths and three urban river systems 
(Xining City, Datong County and Huangyuan County) where dike strengthening and 
flood control infrastructure and sewage and drainage collection pipelines will be 
constructed; and where reforestation and landscaping recreation areas development will 
be undertaken.  
 
The gullies where the project activities are located are erosion prone areas affected by 
the agriculture and grazing activities of the resident population of approximately 40,000 
and largely contain temperate and alpine grasslands with intermittent forests in shady 
slopes.  The gully mouths have similar characteristics and population density.  The 
project areas where the dike strengthening will take place have a high concentration of 
residents in areas near the urban centers, and the waterways themselves have elevated 
concentrations of pollutants and some marginal natural habitats such as grassy areas and 
riparian vegetation and a few species of fish, none of which have significant ecological or 
economic value.  Some important cultural property is found in general proximity to, but 
not within, the project construction impacted areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSO) 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Page  6
Mr Qingtao Xie (EASRE) 
Mr John Morton (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Resettlement:  Resettlement impacts are expected to occur both in urban/peri-urban areas 
where flood control improvements will cause land acquisition, and in rural areas where 
upstream erosion and sedimentation control measures may result in restricted access to 
resources. Flood control works will cause land acquisition totaling 1,635 mu (about 109 
hectares). This includes 1229 mu (about 82 hectares) of agricultural land and 339 mu 
(about 23 ha) of state-owned land. Impacts on farmer household land holdings and 
incomes are generally minor. Housing demolition will total about 30,000 square meters,  
affecting 132 households. In addition, 22 enterprises will be affected by partial loss of 
land or ancillary structures, but none will require relocation. In all, 3,840 persons are to 
be affected by flood control works.  
 
For communities in or around the 17 gullies involved in upstream erosion and 
sedimentation control measures, a participatory planning process has led to preliminary 
identification of benefit programs to offset restrictions of access to resources, primarily 
hillsides used for grazing. In all, 44 villages are to be involved in the participatory 
watershed management process. The erosion and sedimentation control measures will not 
result in any land acquisition or demolition of structures.  
 
Indigenous People:  During project screening, it was determined that ethnic minority 
households would not be affected by flood control measures in urban or peri-urban areas, 
but would be a large proportion of households affected by erosion and sedimentation 
control measures in rural areas. While many communities reflect ethnic intermingling, 
one potentially affected village is primarily Tibetan and another is primarily Hui. 
Because of long periods of interaction in the general vicinity of urban Xining, most of the 
minority households residing in the project are largely acculturated into the broader social 
system, and commonly speak Han Chinese rather than a traditional minority language. A 
Page  7
social assessment was undertaken, including a process of “free, prior and informed 
consultations” with potentially affected communities. The consultation processes, in the 
context of the participatory watershed management component, showed that area 
residents broadly support project objectives. Communities also were directly involved in 
identifying and designing benefit programs intended to offset restrictions on access to 
resources.  
 
Environmental Safeguards Issues:  
 
Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01):  The project is considered a category A 
for Environmental Assessment based on the environmental impacts identified during 
project identification.  In accordance with the policy, an environmental impact 
assessment was developed that included an analysis of regional environment, project area 
baseline environment and anticipated project-related impacts. It also includes an 
environmental management plan that includes mitigation measures for the impacts along 
with arrangements for monitoring, responsibilities, budget and capacity building.  
 
Pest Management (OP4.39): The reforestation and revegetation activities and 
greenhouse operation will result in an increase in the use of pesticides in the project 
activities, although none will be procured as part of the project.  Consistent with the 
provisions of this policy, an integrated pest management plan has been developed for the 
project to reduce impacts and ensure safe handling, storage, and treatment of the 
pesticides.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11): A total of 38 important cultural sites were 
identified to be proximate to the project areas. The boundary of the closest site is some 
800 m from the construction site and the environmental assessment concluded that they 
would not be adversely impacted by project activities and therefore the policy is not 
triggered.  As part of the EA some precautions were incorporated in project EMP to 
ensure the sites closer to construction areas are not affected.  Chance finds procedures 
were also included in the environmental management plan that outlined procedures to be 
taken if important cultural property is discovered during construction.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04):  A review of the critical natural habitats, including protected 
wetlands in Qinghai Province has indicated that all the national and provincial listed 
significant natural habitats are well far away from project affected area with the nearest 
distance of some 20km and that no critical natural habitat will be affected by the project 
activities.  The riverine areas where the dike strengthening and wastewater collection 
pipelines is to be constructed do not support important aquatic habitats or fish species that 
are economically or ecologically significant and do not contain any significant wetlands. 
Some marginal natural habitats, including reforested river banks, shrubs and grassy areas 
exist in these river reaches.  The project design includes infrastructure design measures to 
ensure that impacts to these areas are minimized and also activities to enhance the river 
banks through reforestation and landscapes development.  Reforestation in the 
watersheds will be completed on marginal land that has already been converted by human 
activities. Considering the very minor significance of these habitats and the inherent 
Page  8
measures included in project EMP to preserve them it was considered not necessary to 
trigger the Natural Habitats Policy.  
 
Forests Policy (OP 4.36):  The project will finance large scale plantations as part of the 
efforts to prevent soil erosion in the watershed management areas.  The project will be re-
vegetating the areas using non-invasive species (all local common species) in degraded 
land that is not a critical natural habitat or important ecologically. Strict tree species 
selection procedures are developed in watershed management programs, which will be 
closely supervised and monitored by the project EMO/PMO.  With these basic 
environmental conditions and project design and management measures in place it was 
considered not necessary to trigger the policy.  
 
Environmental Assessment:  
 
The project is considered a category A for Environmental Assessment based on the 
environmental impacts identified during project identification. Potential issues identified 
by the EA that are important to consider in order to ensure adverse impacts are avoided or 
minimized include: the impacts of resettlement activities; impacts of dike strengthening 
on riverine ecology; impacts on river flows and downstream flood control; impacts on 
public health; impacts of general construction nuisances; solid waste and spoil handling 
and disposal; soil erosion control in gully areas during construction; use of pesticides for 
pest management in reforestation and greenhouses; eliminating invasive species during 
reforestation; and minor impacts of community activities. These potential impacts were 
assessed as part of project preparation and were minimized or avoided through project 
design and environmental mitigation measures.  
 
Construction related impacts:  The construction works will have typical impacts 
associated with these acti
vities (noise, dust, worker’s health, management of waste from 
construction sites).  The EA also identified three construction areas that require special 
attention in designing mitigation measures.  These include the larger sized silt traps that 
will be built in Bohang and Hela Gullies which because of their size will require extra 
measures; Construction in Jiaomu gully which is proximate (800m) to the Ta’er Temple 
to help ensure there will be no interference with activities at the temple; and drainage 
works near the Huangzhong Medical school which will require measures to minimize 
interference with their operations.  
 
Impacts of resettlement sites:  No significant environmental impacts are expected due to 
implementation of the resettlement program as all the affected people will be resettled in 
their original villages.  
 
River flow and ecology:   The rivers are not ecologically rich with only a few species of 
fish none of which are important from an ecological or economic perspective.  Changes 
in river flow except during flood events are not anticipated as the project does not involve 
construction of water storage dams or flood detention facilities and the dike strengthening 
will not change river courses or river flow patterns.  
 
Page  9
Water pollution:  The sewage and drainage collection systems constructed under the 
project will transport wastewater that was previously disposed directly into open drainage 
canals flowing into rivers to sewage treatment plants for treatment. For all urban areas, 
plans have been made to ensure the necessary treatment capacity is in place at the time 
the construction is completed. Arrangements have also been made to ensure the sludge 
produced from the treatment plants is properly disposed in landfills.  
 
Forests and land use change: The project will finance reforestation and revegetation in 
watershed areas.  Within these areas the land use change will be significant. The area of 
farmland will remain unchanged, but the area of woodland will increase 10%, the area of 
recovered grassland would increase 18.5% with a corresponding decrease of the erosion 
prone wasteland and marginal areas. These impacts would be largely positive, as the 
project will help reduce erosion and flooding by re-vegetating areas using non-invasive 
species in degraded land that are not critical natural habitats or important ecologically.  
 
Pest management: The reforestation and greenhouse construction and operation will 
result in an increase in the use of pesticides in the project activities, although none will be 
procured as part of the project.  This raises issues common in the region including over-
dependence upon chemical control; control and quarantine techniques in pest 
management; and improper use of pesticides through lack of knowledge. Under the 
project an integrated pest management plan has been developed to improve capacity of 
farmers to apply knowledge to minimize use and to safely and properly apply pesticides 
and also to improve monitoring of government agencies of pests and undertake 
quarantines.  
 
Regional impacts: A regional analysis was undertaken to understand the role and 
impacts of the project in regional development.  It concluded that while the project’s 
environmental issues (water quality, ecology, flood control and river flow) are also issues 
relevant to the region, the scale and scope of the impacts are not significant at the 
regional level.  
 
Linked activities: Linked activities including past dike strengthening, and past and 
ongoing wastewater treatment plants and capacity expansions which are consistent with 
and support the project objectives, leading to no indirect or long term detrimental impacts 
outside of those that have been identified as part of the project.  Those works that are 
completed have approved environmental assessments under national laws. EA 
compliance, operational performance and timing of wastewater treatment capacity 
expansion in relation to the project works will be monitored as part of the project.  
 
Alternatives considered: The following alternatives were considered as part of project 
design in light of their environmental impacts.  
 
a. 
Dam construction:  Dam construction was considered at the very beginning of 
project preparation, but soon was abandoned because the project area does not have 
appropriate geological conditions for building of large dams and significant adverse 
impacts could be caused by these activities.  
Page  10
b. 
River courses:  Originally it was proposed that changing of river courses would be 
implemented, but these were not adopted.  The choice of the river bank protection 
structures was also based on considerations of the advantage of a structure that would 
better support river bank ecology and natural aesthetics.  
 
c. 
Management of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) sludge, removed municipal solid 
waste and construction spoil in dike strengthening activities:  Disposal options were 
considered for these wastes including existing landfills and designated spoil disposal sites 
in light of the environmental impacts.  Considering the alternatives, it was decided that 
the solid waste that has been dumped on the river banks would be disposed in two 
sanitary landfills in the region.  The construction spoils which are environmentally more 
benign would be disposed in seven designated spoil disposal sites.  Both sets of sites have 
adequate capacity to receive this additional waste.  The STP sludge disposal for the 
linked projects considered agricultural application or disposal in the landfills.  The 
current practice of disposal in landfills is considered safe from an environmental 
perspective as the landfill capacity and operation is adequate and with only limited 
advantages from an environmental perspective for use agriculture.  
 
Environmental Management Plan:  All project activity types have been identified as part 
of preparation.  The approach was therefore to undertake an environmental impact 
assessment for all activities and develop design and mitigation measure to prevent or 
minimize the impacts.  The EMP includes the following instruments (i) mitigation 
measures for major environmental issues including general guidelines for construction 
works; (ii) environmental management plan for participatory watershed management 
including a pest management plan; and (iii) supervision of linked projects.  In addition 
for the first year commenced works site specific EMPs were developed. The EMP also 
includes an environmental monitoring program, institutional establishment, capacity 
building and training needs, as well as cost estimates for EMP implementation ($1.14 
million).  
 
Safety of Dams:  
 
The Dam Safety Safeguard Policy (OP 4.37) is triggered by the Project because the 
project sites are located downstream from a number of existing dams, and the failure of 
the upstream dams could cause extensive damage to or failure of the some or all the 
investment under the Project. Totally 10 dams trigger the policy. Among these dams, 7 
are classified as operationally safe, and 3 are classified as needing remedial works.  
 
Other safeguards policies:  
 
Projects on International Waterways:  The project area is located in the upper Yellow 
River Basin.  The drainage area upstream of the project area to the top of the catchment is 
all within China and drains ultimately to the Yellow River and generally east to the 
Yellow Sea.  There are no international rivers in the project area.  
 
Page  11
Physical Cultural Resources:  A total of 38 important cultural sites were identified  
proximate to the project areas.  The border of the closest site is 800 m from the 
construction activities and the environmental assessment concluded they would not be 
impacted by project activities.  For the sites closer to construction areas, basic 
precautions are included in the EMPs to ensure there are no impacts.  Chance finds 
procedures were also included in the environmental management plan that outline 
procedures to be taken if important cultural property is discovered during construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
regional environmental analysis was done for the Huangshui watershed that projected 
trends in the watershed and indicated that at the regional level the long term impacts of 
the project, even if scaled up, would be positive and that in light of ongoing and planned 
development would not confound or cause significant additional direct or indirect 
impacts.  The use of pesticides would in the longer term increase in the project area 
however the increase in use is not significant, relative to the current pesticide use in the 
region.  
 
Linked activities including ongoing and past dike strengthening, and wastewater 
treatment operations are consistent with and support the project objectives and national 
laws, leading to no indirect or long term detrimental impacts outside of those that have 
been identified as part of the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Dam construction:  Dam construction was considered at the very beginning of project 
preparation, but soon was abandoned because the project area does not have appropriate 
geological conditions for building of large dams and significant adverse impacts could be 
caused by these activities.  
 
River courses:  Originally it was proposed that changing of river courses would be 
implemented, but these were not adopted to avoid impacts on the ecology of the area.  
For similar reasons the choice of the river bank protection structures considered the 
advantage of choosing a structure that would better support river bank ecology and 
natural aesthetics.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has hired “Class A” institutions to prepare the EIA and EMPs and the RAP.  
In addition, experienced consultants, familiar with Bank standards of preparation have 
been engaged by the borrower to carry out the Social Assessment.  The borrower is 
committed to setting up the required implementation management arrangements, 
including a Resettlement Office and Environmental Office as part of the Project 
Implementation management organizational structure.  These dedicated management 
organizations would be supplemented by Expert Panels.  
 
Page  12
Environmental Management Plan:  In order to mitigate the environmental impacts, an 
environmental management plan has been developed that includes environmental 
protection measures that will be required to be implemented under the project.The outline 
of the EMP is as follows:  
 
Design measures:  The design of all the components has integrated environmental 
measures that will be required to be implemented by the contractors.  These most 
importantly include the design choices for the dike strengthening (to maintain and 
enhance the riparian and river ecology), gully works (avoiding large dams) and 
reforestation (avoiding invasive species), but also other measures including those 
designed to minimize conversion of productive land, erosion and ensure adequate 
facilities for workers.  
 
Construction:  For all works, rules for contractors will be included in contract 
specifications to help mitigate general impacts including waste management, noise, 
erosion control, safety and construction camp management. For the large works, a series 
of site specific measures are considered. In particular, special measures were taken to 
ensure construction will not disturb the population and activitie
s
around the Ta’er Temple 
and residential and schools.  Other site specific measures include those intended to 
protect ecological areas and erosion prone gullies during construction.  
 
Pest Management Plan:  A PMP has been prepared based on existing Provincial and 
National Integrated Pesticide Management Plans and included as part of the EIA and also 
as a stand alone document.  The document assesses pest management in the project area, 
to support integrated pest management (IPM), the safe use of agricultural pesticides, and 
to mitigate potential environmental impacts. It includes non-chemical approaches to pest 
control, monitoring and evaluation procedures, guidelines for the use of appropriate 
pesticides and a plan for capacity building at local institutional and community levels.  
 
Ethnic Minorities Development Plan:  As described above, ethnic minorities constitute a 
large proportion of residents potentially affected in the participatory watershed 
management component. A draft Ethnic Minorities Development Plan (EMDP) has been 
prepared, documenting consultation processes and results, and describing tentatively 
identified benefit programs for each affected gully area, to offset restrictions on resource 
use required for improved erosion and sedimentation control. The EMDP includes 
tentative cost estimates and financial arrangements. Final design of benefit programs will 
be determined, and implementation will be undertaken, at least in part, in a participatory 
manner, as described in a separate resettlement process framework that will guide 
implementation.  
 
Resettlement Action Plan: The RAP sets forth a series of measures for livelihood 
compensation and rehabilitation in consultation with local affected communities and 
households. All these measures aim to minimize resettlement wherever possible, and, 
where resettlement cannot be avoided, to ensure proper relocation and rehabilitation of 
the affected households so that they will be appropriately compensated for their losses, 
and their incomes and living standards will be improved or at least restored to the pre-
Page  13
project levels in a sustainable manner. In addition, in view of any potential restriction of 
access to living resources caused by afforestration and pasture alternation under the 
watershed rehabilitation component, a Process Framework was also developed in order to 
ensure timely assistance from the project to the affect people in their efforts for 
reestablishing resources and regenerating livelihoods. Based on three pilot sub-
watersheds, prin
ciples and strategic measures for communities’ participation in watershed 
rehabilitation design and implementation were set forth in the Framework for the 
remaining gullies to follow during project implementation. Moreover, the internal and 
external monitoring mechanism for the RAP implementation was designed and would be 
established as well to ensure that all the protection and rehabilitation measures for the 
affected people are properly implemented.  
 
Dam Safety: The Borrower has made a remedial work plan for the Class C dams and a 
dam safety review plan for those dams. The borrow has also issued guidelines and 
regulations for dam safety management, including Reservoir Dam Safety Management 
Regulation, Regulations on Reservoir Dam Safety Review, Guidelines for Dam Safety 
Review, Guidelines for Emergency Preparedness Plan, and Guidelines for Operation, 
Maintenance and Surveillance of Dams. During Project implementation, the Bank will, 
together with the Dam Safety Expert Panel hired by the borrower, supervise the 
implementation of the remedial work plans and dam safety review and acceptance plans 
to ensure that the Project complies with the OP4.37.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In order to learn the local situation and the project impact on it, a social assessment (SA) 
was carried out by a consultant team composed of 9 anthropologists and sociologists 
from the Central University of Nationalities and Qinghai Ethnic Minority Research 
Institute, in cooperation with the PMO staff and local authorities. After primary survey of 
ethnic minority information in the project areas, the SA team conducted intensive sample 
surveys and PRA fieldwork in 17 villages and communities scattering in 8 townships and 
5
counties/districts where ethnic minorities lived with Han people together, with a focus 
on the Hui and Tibetan populations concentrated communities. In these sample villages, 
informed consultation and two-way flow of communication were conducted through 
village meetings and focus groups; 130 farm households were visited to carry out 
household interviews and more than 70 persons underwent in-depth interviews. In 
addition, after training by the SA team, county PMO staff also conducted a project 
information campaign and consultations over all the villages in the 17 sub-watersheds 
under the project. As a result, the project social assessment report and EMDP were 
developed with assurance of broad support to the project from local ethnic minority 
groups.  
 
At the same time, in order to avoid or/and mitigate project adverse impacts caused by 
resettlement, the project resettlement team comprising professional consultants and 
project staff conducted several rounds of public consultation and surveys among the 
affected communities and households. Each of the village communities and the relocated 
families were visited, consulted and measured.  The RAP was developed and finalized 
Page  14
through the process of convocation of public opinions, solicitation of feedback from in-
house interviews, as well as detailed site measuring and discussing to reach agreements 
on final calculations of property losses and compensations. In addition, a detailed sample 
socio-economic survey of 200 households, about 21% of the affected rural people, was 
conducted, based on which local livelihood rehabilitation was assessed and planned. 
Overall, the RAP described in detail the rationale and the time-bound steps for adequate 
compensations and assistance provisions to the affected households and units in 
resettlement implementation.  
 
For the environmental assessment, two rounds of consultation were undertaken during 
the EA preparation, one round at the beginning of the EA preparation and the second 
before finalization.  The consultations included project affected people and residents in 
each of the project areas as well as relevant city and local government representatives.  
The consultations show that many of the residents of the project area knew of the project 
and 95% expressed support for the project.  The consultations also indicated that the 
construction should be scheduled to avoid interference with farming, that they should 
avoid farmland and woodland as much as possible.  Consultation with the Huangzhong 
County religious administration associated with the Ta’er Temple indicated they were 
supportive of the project, did not believe there would be significant impact on their 
activities and requested there not be construction at night.  
 
The environmental and social safeguards documents will be placed in county libraries 
and County Project Management Offices (CPMOs) for public disclosure before the 
project appraisal, and will also be lodged in the Bank’s InfoShop.  Final, ratified copies 
of the safeguards documents will replace these drafts after appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/06/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/13/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/06/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2009 
 
Page  15
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/13/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/15/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
Page  16
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ximing Zhang 
03/04/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Morton 
02/26/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson 
02/26/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
02/26/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
