Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/27/2008 
Report No.:  AC3817
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P081615 
Project Name:  Taiyuan Urban Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader:  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
474.80
474.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the project is to improve mobility on selected main 
corridors of center city Taiyuan, for people and freight in a safe and efficient manner.  
 
To this end, the project will monitor the following on selected main corridors: (i) travel 
times for road users; (ii) quality and use of public transport services; and (iii) road fatality 
rates. The project will also strengthen capacity for project implementation, traffic 
management and public transport.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is composed of four components as shown below:  
 
1. The Road Infrastructure (RI) Component (total cost US$498.75 million, World Bank 
proposed loan US$102.44 million) includes the construction of two major roads the north 
middle ring road (NMRR) and Taihang road (TR).  
 
2. The Public Transport (PT) Component (total cost US$73.61 million, World Bank 
proposed loan US$21.83 million) consists of four sub-components to improve the quality 
Page  2
of services and facilities to encourage increased ridership including (i) development of a 
bus priority scheme on Xinjian Street; (ii) Bus depots (Nanhan and Beiying); (iii) Bus 
terminals (Yingxin, He Lao Bay, Zoo, and Beiyan); and (iv) an automated vehicle 
location (AVL) and Bus Dispatching System.  
 
3. The Traffic Safety and Management (TS) Component (total cost US$47.73 million, 
World Bank proposed loan US$21.01 million) consists of seven sub-components that 
focus investments on selected main corridors to improve the safety and efficiency of 
movement for all road users including (i) Pedestrian Facilities including sidewalk 
construction, pedestrian overpasses and pedestrian signals; (ii) Bicycle Facilities; (iii) 
Channelization at selected junctions; (iv) Traffic Signs and Markers; (v) Equipment for 
traffic management including a traffic signal system; (vi) Improvement of Traffic Law 
Enforcement and Road Safety; and (vii) Technical Support for component 
implementation.  
 
4.  The Institutional Strengthening (IS) component (total cost US$4.35 million, World 
Bank proposed loan US$4.35 million).  This component includes domestic and 
international training as well as technical assistance related to the project components.  
 
Table 1.   Project components and costs Component  
 
Component Total Cost (US$ millions) World Bank Loan (US$ mill)  
 
Road Component 
            498.75         102.44  
 
Public Transport             73.61               21.83  
 
Traffic Safety   
     47.73               21.01  
 
Institutional Strengthening   4.35                4.35  
 
Front-end fee               0.375               0.375  
 
Total                     624.43           
150.0   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project is located in the city of Taiyuan, capital of Shanxi Province in 
middle of China. The project roads and bus terminals/depots are within urban area where 
landscape features with flat land. The land occupied is mainly urban residential, industrial 
enterprises and existing road, with minor farmland, woodland and unused land. In 
particular, the North Middle Ring Road (NMRR) will occupy a slice corner of the 
Taiyuan Forest Park, which is a public recreation and leisure place. The area affected is 
ca. 760 m2 (0.05% of total park area), where there are about 126 pine trees, 863 poplar 
and willow trees, 25 peach trees and 26 plum trees. There is no protected or rare plant 
and animal in the project area.  
 
A
cultural relic survey has been conducted by Taiyuan Cultural Property and 
Archeology Institute for the project area, and concluded that there is no cultural property 
exist in the project area that is culturally and scientifically valuable.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Page  3
Mr Peishen Wang (EASRE) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is a straight forward urban road infrastructure project, and will have positive 
environmental and social impact by improving the road network and promoting public 
transportation which in turn reducing environmental pollution related to vehicle emission. 
The negative impacts of the project will be common environmental issues related to 
construction activities, i.e. land acquisition, construction noise, air-borne dust, loss of 
surface vegetation, water pollution and soil erosion, solid waste/spoil disposal, 
disturbance of traffic and social activities of local community during construction period. 
Traffic noise, safety and community severance will be main issues during operation. 
These environmental and social impacts are well understood and will be mitigated with 
good construction management and mitigation measures developed in EMP. There is no 
large scale, significant or irreversible impacts envisioned in the project.  
 
There are three domestically funded road sections (to be constructed with similar 
timeframe of the proposed Bank project) linking the proposed road projects with existing 
network, i.e. (1) Waliu road connection (ca. 1 km) in the west end of NMRR, (2) Fen 
River bridge and interchanges on both sides (ca. 1.5 km), (3) connection of Taihang Road 
with South Middle Ring Road (ca. 5 km). The government is also planning to construct 
4.6km of the planned 11km Xinjiang Street busway in the period August-October 2008 
using its own funds.  An initial screening by the Task team concluded that there is no 
special environmental, social or cultural sensitive site associated with these projects. 
Taiyuan PMO will coordinate with those implementing agencies and provide copies of 
the environmental impact assessment documents (when available) of these projects to the 
Bank in order for the Bank task team to conduct due diligence review.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During project feasibility and design stage, alternatives have been considered for road 
alignments, site locations of bus terminals and bus depots. Comprehensive comparison 
has been conducted for environmental, social, technical and financial factors, and final 
selection is based on overall optimum consideration.  
 
-
NMRR Three alignment alternatives were considered. The final recommended 
alignment is selected due to its less impact on Forest Park, avoidance from three churches 
and Taiyuan Zoo, and compatibility with road network planning.  
 
-
Taihang Road Three alignment alternatives were considered, and the final 
alignment is selected due to less land acquisition, and consistency with road planning.  
 
-
Bus depots Three alternative sites were assessed for each of the two bus depot. 
The final location is determined by the consideration of consistency with urban master 
planning, less environmental and social disturbance.  
 
-
Bus terminal stations. For the four bus terminal stations, each has been carefully 
assessed with two to four alternative sites, among which the final location is selected 
based on principle of less land acquisition and resettlement, far from residential areas, 
compatible with urban plan and traffic management.  
 
-
Bus priority corridor Three existing urban roads have been studied during 
feasibility study. The Xinjian Road is selected due to overall service function to 
passenger flow, less civil works and less disturbance to road.  
 
The "without-project" scenario was analyzed during feasibility study and EA 
preparation. Currently, there is no east-west truck road in the north part and no north-
south truck road in the eastern part of Taiyuan, which resulted in much traffic through 
central urban areas unnecessarily. Public transport system in Taiyuan is very much under 
developed, carrying only 11% of person trips in Taiyuan. Lack of infrastructure and 
proper planning/operating system is the bottleneck of public transport development. With 
the project, the road network in northern and eastern part of Taiyuan will be significantly 
improved which will regulate overall traffic flow, alleviate traffic pressure in urban 
center, and improve overall air quality in Taiyuan.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental safeguards:  
 
Taiyuan PMO has entrusted East China Investigation and Design Institute, a Class A 
environmental impact assessment consultant certified by State Environmental Protection 
Administration (SEPA) for EA preparation. An EIA Report and two EMPs (one for each 
component) have been developed to address the potential environmental impacts and 
necessary mitigation measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate the adverse 
environmental impacts. In summary, these include:  
Page  5
Prior to Construction  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement. The alignment and terminals/depots site locations 
have been selected through alternative analysis, with a consideration of less land 
acquisition and resettlement. For these unavoidable acquisition and resettlement, a 
Resettlement Action Plan has been developed in accordance with World Bank OP4.12.  
 
Landscape aesthetics. Special design for landscape and greening of interchanges, green 
belt on road sides has been developed. A total of "greening area" of 228,360 m2 has been 
designed for Taihang Road and NMRR. For bus terminals/depots, the "greening area" is 
required to be at least 25%.  
 
Pedestrian crossing and safety. A total of 27 pedestrian passages (on average three per 
kilometer) have been designed in consultation with local community, with consideration 
of necessary facilities for disabled people. For Taihang Road, there are also 27 passages 
designed with full consideration for disabled people. The roads are design with separation 
of MV/NMV traffic, as well as adequate signaling system and signage.  
 
Construction Stage  
 
Social Disturbance.  The road construction activities will have impact on local road 
traffic and disturbance of local people’s daily life. There is also potential impact on utility 
facilities (water, gas, power, communication etc.). These impacts will be mitigated by 
proper planning of road traffic diversion, coordination with police department, and prior 
notice through public media. The public utility facilities will be carefully identified and 
orderly relocated without interrupting usual life of local community. Temporary access 
roads with adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, protection net, night light etc.) 
will be provided for nearby residents, business, schools etc. to minimize impact of social 
disturbance. Bulletin board will be established at the construction site with information of 
construction activity, timing, channel for complaints.  
 
Noise will be mitigated by use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; careful 
scheduling of construction activities near sensitive sites; installation of temporary noise 
reduction facility if necessary; night-time construction will be restricted, and prior public 
notice as well as EPB approval are required for activities that need continuous 
construction over nighttime.  
 
Air pollution will be mitigated by frequent water spraying on construction site and 
access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials and timely 
site clean up after construction; material or waste hauling will avoid densely populated 
areas, and for certain sensitive section such as schools/kindergartens, transportation will 
be arranged during nighttime.   
 
Ecological environment. Trees to be impacted will be relocated following strict 
requirement of Taiyuan Urban Greening Regulation (which requires relocation or 1 to 15 
Page  6
compensatory planting in other places). In addition, significant amount of greening has 
been designed. In general, the loss of surface vegetation will be fully recovered, and 
enhanced upon completion of the project.  
 
Soil waste. Construction waste will be timely disposed of in two landfills receiving 
construction waste in Taiyuan. Material and waste transportation vehicles will be 
properly covered and wheel-washed before leaving the construction site.  
 
Surface Water. There will be temporary impact on water quality of Fen River from 
bridge foundation construction. While this impact will be mitigated with adoption proper 
construction techniques (i.e. steel cofferdam), and wastewater will be treated through 
sedimentation ponds before discharged.  
 
Cultural property. Chance find procedures will follow the requirement of national 
regulations, i.e. excavation will be stopped immediately in case relics are found, and 
report should be made to Taiyuan cultural property authority. Construction will only 
resume after the relevant authority has completed survey and necessary protection, and 
authorizes the resumption.  
 
Operation  
 
Noise. Noise barrier will be installed, and special modified asphalt will be used for road 
surface in 35 location/sections. Intensive roadside green belt and tree planting will also 
contribute to noise reduction.  
 
Air quality. Modeling results indicate the air quality along NMRR and Taihang roads 
will be in compliance with relevant standards. A total area of 228,360 m2 "greening belt" 
will be planted that will help reduce traffic air pollution. In addition, Taiyuan 
Government is making great efforts on strengthening management of in-city bulk 
material transportation to control air-borne dust which is a major contributor to air 
pollution in Taiyuan (see Annex on air quality management).  
 
Water Quality. Wastewater treatment facilities will be installed in bus terminals/depots, 
and treated wastewater will be reused for greening. Minor amount of sewage will be 
treated with septic tank and A/O process to achieve applicable discharge standard. 
Surface runoff from bridges will be collected to buffer tanks for sedimentation and oil 
separation without being discharged into river directly.  
 
Solid Waste during operation mainly comes from administration buildings and ships. 
This will be mitigated by installation of solid waste collection facility; regular 
transportation to landfill for final disposal.  
 
Safety. Traffic safety will be ensured through proper traffic management system 
(signaling, signage) and infrastructures. Safety concerns of fuel storage in bus 
terminals/depots will be addressed by adoption of careful design in accordance with 
relevant safety code, enforcement of safety management practice, and routine monitoring.  
Page  7
Resettlement:  
 
1) 
The project has adverse impacts related to the need for land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement; though in some cases displaced persons viewed the housing 
demolition as an opportunity to improve their living conditions significantly.  The project 
will require the acquisition of 529,470 m2 of village land including 61,938 m2 of 
cultivated land, and 879,120 m2 of state-owned land.  The project would also require the 
demolition of 154,784 m2 of housing areas, 266,563 m2 of enterprises, and 2160 m2 of 
private shops. The land acquisition of the project would affect 25 people in 11 
households; the house demolition would affect 4407 people in 1208 households and the 
demolition of shops would affect 572 people at workplaces.  
 
2) 
Project impacts are detailed in a RAP.  The RAP describes in detail the overall 
legal framework, project impacts, strategy and action plans for relocation and livelihood 
rehabilitation, consultations, grievance redress, implementation schedules, cost and 
budget as well as institutional and monitoring arrangements.The PMO will assume the 
overall responsibility for the implementation of the resettlement program.  An 
independent monitor will be engaged.  All resettlement costs will be financed 
domestically from counterpart funds.  
 
3) 
The following were the guiding principles for developing the RAPs:  
 
a) 
The original living standards of all affected people should be improved or at least 
be restored;  
 
b)
Resettlement plans, sites of new houses, standards and building areas should be 
determined after consultation with the affected people;  
 
c) 
For all affected buildings, the compensation should be calculated on the basis of 
the current replacement cost without consideration of depreciation;  
 
d)
Compensation rates, location of new residential sites and areas should be 
formulated after consultation with the affected population;  
 
e) 
All compensation funds should be paid before acquisition;  
 
f) 
Construction units are responsible for restoring temporarily used land to its  
productive status after the leasing period; and  
 
g) 
Special assistance will be provided to the vulnerable households identified during 
the detailed planning and implementation process.  
 
4) 
Economic rehabilitation.  The village rehabilitation approach was developed in 
consultation with affected farmer groups.  Agreed by the affected farmers, the project 
will follow a rehabilitation strategy of cash compensation.   30% of land compensation 
fund is retained by the villages for collective use following villagersï¿½?decisions.  
 
5) 
Relocation of households.  The project would require the relocation of 7752 
people from 2193 households.  Households losing residential houses will be provided the 
option of self-resettlement with cash payment or replacement houses according to their 
own preference. All houses will be paid at replacement cost without depreciation, and 
Page  8
without deduction of salvageable materials. Five relocation housing areas were selected 
along the project alignment for relocation house construction, through consultation with 
PAPs. It is estimated that the relocation house could be available for PAPs by the end of 
2009 and transition allowance will be paid.  
 
6) 
Rehabilitation of enterprises and institutes. Among 112 enterprises and institutes 
that would be affected by the project, one enterprise, one primary school, one market 
need to be relocated. Cash compensation will be provided according consultation and 
negotiation with the enterprises and institute. The relocated enterprise will be relocated to 
the Taiyuan Steel Development Zone and the primary school will be reconstructed within 
the village.  It is also in the RAP that the old school will not be demolished unless the 
new school is available for students and the moving activities will be organized within 
the vacation period of the school in order to minimize the negative impact on education.  
 
7) 
Rehabilitation of shops and market. 114 shops and a market will be affected by 
the project. Cash compensation will be provided for structure demolition. The business 
operators could also get cash compensation for their business loss. New shops will be 
developed after the road construction and resettlement housing construction.  Several new 
markets had been built near the project affected one and business operators could easily 
move in.  
 
8) 
Rehabilitation of infrastructure.  Infrastructure affected is mainly power, 
telecommunications.  For these facilities, compensation based on the reconstruction cost 
will be paid to the government departments who are responsible for them.  The 
government departments will be in charge of the reconstruction.  
 
9) 
The social economic surveys also confirmed that there are no ethnic minority 
communities impacted in the project areas.  Based on this finding, it is the Bank’s 
assessment that this project does not trigger Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous People.  
 
Resettlement Planning  
 
Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement, the Taiyuan Project Office has prepared a resettlement action 
plan (RAP).  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was also prepared for the 
Relocation Housing Construction and a new school construction, which would reflect the 
resettlement arrangement for the host communities.  The resettlement planning work was 
carried out by the line agencies under the guidance of a team from Wuhan University 
with experience in resettlement planning for World Bank financed Projects.  Planning 
work included project impact inventory surveys, social economic surveys and 
consultations over resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation strategies.  
 
Resettlement organization and implementation capacity.  The PMO will assume the 
overall responsibility for the implementation of the resettlement program.  PMO will 
work with the district and country government offices, on a contract basis, to implement 
the resettlement programs.  These offices will employ competent and experienced staff.  
Page  9
Their respective responsibilities and functions are detailed in the RAPs.  Training will be 
provided to the project staff.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation.  Both internal and external monitoring is planned for 
resettlement implementation.  The resettlement offices will be responsible for the internal 
monitoring.  A team from Wuhan University was appointed as the external institute to 
undertake the independent monitoring of the resettlement program.  The monitoring 
scope, targets, indicators, procedures, methodology and reporting requirements are 
described in the RAPs.  
 
Annex on air quality management  
 
Air Quality Management.  Presently, evidence suggests that mobile emissions are a 
minor contributor to urban air pollution in urban China.  Fine particulate matter (PM2.5 
and smaller) are the key transport related pollutant of concern in Chinese cities , but are 
not currently measured systematically anywhere . Even though emissions from mobile 
sources have a disproportionate share of such fine particles, the available evidence 
suggests that mobile sources still account for a small share of fine particulates pollution 
–
less than 10 percent in Beijingaccording to a 2003 study.  This suggests that attention and 
resources targeting air pollution currently are best spent addressing the stationary sources 
where the gains are likely to be the highest.  This is even more so outside of the big 
eastern cities such as Beijing and Shanghai, where many of the basic steps to address 
industrial and residential sources of air pollution have not yet been taken.  
 
There are many tools to address mobile emissions; key among them are encouraging 
alternatives to private vehicle movements.  The accelerated growth in the in-use vehicle 
fleet in China has the potential to make vehicle emissions a significant source of urban air 
pollution unless a comprehensive and integrated vehicle emissions control strategy is 
fully implemented.  An integrated strategy would have multiple dimensions including 
encouraging compact urban growth, encouraging alternatives to private automobile use, 
managing and constraining automobile use, regulating the public transport market, 
regulation of new vehicle standards, and regulation of fuel quality and inspection-
maintenance of the in-use fleet.  
 
There is much that cities can do with their transport system to address mobile source 
emissions.  As discussed above, Chinese cities are expanding spatially and in population 
and are characterized by small, new, rapidly growing relatively clean automobile fleets, 
progressively deteriorating conditions for a still high share of non-motorized (cycle and 
pedestrian) trips, and significant (but often with potential for material improvement) 
public transport supply.  Improving public transport and making it more attractive, 
increasing the convenience and safety for pedestrians and cyclists, developing parking 
policies that rationalize automobile use and developing strategies that encourage compact 
growth are critical high-impact elements of any motor vehicle emission control strategy.  
These actions are also consistent with sound transport practice to address congestion, 
Page  10
safety and equity issues, as well as sound energy management and climate change 
mitigation plan.  
 
The tailpipe-end of emissions control is institutionally complicated and Inspection and 
Maintenance (I&M) is particularly difficult to get right.  As fleet sizes increase, I&M 
systems to ensure compliance of the in-use fleet will become increasingly important. 
However, I&M is probably one of the most politically and operationally complicated 
elements of this overall approach. International experience demonstrates that an I&M 
program is unlikely to be effective unless it is supported from the highest level and 
involves great attention to detail. The World Bank’s assessment suggests that there are 
some fundamental technical and institutional issues that need to be resolved before a 
successful IM system can be implemented in China.  Technically, national and provincial 
authorities need to take the lead on resolving outstanding issues related to quality control 
and assurance, equipment homologation (acceptance testing), computer-controlled test 
systems, calibration and audit procedures.  Institutional responsibilities also need to be 
clarified.  Currently, most of the relevant authority lies with provincial and national 
authorities with responsibilities split between the Environmental Protection and the 
Standards Bureaus.  
 
Taiyuan transport emissions and air quality: Pollution is a serious concern in Taiyuan –
in 1998, Taiyuan was rated as the most polluted city among 46 major cities in China. The 
key environmental issue is air pollution (mainly Sulphur dioxide and TSP) and the major 
causes are a reliance on coal and presence of heavy industries .  Taiyuan has coal smog 
dominated pollution, especially during winter season when vast amount of coal is needed 
for heating . TMG has made great efforts to address air pollution since the Ninth-Five 
Year Plan period (2000-2005), focusing primarily on industrial pollution, increasing the 
use of central district heating, cleaner coal, and a replacement of buses and taxis to coal-
bed methane fleet.  Vehicle emissions are not a major contributor of air pollution in 
Taiyuan. A study conducted by Taiyuan Environmental Science Institute and Taiyuan 
Environmental Monitoring Station (2002) concluded that vehicle emission contributes 5 
percent of PM10 in Taiyuan.  Since then most of the bus and taxi fleet has been switched 
to coal-bed methane.  
 
From an air quality management perspective, the focus of the project is to encourage 
alternatives to private automobile use by supporting initiatives and investments to make 
public transport and non-motorized transport more attractive.This priority reflects the 
recent experience that suggests that effective tailpipe emissions control is often more 
difficult than other pollution strategies in light of institutional complexity and the need 
for implementing complex systems and aligning numerous incentives.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include local project-affected people and relevant local government 
agencies.  
 
Page  11
Consultation for Project design.  Public consultation was conducted for both project 
scoping and EA preparation. During May-July 2007, public consultation was carried out 
by Liaoning Academy of Social Science as part of social assessment exercise for project 
scoping and design, including six public meetings, 30 group discussions, 54 individual 
interviews and 2048 questionnaire survey. The consultation focused on public opinions 
on public transport, traffic management and road infrastructure in Taiyuan city. The 
public concerns collected through consultation covers a wide range of aspects from bus 
routes and stations at certain locations, appropriate ticket price, necessary facility at bus 
stations etc. to adequate infrastructure for secondary and small streets, pedestrian 
crossings and intersections, vehicle parking lots, road lighting green belt, drainage, 
signaling and signage, etc. These concerns were fully considered in the scoping and 
design of he proposed project.  
 
Consultation for EA.  Additionally, two rounds of public consultation were conducted 
during EA preparation. The first round was conducted in November 2006 through field 
interview and questionnaire survey among project-affected people, local village 
committees, schools and hospitals. The main concerns raised from public are noise/dust 
impacts, pedestrian crossing and resettlement compensation. All these concerns were 
addressed in the RAP and EIA/EMPs. The second round of public consultation was 
conducted in January 2008 after the draft EIA reports had been prepared. Five public 
meetings were held in local communities and total 1,221 questionnaires were collected. 
During consultation, the EA explained the key findings of draft EIA report and proposed 
mitigation measures, as well as the responses to the questions raised from the first round 
consultation. The draft EIA received broad support and satisfaction from public 
consulted.  
 
As required by Chinese EIA regulations, the first round information disclosure was 
carried out on December 28, 2006, in which brief project information and 
commencement of EIA was published in Taiyuan Daily. The second round of disclosure 
was conducted on May 13, 2008, when draft EIA report was disclosed through internet 
(Taiyuan Economic Information Center, http://www.tyeic.gov.cn, and East China 
Investigation and Design Institute www.ecidi.com). As per Bank’s requirement, the latest 
EIA report was disclosed on Taiyuan Government website (www.taiyuan.gov.cn) with 
announcement published in Taiyuan Daily and Taiyuan TV on July 28-30, 2008. The  
English EIA has been disclosed in Infoshop on August 6, 2008.  
 
Resettlement Consultation and participation.  Resettlement planning followed a 
participatory process.  Affected villagers and various government agencies participated in 
the social economic survey, impact census, inventory and formulation of the 
compensatory and livelihood rehabilitation plan.  Project information, relevant 
government policies and regulations were broadly disseminated through village meetings 
in the project areas.  Project RAPs have also been disclosed.  A project Resettlement 
Information Booklet will be developed and distributed to every affected farmer 
household.  
 
Page  12
Further a mechanism has been established for grievance redress.  Grievances can be 
filed both orally and in writing.  Starting at village and neighborhood committee level, 
the grievances can be elevated to county/district, city level if they are not satisfied with 
the resolution at the lower level.  The affected people could also file their cases in court if 
they are not happy with the resolution by the project authority.  All grievances and their 
resolution will be recorded.  This mechanism has been disclosed to the local population 
and will be further disseminated through the Resettlement Information Booklet.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/12/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/08/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/05/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/12/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  13
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
10/08/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
10/08/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
10/08/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
10/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
10/27/2008 
Comments:   
