Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3542 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P105872 
Project Name: Integrated Forestry Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Jin Liu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 4, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective would be to demonstrate sustainable management 
and operation models for multifunction forest plantations with significant public goods benefits. 
The project will also strengthen institutional capacity and promote the Chinese Government’s 
new policy to reform land use rights in collective forest areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is expected that this project would be implemented over a six year period and would include 
the following components:  
 
(a)  Component One -- Establishment of new multifunction forest plantations:  Under this 
component, the project would finance the implementation of different sustainable management 
and operation models for multifunction forest plantations on degraded and erosion-prone lands.  
These models would include, inter alia, plantation of adapted trees to create: (i) wind breaks and 
sand break forests; (ii) soils and water conservation forests; and (iii) farm land shelterbelts.  
 
(b)  Component Two -- Improving Existing Plantation Forests: Under this component, the 
project would finance in Anhui and Zhejiang Provinces the upgrading of existing degraded forest 
Page  2
plantations into sustainable multifunction forests and improve the management of these forests to 
increase their vegetative cover, resiliency and erosion control potential.  
 
(c)  Component three -- Institutional Support, Project Management and Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E):  Under this component the project would (i) finance training and technical 
services to build 
up
project management capacity; (ii) support the Government’s efforts in 
reforming forestland tenure; and (iii) help establish an efficient M&E system that would monitor 
project implementation progress and impacts and generate lessons for scaling up and transferring 
project experience to other areas in China.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would be implemented in the provinces of Anhui, Hebei, Liaoning, Shanxi 
and Zhejiang and would include about 80 counties and cities/forest management bureaus.  The 
project intends to: (i) establish new forest cover and shelter belts in the loess plateau (Shanxi 
Province) and on degraded lands (Liaoning and Hebei Provinces) prone to wind erosion and 
wind storm; (ii) establish new forests in the mountainous areas prone to water erosion or upgrade 
existing degraded forests for environmental improvement (Anhui Province); (iii) modify and 
transform monoculture degraded plantations (Zhejiang and Anhui Provinces) into mixed species 
plantations that will benefit to the environment improvement and forest sustainability.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project would build upon the Bank’s 20 years of highly successful involvement in 
the forest sector in China. The project provinces have participated in several previous Bank-
supported forestry projects and demonstrated excellent institutional capacity in the management 
of projects, including the strict implementation of the Bank’s safeguards policies. All of the 
previous forestry development projects required the preparation and implementation of 
Environmental Assessments (EA) and Environment Management Plans (EMP) under OP4.01. 
Most of the provinces participated in the Sustainable Forestry Development Project (the fourth 
forestry project) are successfully using social safeguard documents prepared following Bank 
policies. Work and experience of previous Bank supported projects have helped build up the 
Borrower’s provincial institutional capacity in compliance with the requirements of the World 
Bank (WB) safeguard policies. The existing "Plantation Environmental Protection Guidelines" 
developed by the previous projects, have proven to be effective tools in mitigating the negative 
impacts to the environment.  
 
The Borrower has recruited qualified national institutes to carry-out Social Assessment (SA) 
and EA. Orientation training on WB policies and guidelines has been provided by the Bank task 
team to the SA and EA expert teams and the work is being closely supervised to ensure adequate 
quality and incorporation of findings and recommendations into project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is designed to support the improvement of the environment, management, and 
productivity of degraded land in selected areas. Project plots are relatively small in size and 
scattered in about 80 counties of five provinces where a variety of tree species will be used.  
Plantation sites would not be those of natural forests, but would be sites where wind, water 
erosion or human activities have eliminated permanent vegetative cover, where previous 
plantings took place or where the forest cover has been removed and not replaced. All activities 
will be undertaken in plantation areas.  The EA will include an evaluation of the experience and 
lessons learned, particularly the implementation experiences of the Environmental Management 
Guidelines, from previous WB-financed forestry projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The proposed candidate sites for both plantation establishment and restoration are not located 
in any critical nature habitats. The site selection criteria exclude sites in critical natural habitats. 
During project implementation, further site screening process will be undertaken for each of the 
candidate sites to confirm that no critical natural habitats or cultural heritage exist in the project 
area and that site information will be well documented. On-site screening has proven to be an 
effective tool in previous Bank forestry projects.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project aims to increase forest cover and improve plantation quality to contribute to 
environment improvement and sustainable forest management while generating some benefits to 
local farmers.  The activities to establish and restore plantations will largely be carried out at the 
community (e.g., village level) level.  
 
The plantation establishment and restoration to be financed by the Bank Loan will not 
involve any conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. The project will not introduce 
any invasive species.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Since the establishment and management of plantations may require the use of pesticides or 
herbicides, a Pest Management Plan will be developed. An integrated pest management (IPM) 
approach will be incorporated into the project design during preparation.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The social screening indicated that there are no physical cultural resources in the project 
areas. The site selection criteria exclude such areas from being included under the project.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The social screening indicated that there are no ethnic minority communities in the project 
areas of Zhejiang, Anhui, Hebei and Shanxi Provinces, although there are individual households 
who are ethnic minorities in those provinces. However, there are a few ethnic minority 
communities living in the proposed project areas of Liaoning Province consisting mostly of 
Mongol and Mandarin. Therefore, OP 4.10 applies.  
 
Two options are being explored during further project preparation.  Option 1: if all project 
sites have been selected and it is possible to identify all the communities that will be affected 
upfront, then one Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) will be prepared.  Option 2:  if all 
projects sites or communiti
es can not be fully identified or if the project sites may be changed 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
during project implementation, then an Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF) would be 
developed, outlining the procedures that will be followed to prepare EMDP for ethnic minority 
communities that have not been identified during project preparation and appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No land acquisition will take place under the project and land users must apply for 
participating in the project voluntarily. However, in a few areas, when households and villages 
plant trees, they may need to limit grazing in the first year or so until the plantation is 
established.  Therefore, a Process Framework for Land Use will be prepared in consultation with 
the affected people to mitigate any impacts caused by the temporary resource access restriction.  
 
The consultation process will be ongoing throughout project preparation and 
implementation. A Consultation and Participatory Planning Manual is being developed by social 
experts to standardize the consultation process, and will focus on ensuring the voluntary 
participation of the households and communities to the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this 
policy.  No action is required under this policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined under 
the policy. No action is required under this policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.  No 
action is required under this policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/20/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of Safeguard-related studies has been initiated in June 2008 and should be 
completed by January 20, 2009.  The Project Preparation Review is planned for January 20, 
2009. At this point in time all documentation related to safeguard policies would be available 
in their draft stage.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jin Liu 
10/22/2008 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
10/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
11/04/2008 
Comments:   
