Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3647
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P101258 
Project Name:  Hubei Yiba Highway Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 11, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2,044.02
2,044.02 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve passenger and freight flows in the 
Yichang-Badong corridor by investing in the construction of an expressway that 
demonstrates improved environmental management practices during construction.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components:  
 
Component A: Yichang - Badong Expressway (YBE)  
 
The construction of a 173.6 km expressway connecting Yichang City and Badong 
County at the border of Hubei and Chongqing Municipality including land acquisition 
and resettlement, the relevant electrical and mechanical (E&M) facilities, annex areas, 
toll plazas and buildings, seven interchanges, and 35.4 km of interconnecting roads to 
improve integration with the local road network. The expressway will be built with four 
lanes, 80 km/hour design speeds and 24m integral subgrade width. The expressway 
alignment was selected to minimize the negative environmental and social impacts of the 
project, while the interchanges were located based on the network needs and access 
requirements of local road users.  
Page  2
The total cost of the expressway is estimated at US$2189 million, of which the Bank is 
financing US$149.7 million -
 approximately 6.8 percent. The Bank’s financing will be 
focused on the first 48.5 km of the project where the works are in particularly 
environmentally sensitive areas. The Bank will finance eight subgrade and civil works 
contracts and one paving contract in this area. It will also finance the tolling system and 
telecommunications equipment for the entire expressway.  
 
This component also includes the supervision of the construction activities. The project 
will adopt an innovative approach towards supervision through the appointment of a 
separate environmental supervision consultant, in addition to the usual practice of having 
the environment supervised by the same consultant as the civil works. This 
environmental supervision consultant will monitor and audit compliance with the 
project’s EMP. Two domestic consulting teams will be procuredto act as the ‘Engineer’ 
for the civil works on the project, and a third for theE&M works. This is the first time this 
FIDIC based approach is fully used in Hubei Province. A foreign consulting firm shall 
provide supervision support to the project office. There will be eight consulting firms 
providing resident engineers.  
 
COMPONENT B: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING  
 
There will be four institutional strengthening activities, as well as a training program 
and equipment. These activities will support the sustainability of the project through 
improvements to environmental protection, environmental monitoring, and safety for 
tunnel construction. The equipment will be used to enhance road maintenance, while the 
overall capacity of the HPCD will be improved through training.  
 
•
Improved Environmental Supervision: During project preparation a ‘Strategic 
Environmental Assessment’ (SEA) of Hubei’s road transport sector was undertaken by 
international and domestic consultants with SIDA grant financing. Based on the 
recommended action plan from the SEA, it was agreed that priority would be given to 
improving the effectiveness of environmental supervision on the HPCD’s projects. This 
will be done through the preparation of two guides by the environmental supervision 
consultant: (i) an EMP implementation guide for contractors clearly identifying their 
responsibilities and the HPCD’s requirements; and, (ii) a guide for environmental 
supervisors on how to undertake supervision, including monitoring of effectiveness. 
These guides will be supported by a training program.  
 
•
Tunnel Safety: The study, to be conducted prior to the beginning of the 
majortunnel construction period, will: (i) provide recommendations on different 
alternatives for the improvement of tunnel construction practices; and, (ii) identify 
methods for improved tunnel safety supervision intended to reduce potential dangers and 
accidents.  
 
•
Hubei Comprehensive Transport Centre Study: The GOC has recently released a 
document “Comments on Promoting Central area Grow-up.” With its geographically 
central position, and rapidly expanding expressway network, Hubei is seen as having 
opportunities to become a multi-modal centre for transport in China. This study will 
Page  3
identify policies, infrastructure and institutional constraints which need to be addressed in 
order f
or Hubei to fill its role as the “Comprehensive Transport Complex”. For both 
freight and passenger transport, the study will consider road, rail, waterways and air 
transport. It will identify possible solutions for infrastructure, institutional framework, 
and management practices, based on experiences from other countries, and respecting 
existing national appraisal requirements.  
 
•
Reducing Geological Landslide Disasters on Expressways in Mountainous 
Regions: The purpose of the study is to review design approaches to identify ways in 
which designs can be enhanced to reduce the risk of landslide and other geological 
disasters during construction and operations.  
 
•
Training: Domestic and foreign training activities will cover a range of topics 
including design, safety, maintenance, management, finance and the environment.  
 
•
Equipment: Equipment will be procured for expressway management and 
maintenance, and environmental monitoring. These will include weighing stations, 
quality control sets and road condition monitoring equipment.  
 
The institution will also be strengthened through an HIV/AIDS education program, 
which will be financed through the AusAID ‘Infrastructure for Growth’ trust fund. This 
will build upon the success of previous similar programs in the Bank financed Hubei 
Shiman Highway and Inland Waterway V projects. The program will pilot test the new 
HIV/AIDS IEC Toolkit ‘The Road To Good Health’, developed by EAPspecifically to 
educate construction workers, local residents, and commercial sex workers on HIV/AIDS 
risks and mitigation. At the same time, the education program will also include 
information on worker’s rights under the new 2008 China labor law, part of the project’s 
‘Environmentally and Socially Responsible Procurement Initiative’.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The YBE is located in the west of Hubei province, north of the Yangtze River. The 
expressway crosses Yichang and Badong Prefectures, Xingshan and Zigui Counties, as 
well as Yiling District. The population served by YBE totals about one million people: 
500,000 are located in Yiling District (from the starting point to KP 80), 200,000 in 
Xingshan county (KP 80 to 142) and 250,000 are located in Badong county northern 
bank of the Yangtze (KP 142 to the ending point).  
 
The YBE traverses environmentally sensitive areas, including the ‘Three Gorges 
National Geological Park’, the Shennongjia Scenic Areas, the Xiaofeng Tourism Area 
and karst areas. According to the ‘Three Gorges National Geological Park Master Plan’, 
there are 21 geological remains sites, 12 paleontology scene, nine geological and 
geomorphic scenes, five geological disaster remains and two hydrologic engineering 
scenes within the areas of Badong, Zigui and Yichang. Most sites are about one km from 
the proposed road; however, three sites are likely to be affected by the project, the 
impacts of which are addressed below.  
 
The YBE passes through a region of mild terrain at the east end of the project and 
steeper elevations as the project moves west. The surrounding area is forested, 
Page  4
mountainous and with complicated geology.  The terrain in the project area varies from 
100 to 1,800 m. The project area lies in a semi-tropical zone with an average annual 
precipitation between 1,065 and 1,132 mm. The expressway, which will cause some loss 
of natural habitats, is in area that has patches of natural vegetation and karst caves. Much 
of the land along the alignment is already disturbed by human activities; the remaining 
undisturbed areas are highly fragmented and unable to sustain large wildlife.  
 
The proposed project alignment crosses the Xiangxihe and Shennongxi Rivers. These 
rivers, which are upstream of the Three Gorges Dam, have experienced higher water 
levels as a result of the dam construction. The water quality of the project area is fairly 
good, with indicators satisfying the zoning requirements of Class II and III of the 
Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water.  
 
Field investigations along the YBE alignment identified 11 townships, 53 administrative 
villages, and 138 village groups that would be directly affected by the project; two 
schools were also reported in the affected project area. The acoustic environment in the 
project area is fairly good, with most area villages and schools meeting Class I of the 
Standard of Environmental Noise of Urban Area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EAPCO) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment: The project is classified as Category A since it involves major expressway 
construction on a ne
w
“greenfield” alignment. The project will permanently occupy about 
560 ha of land, about 37% of which will be farmland and approximately 32% will be 
woodland. The woodland areas, which do not include virgin forest or commercial 
forestry, could not be avoided. The project will result in increases in noise and motor 
vehicle air emissions, occupation of fertile lands and scenic areas, soil erosion, 
Page  5
resettlement, and other environmental and social issues. It will result in increases in noise 
and motor vehicle air emissions, occupation of fertile lands and scenic areas, soil erosion, 
resettlement, and other environmental and social issues.  
 
The National Yangtze River Geology Park features geologic relics and manmade tourist 
resources.  The core geological area of the Park occupies 1,000 km2.  All alignment 
alternatives of the proposed road are within the Park, and cross Badong, Zigui and 
Yichang geological areas.  Most scenic sights are about one km from the proposed road 
alignment and are not expected to be impacted by the Expressway.  
 
Increased vehicle emissions in the area will occur as a result of the YBE. It is predicted 
that this would cause an increase in NO2, carbon monoxide (CO) and total hydrocarbon 
(THC) emissions. In addition, the movement of motor vehicles -especially during 
construction - will cause fugitive airborne dust from the road surface. Some of the 
sensitive receptors, such as schools, hospitals, and community facilities, would be 
impacted.  
 
Natural Habitats: There are some natural habitats - forests and caves - along the 
highway alignment that may be affected by construction, although the total area of 
vegetation is rather small. Much of the biodiversity in the project area has already been 
disturbed by human activities and a variety of extensive and intensive agricultural 
ecosystems, especially commercial farming of trees. There is no officially, nationally or 
globally recognized threatened flora or fauna in the area whose known conservation 
status would be affected by this project.  At the western end of the alignment some bird 
species have been seen which have been given Class II national protection, but none of 
these is regarded as Vulnerable or Endangered by IUCN-The World Conservation Union.  
 
Cultural Property:  Four cultural relics - Baihuguan Ruin, Pingyikou Tombs, Xinping 
Overhanging Coffins, and Niejiahe Ancient Camp Ruins - were identified along the 
proposed project alignment.  
 
•
Baihuguan Ruins - Protection area of culture relic is 30,000 m2.  The expressway 
will go through the ruin protection area, and the project will affect some 5,000m2.  
 
•
Pingyikou Tombs (End of Eastern Han Dynasty) - The area covers 3,000 m2. The 
alignment will avoid the Pingyikou Tombs.  
 
•
Xingping Overhanging Coffins (from the Warring Sates, Song Dynasty, and 
Mingqing Dynasty) - Tombs are located on the cliff over the banks of Xiaofeng River. 
The road will be on a viaduct, about 195m from the edge of the tomb area.  
 
•
Niejiahe Ancient Camp Ruins (from Chunqiu Period to “Six Dynasty”) - The 
alignment bypasses the relic about 200 m from the eastern side. There may be indirect 
impacts.  
 
Social Assessment: A ‘Social Assessment’ was conducted by Beijing University from 
August to September 2007. The social assessment team screened the potential social 
impacts on the local communities and identified those with distinct identities in the 
project area. Residents of the Yiling District are primarily of Han nationality (90%). Only 
a
few ethnic minorities, such as Tujia and Miao, make up the remaining population. 
Page  6
Xingshan and Zigui Counties are also both over 99% Han. The population of ethnic 
minorities in Badong County is relatively large, accounting for approximately 46% of the 
total population. In this county, the Tujia residents make up the largest portion of the 
minority population while Miao residents account for less than 1%. Overall, the 
percentage of Han persons affected by the project is 79%, Tujia persons 21%, and Miao 
residents less than 1%.  
 
Resettlement:  The major social impacts of the project stem from land acquisition 
associated with the YBE construction. The project will affect 8,204 people in 53 villages 
though acquisition of 8,395.3 mu (560 hectares) of land. In addition, structural demolition 
of private residential housing is expected to total 302,652 square meters, with 943 
households (4,042 individuals) affected. A total of 1,543 households with 5,568 
individuals will be affected only by land acquisition. A detailed land reclamation plan has 
been designed. This will see construction waste materials used to create new land suitable 
for farming equaling approximately 45% of the farmland acquired for the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The YBE is expected to improve the transportation in the region, promote tourism 
development, support communication outside the project area, and increase accessibility 
to the Three Gorges National Geological Park. The project will generate environmental 
issues of concern, such as the generation of solid waste, wastewater, and pollution from 
vehicles, as well as environmental impacts associated with construction (noise, dust, 
erosion).  Mitigation methods will therefore be put into place to minimize impacts, and 
monitoring of environmental and social resources will be implemented throughout project 
construction and operation.  
 
Much of the biodiversity in the project area has already been affected by human 
activities of past years and by a variety of extensive and intensive agricultural practices, 
especially commercial farming of trees. No animals or wildlife of interest were observed 
in the vegetated parts of the project areas. Kites and Eurasian Kestrel have been recorded 
in the project area. They typically build their nests on the top of large trees or small 
cavities on the high cliffs. Since the expressway alignment runs adjacent to the existing 
economic and human activity corridors, far from the habitats frequented by these birds, 
the impacts of the YBE on these birds are expected to be limited. Also, because much of 
the highway is in the form of bridges / viaducts and tunnels the impacts on the ground are 
expected to be minimal.  
 
Non point source pollution from roadway runoff - which may contain oil, diesel or 
gasoline - will be the primary contributor to water pollution as a result of the project. 
Surface runoff will be small compared to the receiving river flows and its impact, based 
on modeling, is expected to be insignificant. Treated wastewater from service and 
administrative areas will also be discharged to stream systems.  
 
Traffic accidents on the YBE involving the transportation hazardous materials could 
result in spills of toxic and hazardous cargos and pose a risk of water contamination.  
Page  7
Though the probability of such accidents occurring is considered to be very low, the 
consequences could be severe as a spill would impact aquatic life as well as the health 
and safety of the people living downstream. Viaducts and bridges crossing water bodies 
of concerns will be designed to limit the potential of contamination through proper 
drainage systems collecting water and pollutants and carrying them to a storage tank 
equipped with valve system before outflow in the natural environment. In the case of an 
accident with spills, the toxic/hazardous spill can be removed from the tank for safe 
disposal.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed YBE alignment was selected taking into consideration not only the 
engineering and technical issues, but also socio economic and environmental issues - 
especially when the project traverses the Three Gorges Geological Park area. During 
project preparation the task team worked closely with the client, design institute, 
resettlement team, and the environmental consultant to minimize the overall impact of the 
project.  
 
Three corridors were considered at the pre-feasibility study stage: southern corridor 
along the Yangtze, central corridor and northern corridor. The northern corridor was 
finally adopted because: (i) it better serves the area, (ii) has much better geological and 
topographical conditions; and, (iii) minimized the overall negative environmental and 
social impact of the project. The expressway alignment within the northern corridor was 
selected after careful comparison of various alternatives:  
 
•
The starting point is located on Jingmen-Yichang expressway in order to optimize 
the expressway node.  
 
•
From KP5 to KP30, the alignment is located downstream of the Guangzhuang 
reservoir which constitutes a main storage of drinking water for Yichang city. Upstream 
alternatives were considered too risky for the preservation of this drinking water area.  
 
•
From KP25 to KP55, the alignment crosses Xiaofeng scenic spots along the 
Wuduriver. Alternatives avoiding this valley were considered but were: (i) technically 
much more difficult; (ii) upstream of the Guangzhang reservoir; and (iii) had greater 
negative impacts on the environment. The horizontal and vertical alignments of the YBE 
in the Wudu valley were carefully optimized with viaducts and tunnels in order to reduce 
the impacts on environment and cultural relics.  
 
•
From KP55 to 95, the proposed alignment follows valleys and there is no feasible 
alternative.  
 
•
From KP95 to KP145 the YBE crosses very challenging topography with the 
longest tunnels of the project. Four main alternatives were considered and the alignment 
selected minimizes the length of tunnels and has the best geological conditions. However 
this alignment is the farthest distance from Xingshan, so an access road will be required.  
 
•
From KP145 to 155, the alignment follows the flank of a mountain and is located 
along a steep transverse slope, mostly on viaducts. Alternatives would result in very long 
tunnels.  
Page  8
•
From KP155 to KP165, three alternatives were considered. The alignment 
adopted has a very high cable stayed bridge but minimizes civil work quantities. The 
ending point has been fixed in accordance with an agreement reached with Chongqing 
municipality.  
 
The majority of the adverse environmental impacts from the construction and operation 
of the YBE on the Three Gorges National Geological Park have either been eliminated or 
minimized by judicious selection of the alignment. As highlighted above, the water 
quality of the Guanzhang drinking water reservoir has been protected by shifting the 
alignment downstream of the Guanzhang watershed. Similarly, the expressway design 
has been modified to reduce visual impacts on the Xiaofeng, Shennongjia and Gaolan 
Scenic areas.  In the case of the Xinping Tombs, the viaduct option was selected in favor 
of the tunnel option and shifted about 195m from the hanging coffins to minimize the 
impacts on the tombs. Additionally, the alignment was optimized where possible to use 
the waste deposits from tunnels for land reclamation, as well other factors to minimize 
waste.  
 
Design Considerations  
 
The YBE design reflects the experiences of the HPCD on their previous projects, as 
well as inputs from domestic and international reviewers. Key elements include, but are 
not limited to:  
 
•
Increased frequency of hydrological and geological surveys to confirm site 
conditions;  
 
•
Use of viaducts and tunnels to reduce the environmental impact of the YBE;  
 
•
Alignment optimization to achieve a good balance of materials in order to 
minimize waste deposits;  
 
•
Limiting slope heights to 40 m by adjusting embankment heights, thereby 
reducing waste material and simplifying slope protection requirements;  
 
•
Improved tunnel safety through features such perpendicular galleries and 
handicapped friendly barrier doors;  
 
•
Traffic safety audit of alignment, intersections, annex and service areas; and,  
 
•
Ensuring frequency and location of interchanges provides sufficient access tothe 
local road network.  
 
Overall, the final alignment minimizes the negative environmental impacts and impacts 
on cultural relics, and reducing resettlement activity where possible, allowing for 
reallocation of land within existing villages. It will provide the best overall benefits to the 
people living in the project area.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower’s capacity and commitment to implementing appropriate safeguard 
compliance measures is high as it has gained valuable experience during the 
implementation of the previous four Bank funded Expressway projects. The Borrower 
Page  9
has agreed to a number of innovations to be implemented during the construction of the 
project to improve the overall safeguards compliance.  
 
Environment: Due to the sensitivity of the Three Gorges Geological Park and its 
resources, the HPCD contracted the China Geological Environmental Monitoring 
Institute to prepare a Feasibility Study, which was been approved by the Ministry of Land 
Resources. Impacts to the Park from this project will be mitigated, managed and 
monitored according to recommendations provided by the Feasibility Study and 
incorporated in the EMP.  Areas impacted by the construction phase of the project will be 
rehabilitated. Additionally, the area around the tombs will be reinforced to protect it from 
the construction and vibration impacts.  
 
Since karst caves can have unique biodiversity which can be irreparably damaged 
through projects in the vicinity. The project undertook biodiversity surveys for all four 
identified caves within 500 m of the alignment, collecting samples of different plants, 
mammals and invertebrates for species identification. The YBE does not directly impact 
any caves. Appropriate mitigation measures were adopted for two caves as well as a third 
cave to protect its biodiversity. Chance find procedures for other caves that may be found 
were included in the EMP, which requires the mobilization of a Cave Team to assess 
whether further steps are required and recommend mitigation measures. There is 
agreement on possible future biological surveys and on refining the relevant part of the 
EMP as identification of invertebrates are collected.  
 
As previously mentioned, the expressway will traverse cultural property (ruin areas); 
these resources will need to be either excavated or protected. Consideration has also been 
given to protect sensitive sites from the construction and vibration impacts by requiring 
contractors to use smaller explosive charges during construction, as stipulated in the 
EMP.  
 
Chance Finding Procedures will be utilized to ensure proper protection to any 
invertebrate animals in unexpected caves, and to any artifact of cultural, archaeological, 
or paleontological significance found during the construction activities. These procedures 
are defined in the EMP. Workers will be trained on these procedures in an effort to 
protect the resources found during the construction.  
 
To improve the environmental supervision on the project, several innovations have been 
adopted:  
 
•
Separation of Responsibilities. The project will appoint a separate client’s 
environmental supervision consultant (CESC), in addition to the usual practice of having 
the environment supervised by the construction supervision engineer (CSE) for civil 
works. This environmental supervision consultant will monitor and audit compliance 
with the project’s EMP and report directly to HPCD.  
 
•
EMP as Technical Specifications. For the YBE project the environmental 
regulations and requirements from the EMP will be ‘translated’ into technical 
specifications, similar to the engineering technical specifications that contractors 
Page  10
normally follow, and will be included in the bid and contract documents for civil works.  
The EMP, the bidding documents, and the contracts will also include a detailed 
explanation of the compliance framework. In accordance with international experience, 
contractors will also sign a statement acknowledging their awareness of the 
environmental regulations and the compliance framework.  
 
•
Compliance Framework. The HPCD and the Bank jointly devised a compliance 
framework for the YBE designed to motivate contractors to comply with the EMP. This 
compliance framework will be based on the environmental requirements established by 
the EMP and will be strictly enforced.  For minor infringements, the contractor will be 
given a short period of grace (usually 48 hours) to correct the mistakes and to restore the 
environment. If the restoration is completed in time, no further actions will be taken. If 
the restoration is not completed during this period, the Client will arrange for another 
contractor to carryout the restoration, and deduct the cost of the restoration from the 
offending contractor’s next payment. For major infringements, there will be a financial 
penalty in addition to the cost of restoration.  
 
The work sites will be inspected by the Client’s Environmental Supervision Consultant 
(CESC) on a regular and ad hoc basis. A simple form will be utilized to identify the 
activities conducted during that inspection period and a list of environmental, issues and 
deficiencies will be prepared. For each environmental requirement, CESC will determine 
whether the contractor is in compliance or not. These lists are common in projects 
implementing similar enforcement frameworks.  
 
Resettlement: Since the project will result in the resettlement of local residents, the 
HPCD, in consultation with the Land Resources Department and local governments, 
undertook the necessary studies to ensure compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies. 
A
‘Resettlement Action Plan’ and ‘Resettlement Policy Framework’ have been prepared 
by the HPCD. The HPCD is committed to production rehabilitation and income 
restoration. When project affected persons (PAPs) have lost their productive base, or 
income sources, the HPCD will provide new income sources to them and rehabilitate 
production. In order to assist the PAPs to achieve at least the same level of well being 
with the project as without it, the HPCD have formulated both short- and long-term 
strategies for restoring PAPs’ incomes.  
 
Short-term activities are income restoration strategies are for immediate assistance 
during relocation, and they include:  
 
•
Compensation for land, structures, and all other lost assets is paid in full before 
relocation.  
 
•
House construction grants and relocation subsistence allowances are paid for the 
full duration of the period of disruption and re-establishment, and new house sites are 
arranged for relocation households.  
 
•
The HPCD will provide temporary or short-term employment in the construction 
activities at the resettlement or project construction sites.  
 
•
The HPCD have established a special assistance fund to assist vulnerable groups 
such as women, the aged, and the disabled.  
Page  11
Long-term income restoration strategies will provide a sustained source of income over 
a
longer period of time and to enable restoration, or better still, improvements in PAPs 
standard of living. The HPCD firstly evaluated the impact ratio of land acquisition on 
every village, then after fully negotiating with PAPs, developed cultivated land by 
reclaiming deposit areas and formulated a production rehabilitation and income 
restoration plan that is suitable to the actual situation according to the impact rate and the 
features of local society and economy.  
 
There is a well established protocol used in Hubei province for handling resettlement 
complaints on previous World Bank financed projects. Due to the environmental 
sensitivity of the area traversed by the YBE, it was decided to strengthen this through a 
‘Safeguards Compliance Monitoring System’ (SCMS). The objective of the SCMS is to:  
 
•
Provide resettlement information on the project to the public (eg. download RAP, 
resettlement information booklets, etc.);  
 
•
Record information on the resettlement performance against key indicators (eg. 
compensation rates for main structures and land, how long it takes for PAPs to receive 
compensation, land occupation before/after land taking, income recovery after 
resettlement rehabilitation); and  
 
•
Provide a mechanism for complaints to be automatically logged and forwarded to 
the appropriate parties.  
 
The SCMS has two components: (i) the web site interface and (ii) the complaint logging 
system. The web site is used to store and disseminate information on the project 
environment and resettlement status. It will have downloads available, such as the RAP 
and information booklet, as well as summary statistics showing the progress of 
resettlement. The ‘Complaint Logging System’ allows complaints tobe logged in three 
ways: (i) through a form on the web site; (ii) by sending an SMS message; and (iii) via e-
mail. The SMS part of the system is important since those affected by the project may not 
have access to the Internet to visit the web site, but they can send an SMS message since 
mobile phones are ubiquitous.  
 
Upon receipt of a complaint, the message is automatically forwarded via e-mail to: (i) 
the HPCD; (ii) the Bank; and (iii) the resettlement monitoring consultant. The system is 
designed to permit the message to be forwarded to others as well should this be required. 
The reporting facility in the system records the details of the message, sender 
information, when received, etc. Later, when resolved, the complainant will be notified of 
resolution if possible. The reporting system will record the elapsed time for dealing with 
the complaint as well as the outcome. The system is designed to allow for anonymous 
complaints to be made should the person wish to do so.  
 
Social Assessment: A Social Assessment was conducted by Beijing University from 
August to September 2007. The social assessment team screened the potential social 
impacts on the local communities and identified those with distinct identities in the 
project area. Though Miao and Tujia ethnic groups are located in the project areas, the 
Page  12
assessment concluded that these groups are scattered and do not constitute separate, 
cohesive ethnic communities.  Furthermore, there is a long history of interaction between 
the Han and the Tujia, who have no separate political or cultural institutions and do not 
use a separate language distinct from the Han. The social assessment team, based on 
examination of relevant documents, field visits and interviews at locations of the project 
affected peoples (PAP), concluded that the YBE will not result in these persons becoming 
especially vulnerable (e.g., they will not have their human dignity, political 
representation, economic activities, standard of living or social and cultural life 
diminished, abridged or curtailed by the proposed project). World Bank OP 4.10 is not 
activated and Indigenous People or Ethnic Minority Development Plans are not required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In accordance with OP4.01 requirements, relevant project information was disclosed to 
the public in different stages of the EA process. During the first round of public 
consultation, booklets were distributed to the roadside residents. Project information was 
included in the booklets, such as the necessity of the project, road alignment, and 
potential environmental impacts. In addition, the EA team placed the draft EA report in 
the local government office of Longquan, Huanghua, Wuduhe, Shuiyusi, Xiakou, 
Xiquwan and Yanduhe Towns. Bulletins were placed at the township government gate, 
schools, and stores to provide project information and the contact information for the 
project owner. Further consultation was conducted using a combination of public 
meeting, individual interview, and questionnaire survey. Documents have also been 
disclosed electronically through the local communication department (www.hbjt.gov.cn).  
 
The environmental consultations for the project were divided into three phases:  
 
•
March 2004: At project initiation, the EA team conducted preliminary site 
investigations and visited relevant government agencies along the alignment to solicit 
concerns in terms off environmental protection and pollution control.  
 
•
September 2005: At the official start of the project EA, the first formal round of 
public consultation, primarily for the affected people along the proposed alignments, was 
launched.  Interviews and opinion questionnaires were used to receive concerns about the 
YBE construction and operation activities.  
 
•
June 2007: Two months after the disclosure of the EA reports, the second round 
of public consultations were performed to gather opinions on the environment and 
resettlement measures for all affected persons along the alignment.  
 
According to the World Bank’s safeguard policies, three rounds of public consultation 
were carried out during the EIA preparation. The first round was conducted in September 
2005. The second occurred during the course of the EA document preparation in March 
2006. The consultation was conducted using a combination of public meeting, individual 
interview, and questionnaire survey. A third round of public consultations was conducted 
in June 2007 to gather opinions on the environment and resettlement measures for all 
affected persons along the alignment.  
 
Page  13
The primary concerns identified during these public consultations were: (i) land 
acquisition and resettlement, particularly related to the timing and compensation; (ii) road 
traffic blockages; (iii) construction activities, particularly their impacts on water for 
irrigation; and (iv) noise and dust generated during construction.  
 
Environmentally and Socially Responsible Procurement (ESRP). ESRP aims to identify 
where procurement can be enhanced to improve its environmental and social impacts. 
ESRP identifies best practices and supports implementation of these measures to reduce 
impact and to increase safeguarding measures associated with projects.  
 
Worker protection is one element of the ESRP initiative for the Yiba project. The new 
Law of the People’s Republic of China on Employment Contracts (known hereafter as 
China’s Labor Law), effective 1 January 2008, greatly strengthens worker protection and 
is consistent with the ESRP initiative. Adherence to the terms of China’s Labor Law is a 
legal obligation of the contractor. The ESRP initiative will focus on three key aspects of 
the new law: (i) ensuring all workers have employment contracts; (ii) ensuring that the 
minimum wage rate is respected; and (iii) ensuring that wages are not paid late. In 
addition, the law’s health and safety provisions will be enforced.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/05/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
08/07/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/05/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/05/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  14
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  15
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
09/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anil H. Somani 
09/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zhefu Liu 
09/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/09/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
09/29/2008 
Comments:   
