Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/20/2008 
Report No.: 44401
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P112291 
Project Name:  Rapid Assessment of Chemical Contamination of the Wenchuan 
Earthquake in Sichuan Province 
Task Team Leader:  Helen Chan;  Jiang Ru 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated CEO Approval Date: 6/27/2008 
Estimated CMU Approval Date: 
07/08/2008 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (80%); health (20%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P); Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [] 
2. Project Objectives 
This project
’s development objective is to support the country’s emergency responses to 
the Wenchuan Earthquake by identifying and assessing potential environmental impacts 
and risks associated with the releases of hazardous chemicals and waste in five out of a 
total of 40 hardest hit counties in Sichuan Province. Specifically, the project will 
facilitate (a) identification of major sources of hazardous chemicals and wastes, 
including, but not limited to, chemical plants, landfills, and hazardous chemicals/waste 
storage and disposal sites that have been damaged by the earthquake; (b) preliminary site 
assessment of the diffusion of toxic chemicals into the environment and their potential 
impacts and risks to human health and the environment; (c) recommendations on 
mitigation priorities to the assessed sites; and (d) timely dissemination of monitoring 
results to the general public and training the general public on necessary safeguards 
measures. 
 
Page  2
2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will include five components: 
1. 
Component 1: Source Identification
 (US$100,000 from GEF and US$100,000 
from Sichuan Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB)). This component will finance the 
Sichuan EPB to recruit individual and firm consultants to identify potential sources of 
significant contamination from hazardous chemicals and wastes by following national 
and international best practices on rapid environmental assessment in disaster response 
and recovery. Based on initial screening activities carried out by the Sichuan EPB, and 
based on available methodologies and procedures for rapid assessment, technical 
consultants will be recruited to rapidly assemble a field investigation form, investigation 
procedures and a set of criteria to determine priorities for preliminary site assessment 
activities to be supported by Component 2. The investigation procedures will include 
proper use of personal protection equipment and necessary personal protection measures 
for site inspection.   
2. 
After the procedures have been developed and the field investigators have been 
trained, this component will support the field investigators to: 
a.  check the registration information of industrial facilities involved in production, 
use, storage, distribution and disposal of hazardous chemicals and wastes;  
b. establish an inventory of all identified facilities that are potential pollution 
sources. Hazard maps will be prepared with the identified facilities clearly marked 
on the map;  
c.  carry out on-site visual inspections to review the situations of sites that have not 
been visited previously; and  
d.  update the inventory and the hazard map, and prepare a list of potential sites for 
further testing and analysis. 
 
3. 
This component is expected to be completed within two months.   
4. 
Component 2: Preliminary Site Assessment 
(US$750,000 from GEF and 
US$212,000 from the Sichuan EPB).
 
This component will finance the Sichuan EPB to 
recruit a consultant to carry out site assessment at the identified sites. Samples will be 
taken, and analysis will be performed on site. The results of such analysis will be 
recorded accordingly. This information will be analyzed later to assess potential impacts 
and risks to the environment and human health by any releases of hazardous chemicals 
and wastes from the sites. Preliminary site assessment reports will be prepared as soon as 
possible after each site visit.  
5. 
As the environmental monitoring infrastructure in the project area has been 
seriously damaged by the earthquake, this component will support the procurement of 
portable monitoring and analytical equipment, and necessary off-road vehicles that can 
reach badly damaged areas. A detailed equipment list is provided in Annex 3. 
6. 
Results of this component will be examined against ambient environment quality 
data obtained from Components 1 (water environment assessment), 2 (solid waste 
Page  3
3
pollution assessment) and 4 (soil pollution assessment) of the MEP Program. This 
comparison will be used to evaluate possible linkage between likely sources of chemical 
releases and the ambient environmental data.  
7. 
This component is expected to be completed within two months.   
8. 
Component 3: Recommendations on Mitigation Priorities. (
US$100,000 from 
GEF and $50,000 from the Sichuan EPB). Based on monitoring results and preliminary 
site assessment reports, the consultant will carry out a priority setting exercise to focus on 
immediate needs in the project areas. Outputs of this exercise will enable the Sichuan 
EPB to further identify its emergency response needs and start looking into its medium- 
and long-term environmental management tasks during the recovery and reconstruction 
of the earthquake area.  
a. High priority emergency responses
.
It is expected that the consultant will 
recommend emergency response to those sites that are considered high risks. 
Those recommendations will be followed up with full site assessments to be 
carried out by the Sichuan EPB in future. Such emergency responses may include, 
but not be limited to, seal production facilities that are leaking, stop operations of 
waste disposal facilities that have been damaged, collect leachate from dumpsites 
if leaches are found, fence off these facilities to prevent public access to these 
sites, and put up warning signs. Suggestions will also be made to ensure that any 
emergency response actions will be properly implemented to avoid or minimize 
secondary environmental impacts. These actions are expected to be on-site 
interventions only and do not involve transportation of any hazardous substances 
from sites, nor any site cleanup activities. As the impact of the earthquake on 
those hazardous waste treatment facilities in affected areas are yet to be fully 
evaluated, it is not recommended that any stored hazardous waste be sent to any 
facilities for final disposal. All production activities in these sites will be banned 
until the sites are fully remediated.   
b. Low priority medium- and long-term action
.
This recommendation will be 
proposed for sites with medium to low risks. Given the limited site information 
obtained from the rapid and preliminary site assessment, it is not expected that the 
consultant can propose any concrete mitigation measures to such sites.  However 
they can recommend that the Sichuan EPB carry out full site assessments to 
clearly understand the extent of damages and contamination of these sites. As the 
project counties have been severely damaged by the earthquake and the secondary 
disasters such as landslide, flooding and are still facing continuous aftershocks, 
such in-depth site investigations are not foreseeable in the near future. This 
category of sites will be required to install fences with warning signs to prevent 
public access. Identified hazardous wastes shall be properly stored on sites, 
labeled and recorded. All production activities, if any, will be banned. On-site 
waste disposal will also be banned. For the same reason mentioned above, 
disposal of any stored hazardous wastes off-sites will not be recommended at this 
stage. 
c. No action
.
For sites with minimal earthquake impact, no further action will be 
Page  4
4
recommended, and the site is to be marked as no risk in the inventory. 
9. 
These recommendations will be provided to MEP for incorporation into the MEP 
integrated assessment (see Annex 1) for the Sichuan EPB. The MEP integrated 
assessment will provide a basis for the Sichuan EPB to plan its emergency response 
actions with sound environmental information on a priority-based time-scale in the 
earthquake area. It is expected that MEP/Sichuan EPB wil
l
evaluate the consultant’s 
findings and recommendations on a rolling basis.   
10. 
This component is expected to be completed within one month. 
11. 
Component 4: Information Disclosure 
(US$50,000 from GEF and US$38,000 
from the Sichuan EPB). This component will finance the Sichuan EPB in developing a 
program to disclose information generated from this project. Monitoring results, 
preliminary risk assessment reports, and recommendations on mitigation actions will be 
publicized through leaflets, websites, TV and radio programs etc. In addition, this 
component will support the preparation and distribution of information to the public on 
necessary safeguards measures for avoiding or minimizing potential exposures to releases 
of hazardous chemicals and wastes. Caution will be exercised in information disclosure 
to ensure that any disclosed information will not be misinterpreted and cause widespread 
panic to the public, currently a very vulnerable population.  
12. 
This component will commence after the immediate rescue effort has been 
completed, and the public is more at ease. Public disclosure activities will continue 
throughout the project life. 
13. 
Component 5: Project Management
 (US$50,000 from MEP and US$50,000 
from the Sichuan EPB). This component would support the management of the project 
including, among other things, equipment procurement, consultant recruitment, financial 
management, and monitoring and evaluation. As the national implementing agency, MEP 
will procure the needed equipment based on an equipment list provided by the Sichuan 
EPB, facilitate consultant contract signing with consultants selected by the Sichuan EPB, 
prepare withdrawal requests to MOF, and provide general oversight. In the meantime, the 
Sichuan EPB will concentrate on all ground activities, and ensure all activities are carried 
out as scheduled. Management oversight from MEP and supervision of project activities 
by the Sichuan EPB will be ongoing throughout the project life. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
 
Initial screening by Sichuan EPB has identified that five counties/county-level cities (out 
of the 40 hardest hit counties) would need special attention on potential chemical 
contamination due to concentration of chemical industries in these counties.
1
The five 
counties are: 
1
The term “county” here refers to these counties and county-level cities.  
Page  5
5
a. 
Pengzhou City in Chengdu Municipality 
b.  Shifang and Mianzhu Cities in Deyang Municipality 
c. 
Anxian and Beichuan Counties in Mianyang Municipality 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Peisheng Wang, Environmental Specialist 
Andres Liebenthal, Sr. Environment Advisor 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50)  
X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.  
Overall Positive Impacts.   
The proposed project is a technical assistance project that 
aims to help Sichuan identify potential environmental risk associated with hazardous 
materials in the earthquake area. As an integral part of the MEP Program, the project 
itself is an environmental safeguarding activity that will have significant positive 
environmental and social contributions to the recovery and reconstruction of the project 
area. 
 
Negative Impacts at the project level.
 At the project level, the major environmental 
concerns are personal health and safety of site investigators and laboratory technicians, 
and a very limited amount of wastes generated under this project. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. 
Although this project will not finance any investment activities, the project will finance 
consulting services that will deliver recommendations that assist MEP/Sichuan EPB 
prioritize their mitigation actions. Therefore, the project is expected to have indirect 
impacts in the project area when MEP/Sichuan EPB adopt the project’s recommendations 
to plan its emergency response and future mitigation actions at the high priority sites. 
Properly planned and implemented emergency response and future mitigation actions are 
expected to generate positive social and environmental impacts for the project counties. 
Page  6
6
However, it is also recognized that improper use of such recommendations in emergency 
response and future mitigation actions may lead to secondary environmental 
contamination if identified hazardous substances are mishandled. 
Given this practical concern, the project will require the technical consultant to 
particularly highlight how the emergency response measures should be implemented to 
avoid or minimize possible secondary environmental risks associated with such 
mitigation actions. In addition, all emergency responses actions should be carried out 
with the greatest care and follow all national environmental requirements, including those 
policies, technical guidelines issued specifically for the recovery and reconstruction of 
the earthquake area.  
For medium- and long-term actions, MEP/Sichuan EPB will be reminded that results of 
this project are based on preliminary assessment activities. In-depth site assessment will 
have to be carried out to help MEP/Sichuan EPB further understand site situations before 
they can develop any site mitigation plans. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Measures for Project Level Environmental Concerns
 
·
Health and safety.
Concerns on health and safety issues will be adequately 
addressed through provision of necessary personal protection equipment (PPE) 
and prior safety training to all involved staff. In particular, the training will 
emphasize the importance of how to carry out inspection and sampling in the 
damaged area without provoking any risks from physical stability of the structures 
as well as from hazardous substances. 
·
Limited amount of hazardous wastes generated under the project.
Implementation 
of this project will generate laboratory waste, including those unused samples and 
all hazardous wastes generated from sampling and analysis processes. In addition, 
personal protection clothes and equipment will also become waste if they are no 
longer usable. All these wastes will be collected, properly packaged, and disposed 
of according to hazardous waste management procedures defined by the national 
environmental regulations. By doing so, environmental and health risks caused by 
improperly stored or disposed wastes can be minimized. 
Mitigation Measures to Potential Negative Impacts Associated with Future Actions  
The following describes sequencing of different mitigation activities in the Sichuan 
provide to help avoid and minimize risks in the earthquake areas in Sichuan.   
Page  7
7
(1) 
MEP emergency policies, plans and guidelines issued prior to June 2, 2008. 
MEP 
and the Sichuan EPB have already taken a series of actions in their efforts to 
minimize such risks. To minimize potential secondary environmental risks associated 
with activities to be carried out during the recovery and reconstruction process, MEP 
issued the following eleven emergency notices, policies, and technical guidelines. In 
addition, MEP commissioned technical experts to review environmental impact of the 
earthquake immediately after the earthquake.  
i. 
Notice on Prevention and Control of Secondary Environmental Pollution 
Incidents After the Sichuan Earthquake (2008-05-13);  
ii. 
Decision about Starting of the National Emergency Plan for Response to 
Emergent Environmental Incidents (2008-05-13);  
iii. 
Emergent Notice on Emergent Environmental Monitoring Plan During the 
Earthquake Disaster Relief Period (2008-05-13) 
iv. 
Guidelines for Protection of Central Drinking Water Sources in the Earthquake 
Region (2008 -05-20) 
v. 
Technical Plan for Assurance of Drinking Waster Safety in the Earthquake 
Region (2008-05-20);  
vi. 
Guidelines for Monitoring of Surface Water Quality and Central Drinking 
Waster Quality in the Earthquake Region (2008-05-20) 
vii. 
Guidelines for Debris Removal and Waste Management after the Earthquake 
(2008-05-24);  
viii. 
Emergent Notice on Assurance of Drinking Water Safety in the Earthquake 
Region (2008-05-26);  
ix. 
Guidelines for Safe Use and Control of Hygienic Disinfectant Chemicals in the 
Earthquake Region (2008-05-29); 
x. 
Guidelines for Safe Disposal of Medical Waste in the Earthquake Region (2008-
06-02); and 
xi. 
Guidelines of Environmental Protection During Construction of Temporary 
Settlement Areas  (2008-06-02)   
(2) 
MEP’s integrated assessment on environment (launched on June 3, 2008 and 
expected to be completed by June 3, 2009). 
On June 3, 2008 MEP launched a 
Program on Post-Earthquake Environmental Safety Assessment and Countermeasures 
to evaluate post-earthquake environment and recommend counter measures on key 
issues, such as drinking water safety, nuclear and radioactive safety, soil and ecology, 
environmental protection in reconstruction and resettlement, chemical contamination, 
and recovery and strengthening of environmental protection capacity. This project has 
been included in the program as one of its ten components. The ten components of the 
program are:  
i. 
Assessment of drinking water and water environment pollution;  
ii. 
Assessment of solid waste pollution;  
iii. 
Assessment of nuclear and radioactive safety;  
iv. 
Assessment of soil pollution;  
v. 
Assessment of ecological environment and biodiversity;  
vi. 
Environmental protection during the temporary settlement of rural and urban 
residents;  
Page  8
8
vii. 
Assessment of industrial development strategy and environmental protection 
during the reconstruction of industrial enterprises;  
viii. 
Rapid Assessment of potential chemical contamination due to Wenchuan 
Earthquake in Sichuan Province (i.e. this project);  
ix. 
Assessment of environmental protection infrastructure and environmental 
regulatory enforcement capacity; and  
x. 
Integrated assessment of and countermeasures to the post-earthquake 
environment. 
 
With conclusions from different assessments on soil, drinking water, solid wastes, 
nuclear and radioactive substances, ecology and biodiversity, temporary resettlement, 
potential chemical contamination (from this proposed project), industrial 
development strategy and environment protection during reconstruction, 
environmental protection infrastructure and enforcement capacity, Component 10 will 
reach conclusions from different assessments on soil, drinking water, solid waste, 
nuclear and radioactive substances, ecology and biodiversity, temporary resettlement, 
potential chemical contamination (from this proposed project), industrial 
development strategy and environment protection during reconstruction, 
environmental protection infrastructure and enforcement capacity. This will allow 
Component 10 of the MEP Program to develop an integrated assessment which will 
provide a comprehensive understanding of the earthquake damages to the 
environment and propose measures to ensure that mitigation actions and future 
remediation and reconstruction programs will be consistent with applicable national 
policies and standards. 
Information collected from the MEP’s ongoing environmental 
monitoring program will also be reviewed and analyzed so that priorities for 
environmental safety of the earthquake area can be identified. Based on the integrated 
assessment, new policies, guidelines and action plans will be developed and enforced 
to better regulate environmental emergency responses as well as long-term mitigation 
actions to be carried out in the earthquake area. 
(3) 
Sichuan’s overall integrated re-construction program (expected to start after the 
situations in the earthquake area are stabilized). 
To support the future 
reconstruction, MEP will present the integrated assessment to the Sichuan EPB and 
Sichuan Governme
nt. This assessment, together with other sectors’ assessments (such 
as assessment on effects on agriculture and livestock, construction, health, education, 
infrastructure, utilities, etc.) will help Sichuan to prioritize its reconstruction and 
recovery program, which is expected to be presented to the State Council. Initial 
estimate is that the reconstruction period will last three to eight years. 
(4) 
Government’s requirements in construction of any facility.  
The reconstruction of 
the earthquake area will be carried out by following strictly all existing national 
regulations and technical standards and guidelines, including those for environmental 
protection. All large construction (any construction of building, facilities, schools, 
hospitals, road, sewerage plants, chemical plants, etc) will have to be reviewed and 
cleared by the National Development and Research Committee (NDRC) or by the 
Sichuan DRC, and other relevant authorities, including the Sichuan EPB. Any 
proposed planning and construction activities (including reconstruction of damaged 
Page  9
9
facilities) will have to follow national environmental regulations to carry out either 
planning environmental assessment or environmental impact assessment to identify 
and mitigate potential environmental impacts of such proposed actions. Conclusion of 
any construction activities (such as schools, landfills, industrial plants, waste 
management facility) will also be reviewed and commissioned by relevant 
government authorities (either provincial or local) to ensure the facility has met all 
safety, health, fire fighting and other construction codes. Only when this permit is 
obtained, can the facility be used. 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
(1) The key stakeholders of this project are: MEP, Sichuan EPB, governments of the five 
counties, facilities that own hazardous chemicals and wastes, and people live in the 
five counties and their proximity. The preparation of this project has been carried out 
mainly by MEP through direct phone and email communication with Sichuan EPB. 
Sichuan EPB has maintained direct dialogue with the local governments of the five 
counties. However, due to the fact that these counties have been severely damaged by 
the earthquake and its secondary disasters such as landslide, flooding and continuous 
aftershocks, it was impossible to carry out any consultation with facility owners and 
the public that may be affected by MEP/Sichuan
 EPB’s follow-up site mitigation 
measures.  
 
(2) For the same reason, it is not expected that disclosure of project documents at the 
project counties can be done at this stage. One project county, Beichuan, has been 
partially flooded, and the entire population has been re-settled throughout the Sichuan 
province. The other four project counties have also been seriously damaged – roads 
are almost impassible, most schools, libraries, hospitals have collapsed, and local 
authorities and population are currently mainly concerned with safety, sanitary, and 
survival issues. 
 
(3) MEP has agreed to disclose the project document in English on the MEP POPs 
website within a month and disclose the project document in Chinese within two 
months after the signing of the Grant Agreement between the Bank and the Ministry 
of Finance of China. Following the MEP practice, the Sichuan Academy of 
Environmental Sciences will disclosure the project document on its own website. 
 
(4) In addition, the project has included one project component – Component 4 on 
Information Disclosure – to effectively carry out public disclosure to ensure the 
public are aware and fully informed. Monitoring results, preliminary risk assessment 
reports, and recommendations on mitigation measures will be publicized through 
leaflets, websites, TV and radio programs. Moreover, this component will support 
preparation and distribution of information to the public on necessary safeguards 
measures for avoiding or minimizing potential exposure to releases of hazardous 
chemicals and wastes. However, caution will be exercised in information disclosure 
to ensure that any disclosed information will not be misinterpreted and cause 
widespread panic to the currently very vulnerable population. 
Page  10
10 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: N/A 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal? 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: N/A 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: N/A 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: N/A 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
Page  11
11 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Helen Chan and Jiang Ru 
June 16, 2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Peishen Wang
 
June 16, 2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Andres Liebenthal
 
June 16, 2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Jose Vicente Zevallos 
(Acting for L. Panneer Selvam) 
June 17, 2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
June 20, 2008 
Comments:   
