Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/07/2009 
Report No.:  AC3685
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P091950 
Project Name:  CN-Guizhou Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development 
Task Team Leader:  Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 5, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (40%);Other social 
development (40%);Other urban development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase economic benefits to local communities, 
including minority groups, and national parks, through increased tourism and better 
protected cultural and natural heritage in participating sites.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises four components: (a) Ethnic Minority Cultural Heritage Protection 
Component; (b) Natural Heritage and Scenic Site Protection and Development 
Component; (c) Tourism Gateway Town Facilities Component; and (d) Capacity 
Building and Project Implementation Support Component. The first three components are 
designed to bring about benefits to local communities, including ethnic minority villages 
in project sites, such as the preservation of cultural and natural heritage assets and the 
improvement of basic living conditions through upgrading infrastructure facilities. The 
last component is intended for both the local communities and government officials in the 
tourism sector in Guizhou to ensure long-term sustainable development. The four 
components are summarized below.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Ethnic Minority Cultural Heritage Protection (US$ 49.85 million), 
including: (a) small scale infrastructure facilities in villages and towns; (b) protection of 
unique historic buildings and establishment of cultural and visitor centers; (c) pilot 
rehabilitation of traditional private houses; and (d) intangible cultural heritage protection 
(arts, crafts and music, etc).  
 
Component 2: Natural Heritage and Scenic Site Protection and Development (US$ 
24.71 million), including improvements to infrastructure and tourism facilities in: (a) 
Guanlin Geo-Park in Anshun Municipality; (b) Dingxiao Geo-Park in Qian Xinan 
Prefecture; (c) Wanfenglin National Scenic Area in Qian Xinan Prefecture; and (d) 
Shibing Sanmu River Scenic Area in Qian Dongnan Prefecture.  
 
Component 3: Tourism Gateway Town Facilities (US$ 14.09 million), including the 
construction of: (a) three county-level tourist information centers in Qian Dongnan 
Prefecture; and (b) a Guizhou Provincial Heritage Protection, Tourism Development and 
Information Center in Guiyang.  
 
Component 4: Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support (US$ 3.30 
million), including: (a) technical assistance for project implementation and capacity 
building; (b) PMO strengthening and training for tourism sector staff; (c) revision of the 
Guizhou Tourism Master Plan and development of guidelines for the conservation of 
traditional buildings and environments in minority villages; and (d) tourism promotion in 
Qian Dongnan Prefecture.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Guizhou is located in southwest China and borders Sichuan, Chongqing, Hunan, 
Guangxi, and Yunnan Provinces. It has a total area of 176,100 km2, and an average 
altitude of 1,100 m. About 92.5% of Guizhou is mountainous and has hilly areas, and 
61.9% is featured with Karst topography - the most outstanding characteristic of 
Guizhou’s physical environment. Guizhou is located in the subtropical monsoon zone, 
characterized by a warm and humid climate.  
 
Guizhou has an abundance of surface water which principally comprises two river 
systems, the Yangtze and Pearl River basins. Surface water quality is generally good 
according to national standard; however, the water quality at the urban sections of the 
rivers is a serious environmental issue.  
 
Guizhou has one of China’s most pristine environments. Botanical resources of the 
province are well known for a large amount of rare flora, ancient trees of historic and 
cultural value, and a wide spread of planted forests. Guizhou also provides habitat for a 
range of wildlife. Protected fauna include Golden Monkeys and birdlife. Investigation 
shows that there are no protected ancient trees or rare flora in project towns/villages. 
Some of the project locations have ancient trees which are far from construction sites or 
are well protected. No significant impacts are anticipated.  
 
Page  3
In 2004 Guizhou’s population of 39 million comprised 26% of urban residents. Guizhou 
is the home to 49 ethnic minority groups with a population of 13.39 million, which 
accounts for 36.77% of Guizhou’s total population. Ethnic groups whose population 
exceeds 100,000 include the Miao, Buyi, Dong, Tujia, Yi, Gelao, Shui, Hui and Bai.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (SDV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project addresses the sustainable development of Guizhou’s cultural and 
natural heritage, and therefore can be predicted to deliver positive benefits in improved 
preservation and conservation of the heritage. The project will instill a commitment to, 
and practical experience of, sustainable approaches to tourism development amongst the 
government and the public in Guizhou, resulting in enhanced cultural heritage 
appreciation, environmental sustainability and economic development of isolated 
populations. Owing to the national significance of Guizhou’s heritage, the project also 
has the potential to make a substantive contribution to the development of approaches to 
sustainable tourism in China as a whole.  
 
The project also can be predicted to deliver positive environmental and social benefits. 
If the investments at each site are carried out in a responsible manner, they will contribute 
to the improvement of local environmental conditions. Social and economic benefits can 
be realized through the use of increasing the number of tourists to accelerate the 
development of the service industry. Economic development driven by tourism will 
increase job opportunities and enhance incentives for the protection of natural and 
cultural heritage.  
 
The project components will potentially cause a variety of short-term impacts, such as 
dust, noise, and soil erosion, etc. However, those impacts are relatively minor and a series 
Page  4
of mitigation measures have been planned to reduce the impacts to acceptable levels. 
Details of mitigation measures, and the monitoring program that mitigation measures are 
to ensure effective implementation, and responsibilities are provided in the EMP.  
 
Resettlement impacts are quite limited. In most cases, land needed for the village project 
will be obtained through land adjustment or donation. Facilities built under gateway and 
scenic area subprojects will use empty state owned land in most cases. Only one village 
involves housing demolishing as required by following the provincial cultural heritage 
preservation planning.  
 
Three minority groups including Miao, Dong and Buyi will be affected. Majority of 
beneficiaries of the project are minorities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
During the construction phase, the project components will potentially cause a variety of 
short-term impacts, as described above.  
 
On the other hand, during the operation phase, some longer-term environmental impacts 
and issues might be appeared, such as inappropriate solid waste collection and disposal, 
and noise management. However, many of the concerns have been addressed in the 
design of the facilities. The local capacity of environmental management will be 
strengthened through the TA component supported by Bank loan.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Im
pacts of “with and without the project” have been analyzed during the preparation of 
EA documets. Analysis reveals that the proposed project will promote sustainable 
development of tourism industry in favour of the protection of Guizhou’s cultural and 
natural heritages and poverty alleviation. Adverse impacts will be avoided or mitigated 
by implementing the EMP prepared. Hence the proposed project is recommended.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address the safeguards issues, a conprehensive EA/Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP), individual EMPs for each subcomponent, , a consolidated RAP including a 
resettlement policy framework have been developed.  Social assessment has been carried 
out, free, prior and informed consultation with affected minority groups was conduced 
during project preparation and a community participation and operational manual has 
been prepared.  
 
The Guizhou Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO) will have the overall 
responsibility for coordination with and reporting to the World Bank on the safeguards 
issues of the project. Project implementing units, including the PPMO, have no 
experience with Bank-financed projects. Training on the Bank’s safeguards policy has 
been provided and additional training will be necessary. An independent environment and 
Page  5
resettlement monitor will be contracted under the project, and the PPMO will prepare 
semi-
annual environmental management reports for the Bank’s supervision team.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In the preparation of EA safeguard documents, two rounds of public consultation were 
carried out through questionnaire surveys, expert consultations, household interviews and 
public hearings during the preparation of the project. The first round was conducted when 
preparing EA terms of reference (TOR) in April and May, 2007, while the second round 
was when completing a draft EA report in November and December, 2007. Participants 
in public consultation were mainly from individuals who would be potentially affected by 
the project, organizations/institutes, NGOs and experts.  
 
Information on the project and potential environmental impacts has been publicly 
disclosed through various means, such as the Internet (www.ghidri.com,cn) and local 
newspaper (Guizhou Daily, Jan 30, 2008).  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
Public consultation and participation was a key element in resettlement planning. Free, 
prior and informed consultation with minorities in the project areas was conducted 
through the process of social assessment. As a result, a community participation and 
operational manual has been developed. The resettlement action plan and resettlement 
policy framework have been publicly disclosed through local media (Guizhou Daily, 
April 24, 2008, and Qiandongnan Daily, April 3, 2008). These documents can be 
accessible through internet (www.gz-travel.net and www.mdlyw.com) as well as in the 
PMO offices. The government at different levels have committed for implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/17/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/20/2008 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
IPP elements have been incorporated into overall project design. Therefore individual 
IPDP is not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
09/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
09/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
09/16/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
09/23/2008 
Comments:   
