Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/14/2009 
Report No.:  AC4287
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P112359 
Project Name:  NanGuang Railway Project 
Task Team Leader:  John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5,685.00
5,685.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to provide additional transport capacity and reduce 
transport time between the less developed western region of southwest China and the 
relatively more developed Pearl River Delta region.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project achieves its development objective by connecting the existing railway 
network in the western region of southwest China and the existing railway network in the 
Pearl River Delta region.  It will also connect to numerous network improvements 
underway or planned which will directly contribute to optimizing the benefits to rail 
transport provided by this project.  The construction being undertaken directly by the 
project consists of about 400 km of double track electrified mixed use (passenger and 
freight) railway from Litang West Station to New Zhaoqing Station; in addition, the 
project will finance half the cost of the 62 km of four-track railway being constructed 
between New Zhaoqing Station and Sanyanqiao Station by the GuiGuang project # 
another World Bank financed project (following construction and once the companies are 
incorporated, it is understood that, the two tracks financed by the NanGuang project will 
be formally transferred to the NanGuang company but will be maintained and controlled 
by the GuiGuang company for a yet to be determined fee). At the western end the project 
Page  2
connects to the existing rail network of southwest China near the city of Guigang and 
again further west near the city of Litang (roughly 95 km northeast of Nanning), and then 
connects with the planned LiuNan Dedicated Passenger Railway project (Liuzhou to 
Nanning) at the Litang West station (just west of the city of Litang).  At the eastern end 
the project connects to the existing railway network of the Pearl River delta at 
Sanyanqiao Station.  
 
The Bank loan will finance the procurement of goods associated with the portion of the 
project between Litang West and New Zhaoqing including communications, signaling 
and electrification equipment and maintenance vehicles.  In addition to the goods 
financed by the Bank loan, there is related technical assistance.  The scope of the 
technical assistance (consultant services#, training, and study tours) (if any) will be 
identified during implementation.  
 
The proposed project alignment is relatively direct connecting urban centers such as 
Litang, Guigang, Wuzhou and Zhaoqing. The project passes through generally lightly-
populated country and traverses a variety of terrains including flat alluvial terraces and 
eroded basins and hilly river valley basins.  
 
Although the track will be laid to technical standards that permit speeds of up to 250 
km/h, passenger trains will operate at a maximum speed of 200 km/h and freight trains at 
a
maximum speed of 120 km/h.  In order to accommodate the design speed, it will have a 
relatively straight alignment.  The project includes many bridges (approximately 33% of 
the length) and tunnels (approximately 20% of the length).  
 
Sixteen intermediate railway stations and four overtaking stations are planned to be built 
or reconstructed as part of the project. The new track of the project will run parallel to the 
existing track between Litang and Guigang (about 59 km). Between Litang and Guigang, 
freight trains will operate on the existing track while the passenger trains will use the new 
project track.  Power will be provided from the nearby city grid to the #traction 
substation# (i.e. transformer house) in the railway station under an electricity purchase 
contract and by the local power company. There will be connection lines between the 
traction substation and the city grid.  These lines are parts of the city grid and not separate 
dedicated electric transmission lines for the project.  
 
The planned construction period is about 4 years.  Construction commenced in April 
2009 and the project is proposed to be commissioned by 2014.  At the time of appraisal, 
mid-April 2009, land acquisition had begun, though resettlement and construction had 
not.  Nonetheless, construction, once begun, is expected to proceed rapidly.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project alignment is relatively direct connecting urban centers such as 
Litang, Guigang, Wuzhou and Zhaoqing. The project passes through generally lightly-
populated country and traverses a variety of terrains including flat alluvial terraces and 
eroded basins and hilly river valley basins.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (GEFEO) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The NanGuang Railway will have the potential to cause direct, indirect, or cumulative 
impacts to the social and natural environment. The NanGuang Railway is anticipated to 
have beneficial impacts related to increased mobility and the promotion of economic 
development in impoverished regions of southern China. Manageable adverse impacts 
are primarily related to (i) crossing a few sensitive sites such as nature reserves and forest 
parks, areas of cultural value, and scenic areas; (ii) community impacts such as 
resettlement in urban and rural areas, community severance, and noise and vibration; (iii) 
induced and scenic impacts; and (iv) impacts during construction and operation.  
 
Crossing Sensitive Areas. The most sensitive component of the proposed project will be 
the construction and operation of the railway line through environmentally and socially 
sensitive areas. There are more than 20 environmental sensitive sites identified along the 
project corridor. Various alternatives were studied and the final proposed alignment 
successfully avoided most of these environmental sensitive areas. However, due to the 
distribution of economic hubs and special natural conditions along the line, there remain 
about 7 environmental sensitive areas upon which the alignment may have potential 
impact. The final alignment will pass through the edge of two nature reserves (all through 
tunnels), edges of two forest parks (all through tunnels), and outskirt boundary of one 
nature reserve and one scenic area (by tunnels), and edge of an ancient tombs area. These 
include: (i) Tongledashan Nature Reserve, (ii) Jilongding Nature Reserve, (iii) Dalishan 
Forest Park, (iv) Yapoji Forest Park, (v) Dinghushan Nature Reserve, (vi) Xinghu Scenic 
Page  4
Area, (vii) Guigang Ancient Tombs Group Area.  In addition it also avoids the core 
protection sections of all water source protection areas.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP4.04). By avoiding most ecologically sensitive areas, the project 
has minimized impacts on natural habitats. However, construction activity in a localized 
ecologically sensitive area could affect the ecological environment. Any impact will be 
temporary during construction stage. The tunnel-bridge-tunnel scheme of the project 
(more than 50% of the whole alignment) will minimize the loss of surface vegetation as 
well as fragmentation of habitats for wildlife. It also avoids the main habitats where rich 
wildlife biodiversity is present. The ecological survey through data collection, 
consultation with local authority/research institutes and utilization of GIS/GPS/Remote 
Sensing technology, confirmed that surface vegetation along the alignment (outside the 
protected areas) are mostly secondary/planted trees of common species. Given the 
intensive development and human activities along the project corridor, the project areas 
are not valuable habitats in terms of biodiversity. Hence, the project will not lead to 
significant loss of natural habitats, nor adversely affect any critical natural habitat.  
 
Through screening against World Bank safeguards policies, it is noted that the OP4.04 
Natural Habitats applied for this project. The application of this policy is due to the fact 
that part of the alignment fall into the boundary of a number of natural reserves which 
have legal protection status and compatible with the definition of #natural habitats# in 
OP4.04. However, the alignment sections through these reserves are all tunnels, without 
ecological footprint within the boundary of these reserves. Site specific analysis has been 
conducted for each sensitive site. The construction arrangement is made to avoid any 
physical activities within the reserve boundary. Close consultations with relevant 
authorities have been conducted as per law requirement, and legal approvals have been 
granted by these authorities. Therefore, though OP4.04 is triggered due to legal concept 
reason, the analysis confirmed that there is very little potential impact envisioned.   Since 
there will be no degradation or conversion of natural habitats, there is no need for offsets; 
however, mitigation measures have been included in the EMP such as: (i) rules for 
contractors; (ii) no disposal sites or new access roads inside sensitive areas; (iii) 
ecological monitoring (specifically requested by the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection); and (iv) greening programs.  
 
Though some woodland will be taken during construction, the project will not lead to 
loss of protected or old/valuable plants under Chinese laws. No any forest of scale will be 
cleared or impacted during construction. The loss of vegetation will be common plants 
species and farmland crops, which does not represent high value in terms of biodiversity. 
Intensive soil erosion control and re-vegetation program is designed as per Chinese 
laws/regulations upon completion of the project, which will further mitigate and 
compensate the loss of surface vegetation. Therefore, the project#s impact on surface 
vegetation will not be significant, and can be minimized to acceptable level. As a result, 
OP 4.36 Forest is not triggered. It is also noted that there will be no use of herbicides 
along the right-of-way to clear vegetation. Therefore, OP 4.09 Pest Management is not 
triggered.  
 
Page  5
Physical Cultural Resources. (OP 4.11). A cultural resources survey was conducted for 
all project sites, led by local archeological institutes, in combination with consultations 
with local cultural property management authorities and the general public. This survey 
was complemented by field surveys during EA preparation. One cultural property site 
Guigang Ancient Tombs Group Area (ca. 3.08 km2) was identified. The alignment will 
pass through one edge of the area. Though officially this area was named as Ancient 
Tombs Group Area in 1963 for protection, it was observed during the field visit that the 
area has become highly urbanized. There is little evidence of visible tombs. The 
alignment is being fine-tuned to reduce the possibility of potential impact on the site. The 
proposed project will include upgrading of an existing railway station and expansion of 
existing railway lines by two new tracks. Another round of field surveys is being 
conducted by licensed cultural relic institutes.  The licensed institute has been hired by 
the NanGuang Project Office to conduct the detailed investigation and excavation 
following process and technical procedures as per Chinese Cultural Property Law and 
relevant regulations.  Chance-find procedures in line with domestic cultural property 
laws/regulations are included in the EMP.  
 
There is one church in the rural area in Nanhai, and five surname-based family temples 
to be resettled in Sanshui and Nanhai region of Guangdong.  Due to their normal status of 
building and common existence as public institutions, they are not listed as any level of 
Cultural Property Protection unit. Consultation has been conducted with these local 
communities, and their compensation and relocation have been discussed and agreed with 
those families, and included in the RAP. There are also about 1320 graves to be relocated 
along the alignment. All these graves are regular tombs for local communities and they 
are individually scattered along the alignment, with this cumulative number. The project 
is not affecting large cemeteries.  The approach is compensation for self-relocation with 
compensation rates and implementation procedures covered in RAP.  
 
Construction Impacts. Construction of the NanGuang Railway will cause temporary 
impact to the surrounding environment. Typical short-term construction impacts include 
noise, vibration, air quality, and water quality. If properly planned, the impact of 
construction on neighborhoods, businesses, and the natural environment can be 
minimized. Several aspects of construction have received special attention such as access 
roads, disposal of excess materials from tunnel construction, and management of camps.  
 
-
Spoil disposal and Borrow Pits. Given the fairly larger portion of tunnels throughout 
the line, proper handling of spoil material is a major environmental issue. 38 soil borrow 
sites and 106 spoil disposal sites have been identified following a series of environmental 
and social criteria. Restoration and reclamation plans have been developed for these sites, 
including farmland reclamation of 440 ha, grass re-vegetation of 45 ha, and planting of 
658,000 trees and bushes. Screening criteria and approval procedures were developed and 
included in EMP for additional such sites proposed by contractors during the construction 
period.  
 
-
Access Roads. Road network is fairly developed in the project corridor, hence the 
demand for new access roads will be limited. However, the access roads, if not well 
Page  6
managed will create substantial environmental impact. Access roads in key sensitive 
areas (nature reserve, forest park and scenic areas) were particularly assessed. Rural road 
networks will be utilized as access roads with appropriate strengthening. As most of the 
access roads will be identified by contractors during construction, a screening and 
approval procedure was developed and included in the EMP to ensure that Environmental 
Supervision Engineers review and approve the proposal from contractors. Upon project 
completion, these access roads will be handed over to local communities if appropriate; 
otherwise they will be ecologically restored.  
 
-
Tunnel Construction. There are a total of 106 tunnels in the project alignment, of 
which large amount of spoil waste need proper management. All major tunnels are 
specifically assessed in terms of geological condition, surrounding environment, potential 
impact and key mitigation measures. Geological survey data indicated non-existence of 
water-rich rock formation for these tunnels, hence minimal potential impact on 
groundwater. Spoil material will be reused for the project and local construction demand 
to the extent possible, and the waste spoil will be properly disposed of in pre-identified 
disposal sites according to the Soil Erosion Control Plan. Safety and health issues related 
to tunnel construction will follow the standard practice and technical norms in the sector.  
 
-
Water Pollution. The construction of bridge foundations and wastewater from 
construction sites will have a potential impact on surface water. Such impact can be well 
mitigated by good construction management practice, including cofferdam method for 
bridge foundation construction and sedimentation tanks for slurry and for wastewater.  
Wastewater is not allowed to be discharged directly into surface water bodies. 
Construction wastewater will not be allowed to be discharged directly into irrigation 
systems for farmland without proper treatment.  
 
-
Soil Erosion. Temporary retaining walls will be constructed to prevent earth/stone 
falling into water body. Wastewater collection/interception ditches will be dug in the 
material processing area. Spoil disposal sites will have proper drainage, retaining 
structures and timely leveling and reclamation. A dedicated Soil Erosion Control Plan has 
been developed, as per requirement by Chinese laws, as part of EA document package. 
This plan includes design and mitigation measures for soil erosion control of all disturbed 
sites, including subgrade, slope protection, borrow and disposal sites, access roads, 
construction and camp site, etc.  
 
-
Social Disturbance. Construction activities will have an impact on local road traffic 
and disturb people#s daily lives. Social impacts will be mitigated by proper selection of 
access roads, avoidance of residential areas, well planned traffic management measures 
(dedicated staff, installation of clear signage at sensitive sites, speed limit for material 
hauling vehicles), provision of temporary access roads for local communities, integration 
of community development into access road planning, timely restoration of irrigation 
facilities, among others. Cultural education and sensitivity training of workers will be 
provided with special attention to earth excavation, tomb relocation, local holidays or 
festivals and local spiritual facilities. Health education will also be provided to workers 
(including locally hired workers) on local epidemics, and HIV/AIDS.  
Page  7
-Dust and Noise. Construction activities will cause temporary impact of airborne dust. 
The mitigation measures to be adopted include frequent water spraying on construction 
sites and access roads to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials and 
timely site clean up after construction; dust control facility for material processing and 
mixing tower; personal protection wear (e.g. masks) will be provided to workers as 
needed. Construction activities will also exert temporary noise impact on local 
communities. Such impact will be properly mitigated by measures including use of low 
noise equipment and proper maintenance; careful scheduling of construction activities 
near sensitive sites; speed limits and signs prohibiting the use of vehicle warning devices 
will be installed for access road sections near sensitive sites; and night-time material 
hauling is to be restricted for roads near residential areas.  
 
Impacts during operation. The main issues during operation of the NanGuang Railway 
include noise and vibration, community safety and severance, and pollution aspects in 
terminals.  
 
-
Noise and Vibration. Modeling results indicated that the noise level will exceed 
applicable standards at 192 sensitive receptors (residential houses, schools and hospitals). 
Accordingly, proper mitigation measures have been developed in the EMP to mitigate 
noise impact, including noise barriers (139 places with total length of 54.8 km), 
insulation windows (126 places with total area of 35,430 m2), relocation of 106 
households, and use of track with dampening system. The modeling also concluded that 
the vibration level will exceed applicable standards at 184 sensitive receptors. At these 
locations special elastic track and vibration-absorption cushions will be adopted to 
mitigate vibration impacts to an acceptable level. Intensive green belts have been 
designed along both sides of alignment to help reduce noise impact.  
 
-
Community Severance and Safety. The entire line will be fenced to keep people off the 
track. Bridges and underpasses to carry roads over or under the track are designed based 
on consultation with local government and general public. There are a total of 292 
passages (over-passes and underpasses) designed to facilitate safe movement of people 
and animals across the railway right of way. More than 1157 culverts are designed, with 
consideration of pedestrian and agricultural vehicles demand.  
 
-
Waste Management. Wastewater treatment facilities will be installed in the train 
stations to ensure compliance of discharge. Solid waste will be properly collected and 
disposed of in local municipal landfills.  
 
-
Electro-magnetic Frequency Impacts. Modeling and analog analysis concluded that 
operation of electric trains may have a potential impact on nearby households who use 
antennas for television signal receiving. This potential impact will be monitored during 
the operation stage, and a total budget of RMB 2.59 million has been reserved for 
provision of cable TV access for those villages that may subject to impact. The EMF 
impact traction from power lines is known to be negligible, and the impact of power 
transformer substations and GSM-R stations is within the applicable standards.  
Page  8
Resettlement  
 
Resettlement planning includes an inventory survey of physical impacts and a census of 
the affected population within the impact area as determined under the preliminary 
technical design, as well as a socioeconomic survey and a social assessment conducted.  
 
Despite the minimizing efforts which reduced project impacts, the project is expected to 
affect 170 villages of 15 counties in Guangxi Region and Guangdong Province.  About 
27,777 mu of land will be acquired, including 13,231 mu of cultivated land and another 
12,780 mu of land is expected to be leased during the construction period.  About 19,059 
people in 5,444 households will be affected through land acquisition.  About 6,931 
people in 2,029 households, including 210 households with 650 persons from urban 
areas, are to be relocated.  195 enterprises, 7 schools and 23 shops will be affected as 
well.  The total affected population is expected to be 25,784 people, including people 
losing land and/or houses; employees in affected factories and shops; and students in 
affected schools. The project will also have impacts on local infrastructure and public 
facilities.  The impact data will be updated for implementation with detailed engineering 
designs that will finalize the precise project impact boundaries.  The updated impact data 
and costs will be forwarded to the Bank.  
 
Ethnic minority groups  
 
An impact screening exercise was conducted in Sept 2008 to identify whether ethnic 
minority groups are present in the impact zones. Only Zhuang ethnic minority groups 
were found and they live in 22 villages together with Han villagers.  
 
Further social assessment efforts reviewed the following aspects relating to Zhuang 
ethnic minorities # government policies and definition of ethnic minorities, land tenure 
and land resources utilization, livelihood patterns, social and cultural characteristics, 
informal institutions, poverty status, project impacts and mitigation measures.  It 
concludes that i) the Zhuang ethnic population identified in the 22 villages do not meet 
the definition of the indigenous people under the World Bank OP 4.10, and ii) there is no 
need for prepare a separate ethnic minority peoples# development plan.    The team has 
reviewed the social assessment report and endorses its conclusions and recommendations.  
The team social scientist confirms that IP communities meeting the characteristics 
defined under OP 4.10 are absent in the project area.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Induced Impacts. The railway will provide excellent opportunities for local development 
such as local business trade, transportation and construction, especially around the 
terminals. Without planning, these changes could bring about congestion, increased waste 
and pollution, and threats to cultural resources. Impacts on large urban centers will be 
less significant since they will easily absorb these changes. MOR has maintained 
extensive dialogue with local governments. Alignment and location of terminals in urban 
and scenic areas meet restrictions and objectives of urban land use, and consistent with 
urban master plans. Therefore, the induced development impact will be fully incorporated 
into the urban planning and management.  
Page  9
Aesthetic Impacts. The line will pass through a nature reserve, a scenic areas and two 
forest parks which are considered to have special aesthetic value. In addition to 
mitigation measures such as minimizing cutting and filling, an ambitious reclamation 
plan has been designed (Soil Erosion Control Plan) for re-vegetation of embankment, 
cutting slopes, tunnel portals, borrow pits and disposal sites to restore ecological 
conditions. Aesthetic impacts and measures have been identified including: (i) special 
design of terminals to ensure adequate greening and compatibility with local architecture 
and landscape; (ii) tunnel portals with re-vegetation plans to minimize visual impacts; 
(iii)  
 
bridges will also be designed with consideration to landscape, and (iv) #green corridor# 
development along the alignment.  
 
Cumulative Impacts. There are two relatively large scale linear projects, Pingnan-
Wuzhou Expressway and GuiGuang Railway, are/will be under construction within the 
construction time frame of NanGuang railway project and partially within the same 
corridor, and could potentially interact with NanGuang project in terms of cumulative 
impacts. During feasibility study and EA preparation, close attention has been given to 
mitigate negative impacts caused by simultaneous construction and operation, including 
i) extensive consultation with local governments and among project owners; ii) 
combination of transport corridors of two railway lines in the east end that are 66.4 km 
long; iii) comprehensive mitigation plan as part of the EMP to be implemented during 
construction and operation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Analysis of Alternatives. Alignment selection at the regional level was followed by site-
specific analysis of alternatives.  
 
-
Regional Corridors. During the project proposal and feasibility study, three corridors at 
the regional level were studied, namely Northern, Central and Southern line schemes. 
Comparative analyses of these three corridors were carried out considering the current 
situation and development planning of the regional railways. At this stage, the main 
factors considered are regional economic and social development as well as financial and 
technical aspects, as specific environmental concerns could not be meaningfully 
examined at this macro-scale analysis. In summary, the Central line scheme is the most 
efficient express passage connecting the southwest and northwest part of China and Pearl 
River delta area. It can effectively expand regional railway network, and will bring 
potential benefits to the region, alleviate poverty and improve socio-economic 
development. These developments are consistent with the Ministry of Railways policies 
and long-term planning and therefore, it was recommended for further feasibility studies.  
 
-
Alternative Alignment by Sections. The process of alignment selection has been an 
important environmental impact mitigation tool for this project. Alternative alignments 
for various sections have been extensively studied to choose the optimal scheme in terms 
of environmental and social impacts technical feasibility, and financial and economic 
benefits. Consultation with local governments and relevant authorities in charge of 
environmental sensitive areas were conducted and fully incorporated into the alternative 
Page  10
selection process. Considerable effort has been made to avoid ecological sensitive areas, 
geological unstable zones, floodplains and wetlands, relocation of houses, cultivated 
lands, and cultural resources in order to ensure the environmental feasibility of the 
alignment. The final alignment thus minimizes environmental and social impacts, avoids 
natural hazards, and connects the economic hubs in the region. Section specific alignment 
alternatives included:  
 
o
Litang Section at western end. Four alternative Litang station locations and alignments 
were considered. The option of Litang West Station is chosen due to its consistency with 
urban planning, less land acquisition and resettlement, convenient traffic management, 
avoidance of drinking water protection area, and official agreement from local 
government.  
 
o
Guigang City Section. Two alternative alignments were considered (using existing 
Guigang station along existing railway line and, and new by-pass alignment and a new 
Guigang station). The option using existing Guigang Station is selected due to its 
consistency with urban development planning, convenient mobility connections, efficient 
utilization of existing infrastructure such as station and freight facilities, and agreement 
of local government.  
 
o
Pingnan # Zhaoqing Section. This section features topography of eroded plain and 
low-hilly areas, where the alignment is generally parallel with Xijiang River, a major 
tributary of Pearl River. Two alternatives were considered: north and south options. The 
south option is selected due to avoidance of core drinking water protection areas, Fengkai 
National Geological Park, Hezhou Scenic Area and Wuzhou ancient tomb areas, less 
interference with urban development planning and agreement from local government. 
The selected alignment will pass through the edges of one nature reserve and two forest 
parks, all by tunnels to minimize ecological impact.  
 
o
Cangwu County Section. Three alternatives were considered: north, middle, south 
options based on three station locations. The north option is selected because of its close 
distance with urban areas and convenient mobility connection, compatibility with urban 
planning and existing infrastructure, and agreement from local government.  
 
o
Yun#an Section. Two alignment options were considered: north option (close to city) 
and south option (far from city). The north option is selected due to its less disturbance 
with urban planning, avoidance of geological hazards, and agreement from local 
government.  
 
o
Zhaoqing Section. Two alignment options were considered for Zhaoqing section, i.e. 
through-city option and city by-pass option. The city by-pass option is selected because 
of avoidance of significant amount of urban resettlement, minimized impact on 
environmental sensitive areas (through tunnels), avoidance of large amount of urban 
resettlement, and minimized disturbance with urban planning.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project has implemented a three-fold approach to minimize environmental and social 
impacts. These are:  
 
-
Avoidance. Alternative analysis has been regarded as one of the most important 
mitigation measures to minimize potential adverse environmental and social impact.  
Page  11
-
Sound Engineering. The project has been designed with state-of-the art engineering. 
Tunnel-bridge-tunnel schemes are adopted for more than 50% of the whole alignment 
will avoid most sensitive issues and minimize ecological footprint.  
 
-
Comprehensive Mitigation Plans. Detailed environmental design plans (green 
corridors and landscaping), environmental management plans, resettlement action plans 
have been prepared in order to minimize and/or compensate unavoidable impacts from 
the project.  
 
Environmental Management Plan. A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan has 
been developed based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP details the 
environmental management and supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation 
measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP 
implementation.  The Ministry of Railways is committed to ensure that the contractor 
implements the relevant obligations within the EMP.  Bank supervision will monitor, 
during supervision, environmental activities carried out under the project in order to 
ensure compliance.  
 
EMP implementation is managed by MOR (FCTIC) through the project office of the 
Preparatory Group of the NanGuang Railway Company. An environmental management 
unit will be established in the Project Office with dedicated environmental staff. 
Qualified environmental staff will be required to be assigned in Contractor team, and 
Environmental Supervision Engineer teams will be in place to ensure effective 
implementation of the EMP. A separate Environmental Consultant will be engaged by 
MOR to monitor the EMP performance of the Contractors and Supervision Engineers.  
 
A
two tier monitoring program has been developed for this project: daily and regular 
monitoring is to be carried out by Contractors and Environmental Supervision Engineers 
from the supervision companies, and periodical compliance monitoring by professional 
monitoring institutes. The MOR, through the Project Office, will be responsible for 
submitting progress reports on the EMP implementation to the Bank.  
 
Resettlement  
 
The MOR has completed its resettlement planning process.  Planning exercises include 
i) an inventory survey of physical impacts, ii) a census of the affected population within 
the impact area as determined under the preliminary technical design, and iii) a 
socioeconomic survey on a sample basis, and iv) a social assessment carried out by the 
National Ethnic Minority University.  
 
A
draft Resettlement Plan was completed in September 2008, and reviewed with World 
Bank comments and finalized in April 2009.   The Resettlement Plan is prepared 
following relevant local and World Bank policies.  It details the project impacts, legal 
framework, resettlement and rehabilitation approach and program, cost estimates and 
implementation arrangements, including organizations, schedule, grievance redress and 
monitoring arrangements.  A Resettlement Policy Framework is developed to guide and 
manage resettlement planning process to mitigate construction related impacts such as 
access roads, construction camps, and spoil sites. It lays out principles, policies, planning 
Page  12
steps and institutional as well as management responsibilities for mitigating impacts 
during construction.  
 
A
joint resettlement office has be established to implement the resettlement program on 
behalf of MOR, and Guangxi Region and Guangdong Province. It will lead and 
coordinate the resettlement implementation of the project.  Meanwhile the provinces of 
Guangxi and Guangdong will establish their respective resettlement offices to take charge 
of the RAP implementation within their province. The provincial resettlement office will 
organize and coordinate various levels of government agencies for RAP implementation. 
At the same time, resettlement offices will also be established at county and township 
level.   The MOR has designed internal and external monitoring mechanisms for RAP 
implementation. Internal monitoring will be conducted by the project management 
offices.  An external monitoring agency is to be engaged to report on resettlement 
implementation progress every three months until December 31, 2010 and every six-
months thereafter. The MOR was in the process of hiring the external monitor. The RAP 
provides details of the above.  
 
Resettlement implementation started late March 2009.  Implementation activities mainly 
include updating of the resettlement impacts based on detailed technical design, village 
level consultation and meetings for livelihood planning, signing village agreements, and 
completing land acquisition approval procedure under the China Land Administration 
Law.  By the time of appraisal, physical taking of land for construction has not taken 
place yet and relocation activities have not started yet.   Resettlement implementation is 
expected to continue until mid-2011, lasting about two years.  This schedule corresponds 
with the engineering construction schedule.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
combination of opinion surveys and public meetings in the townships, village 
committees and affected villagers# homes have been implemented during preparation of 
the EA and Resettlement Action Plan. Each mitigation measure was determined by 
suggestions from both experts and the public. Most of the concerns have been 
incorporated either in project design, the environmental management plan, or the 
resettlement plan.  
 
A
brief edition of the EA for this project was made accessible on the website of SSDI 
(http://www.crssdi.com), to collect opinions, suggestions and concerns from communities 
along the line and public in general. Suggestions were provided via telephone, fax and e-
mail. After the first draft of Environmental Impact Report was completed, a summary 
was published in website of SSDI (http://www.crssdi.com) on August 15, 2008.  
 
The EIA has been reviewed and approved by Ministry of Environmental Protection 
(EMP) in October of 2008. The content of the report is accessible to all interested parties 
in the Environment Evaluation Unit, China Railway Eryuan Engineering Group Co., Ltd., 
and the Environment Protection Bureaus of each province or city. Disclosure of final EA 
have been done by MOR in middle March, 2009 on Guangxi Daily Newspaper and 
Page  13
Southern Daily Newspaper. Full version EIA and RAP are released on the websites of 
Provincial DRCs of each province. They are easily accessible to general public.  
 
Public consultations have been mainstreamed in the project planning process.  Active 
public consultations started early 2008 by the three engineering design institutes over the 
selection of railway alignment and location of railway stations.  The feedback of these 
consultations helped optimize project design and reduce the project impacts.    Local 
governments, community and village leaders, the affected households, and affected 
enterprises and shops participated in the planning surveys of census and asset inventory    
The socioeconomic survey continued the public consultation process through focus group 
discussions, interviews and questionnaire survey.  It focused on compensation rates, 
relocation arrangements and livelihood restoration approach and measures.  These 
contributed to the formulation and finalization of the approach and package for livelihood 
restoration.  
 
Project information was shared with the affected villages and entities through 
newspapers, TV, broadcasting, public bulletin boards and public meetings.  The RAP and 
RPF have also been disclosed to the public at public libraries and government public 
websites March 2009.  Their availability is also announced in local newspapers.  These 
have also been disclosed at the Bank Public Information Center at the World Bank's 
Beijing Office and the Bank Infoshop Washington DC.  The final RAP is being re-
disclosed at the above locations.  A resettlement information booklet is being prepared as 
a
summary of the final approved RAP.  It will be distributed to the affected households in 
affected villages and entities.   Public consultations are planned to continue through the 
resettlement plan implementation. Further details on consultations are available in project 
filet.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  14
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  15
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
04/17/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ning Yang 
04/16/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Songling Yao 
04/16/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
04/16/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
05/07/2009 
Comments:   
