Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3272 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P096923 
Project Name: Shanghai Urban Environment Project - APL Phase III 
Task Team Leader: Hiroaki Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 20, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (75%);Sewerage (20%);Solid waste management (5%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Water resource management (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
338.00
338.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The APL program objective is to improve the Shanghai Metropolitan area's environmental 
conditions by progressive development and implementation of integrated, metropolitan-wide 
measures, as defined in the PAD of APL 1.  
 
The proposed project development objective for APL 3 is to further advance the program goal 
through promoting continuous sector reforms and institutional development, and selected 
strategic investments in the water and wastewater sector. The particular focus is on sustainable 
water supply and wastewater management within a comprehensive sector strategy at the 
metropolitan scale.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project consists of three main investment components, and an institutional 
strengthening and training (IST) component. The total cost of the proposed project  is estimated 
at US$ 538 million, with an anticipated Bank loan of US$ 200 million.  
 
(1) 
Water Supply and Management Component (Estimated Cost: US$ 210 million/ IBRD 
loan: US $140 million)  
 
The Bank-financed component is the construction of Nanhui Conveyor (NC), which is one of 
the four branch lines of the QCSRWP described below. NC, with a capacity of 1.28 million 
m3/day, will supply raw water to the rapidly growing outer metropolitan areas in south eastern 
Shanghai, including the major new container port development, and the high tech industry and 
logistical complexes developing around the Pudong International Airport. This component 
consists of about 48 km of twin large diameter raw water conveyors with a connecting control 
system, and pumping stations supplying distribution networks managed by two water companies.  
 
The QCSRWP as a whole consists of four parts: (i) Qing Cao Sha reservoir (area of 70 km2 and 
maximum water storage level of 7 m) and pumping stations for water abstraction, storage and 
conveyance; (ii) raw water conveyor on Changxing Island; (iii) raw water conveyor tunnel 
crossing the Yangtze River; and (iv) four raw water distribution branches on the mainland 
(Yanqiao, Lingqiao, Jinhai, Nanhui) and associated pumping stations. After completion of the 
project, QCSRW system will cover the core city, Pudong, Nanhui, and Changxing Island, 
serving a population of over 10 million. The total investment cost of the QCSRWP is 
preliminarily estimated to be about RMB 16 billion (about US$ 2.25 billion) of which RMB 6 
billion (US$ 845 million) will be provided by the Shanghai Metropolitan Government (SMG) as 
equity, and the remaining RMB 10 billion (US$ 1.41 billion) will be financed in the form of 
debt, including the Bank loan (US$ 140 million).  
 
(2) 
Wastewater Component (Estimated Cost: US$ 220 million/IBRD loan: US$30 million)  
 
The Bailonggang sewerage system was constructed during implementation of the Bank-
financed Shanghai Sewage Project Phase II. The system covers a service area of 839.87 km2 and 
serves a population of 6.9 million people in the rapidly growing eastern part of Shanghai in 
Pudong. The proposed component is the extension of this system, and comprises of: (i) the 
construction of a cross Huangpu River pipe and rehabilitation of the related pumping stations; 
and (ii) improvement of original south trunk sewage with a length of 24.6 km. This component 
will improve the wastewater collection in the Bailonggang area and resolve the issue of 
wastewater disposal in the Wuming pipeline during the rainy season.  Furthermore, the 
utilization rate of the Bailonggang Wastewater Treatment Works will be improved.  
 
(3) 
District Environment Management Program (Estimated Cost: US$ 100 million/IBRD 
loan: US$ 30 million/GEF Grant US$ 5.0 million)  
 
This component consists of: (a) public utility investment program; and (b) a pilot Non-Point 
Source Agricultural Pollution reduction program, with both in suburban districts of Shanghai. 
The first program will, through the DFV, finance environmental investment projects proposed by 
suburban district governments. The DFV, established during APL 2, is a project development 
Page  3
company which helps the suburban district governments develop and implement sub-projects. 
DFV has successfully launched its pilot operations under APL 2 by appraising all sub-projects 
and by disbursing about 50 percent of the loan allocated to the DFV component. Building on this 
significant momentum, it is proposed that the DFV will become a programmatic wholesale 
lending entity under APL 3, where the DFV will identify, appraise and approve sub-projects 
according to the operations manual developed under APL 1.  The aim will be to increasingly 
limit the role of the Bank in reviewing and approving each sub-project. In addition, this 
component will promote co-financing with commercial banks in environmental investments by 
enhancing DFV’sloan syndication capacity. The preparation of converting the DFV into a full 
fledged financial intermediary as a long-term objective will also be started under APL 3. The 
second program is a pilot Non-Point Agricultural Pollution Reduction program in sub-urban 
districts, which will be co-financed by GEF and the suburban district/county governments.  
 
(4) 
Institutional Strengthening and Training (IST) (Estimated Cost: TBD)  
 
This component is to assist SMG and Chengtou implement the project, and to further develop 
their institutions and strengthen their capacities to implement institutional reforms and 
innovations through TA, studies and training. Sub-components will be identified during 
preparation.  
 
APL 3 will focus on the following specific institutional reforms and innovations in parallel and 
close association with the preparation and implementation of strategic utility investments and 
TA:  
 
(i) 
evolution of the DFV to the next level as a programmatic and wholesale lending 
instrument for suburban utility projects, in line with the proposal made by NDRC at the lending 
program meeting;  
 
(ii) 
strengthening Chengtou's corporate capacity for strategic capital investment and optimal 
financial planning, with the aim of reducing investment and financing costs;  
 
(iii) 
water and waste water tariff revision addressing both the needs for cost recovery for 
investment/operations and maintenance costs, and affordability of low income households;  
 
(iv) 
further promotion and improvement of PPPIs based on the assessment of the previous 
and/or ongoing PPPIs;  
 
(v) 
efficient use of limited water resources through the conjunctive use of two different water 
sources (i.e. the Huangpu River and the Yantze River) to ensure both quality and quantity of 
water supply, and to minimize the related investment costs by lengthening the asset life of 
QCSRWP;  
 
(vi) 
full consideration of the impact of the climate change (sea level rise) in the project design 
of the raw water intake of QCSRWP (probably for the first time in China), as well as energy 
efficient design for water and wastewater conveyance; and  
 
(vii) 
pilot an environmental investment program addressing Non-Point Source Agricultural 
Pollution in selected suburban districts to be supported by the GEF grant.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  4
Shanghai, China.  All main locations have been determined, except for some of the sub-projects 
under District Environment Management Program as this component would adopt programmatic 
approach.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Shanghai Metropolitan Government and its urban investment company (Chengtou) have a long 
history of successful implementation of safeguards under the Bank financed projects in the urban 
water/environment sector.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental assessment of the components to be funded by the Bank loan (Wastewater 
Component: the Huangpu river pipe andsouth trunk sewage;Water Suppply and Management 
System Component: the Nanhui raw water conveyor and associated pumping stations; and 
District Environment Management Program Component: public utility subprojects ) is expected 
to be relatively straightforward and to entail similar environmental issues experienced in APL 1 
and APL 2.  Under the District Environment Management Program, specific EA of sub-project 
will be prepared by DFV according to the EA policy framework cleared by the Bank during 
preparation of APL 2.  
 
However, the Nanhui Raw Water Conveyor represents only a part of the much larger 
QCSRWP. Qin Cao Sha Reservoir, Changxing In-Island Conveyor, Cross Yangtze Tunnel with 
two working wells, Wuhaogou Pumping Station, and Jinhai Conveyor Branch including Jinhai 
Pumping Stations are the linkage projects with APL 3.  SMG and Chengtou informed the Bank 
that the QCSRWP has been approved by SMG, and that basis, the EIA has also been approved 
by the Shanghai EPB.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
As the Bank has not yet received any EA for the Bank-funded project components or the 
linkage project areas, such as the project site of Qing Cao Sha Reservoir, the impacts of the 
project or linkage projects on the natural habitats are unknown.  The impacts on natural habitats 
should be carefully analyzed in respective EAs and Environmental Mitigation Plans should be 
prepared, if the projects have negative impact on the natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Based on the site visits and preliminary assessment, involuntary resettlement in unavoidable 
and the project is expected to impact a number of people and structures. It is agreed that two 
RAPs will be prepared, one for the water supply and management component, and the other for 
the wastewater component.  A consultant for preparation of the RAPs will undertake 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
socioeconomic and inventory surveys which are critical to preparation of the RAPs.  The 
consultant will also draft income restoration programs to be incorporated in the RAPs.  
 
Linkage project: A linkage project had been identified for the Water Supply and 
Management Component. It was agreed that the Bank's resettlement policy will be applied to the 
linkage project areas of Qin Cao Sha Reservoir, Changxing In-Island Conveyor, Cross Yangtze 
Tunnel with two working wells, Wuhaogou Pumping Station, and Jinhai Conveyor Branch 
including Jinhai Pumping Stations. The resettlement practices of the linkage projects will be 
included in the project RAP of this component.  
 
Under the bank-financed project, some land acquisition and resettlement is expected 
especially for construction of pumping stations. The use of pipe jacking was strongly 
recommended by the team as a method for installation of water and waste water trunk lines as 
much as possible, as this will minimize the resettlement and temporary land taking. The client is 
currently studying the cost (including resettlement costs) of several alternative options.  
 
District Environment Management Program: The program will be implemented through the 
District Financing Vehicle (DFV). The DFV is an innovative financing approach developed 
during APL 2, which supports environmental infrastructure construction in suburban districts of 
Shanghai.  Under APL 2, it was agreed that RAPs for subprojects under the DFV component 
would be approved by DFV without prior Bank review, provided that DFV has demonstrated 
adequate capacity to review resettlement policies and ensure their consistency with Bank 
resettlement policy.  DFV has successfully implemented the sub-components under APL 2, 
including implementation of the environmental and social safeguard framework.  Given this 
component in APL 3 is expansion of DFV; it is recommended to use the same approach to 
handle the resettlement associated with the subprojects under this component.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Although the height of the embankment is low (7m), the policy will be triggered due to large 
size of the reservoir (435 million m3 of storage, over 70 km2 of area) and its unique geological 
site conditions (i.e. being built on the wetland at the estuary of the largest river in China).  The 
Dam Safety Management Center (DSMC), Nanjing Hydraulic Research Institute has been 
recruited as a dam safety consultant.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An EIA Report for each component of QCSRWP (Linkage project) has been already 
prepared in line with the national guidelines. Bank's EA specialist reviewed the framework, 
main context, conclusions and recommendations of the EIA report.  The team requested 
some additional information on wetlands.  The team also requested to submit full EA reports 
to the Bank.  
 
The client plans to commission another study to ensure that the project meets environmental 
regulations during the construction and operation period.  The time schedule for this study 
has not yet been finalized.  
 
Preparation of EA, EMP and RAP for the Bank project will commence in January 2008.  A 
draft safeguard documents at pre-appraisal stage will be prepared by April 30, 2008, and the 
documents will be reviewed by the PAD stage safeguard review meeting scheduled for 
September 2008.  
 
Some documents related to dam safety needs to be prepared/ completed by pre-appraisal, 
including (i) a comprehensive construction supervision and quality assurance plan, (ii) a 
monitoring plan for construction and operation, (iii) an operation and maintenance plan and 
(iv) an emergency preparedness plan.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
12/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
01/22/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
