Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4082 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/08/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P112838 
Project Name: China Wuhan Second Urban Transport 
Task Team Leader: Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 27, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (60%);Roads and highways (20%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (29%);Other urban development 
(29%);Municipal governance and institution building (14%);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (14%);Pollution management and environmental health 
(14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
405.60
405.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance mobility within and to the central area of 
Wuhan (the area within the 2nd Ring Road) in an environmentally sustainable, integrated, and 
safe manner.  The achievement of this PDO will be measured through a combination of 
indicators such as: travel times along particular routes, traffic volumes, PT performance 
indicators (frequencies, boardings and alightings at bus stops, passengers flows at busiest 
stations, boardings per bus-km, bus total trip times along specific routes), and other user 
satisfaction surveys (including for disabled and vulnerable users).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will involve priority interventions in public bus transport, better integration of 
transport modes, expanded traffic management schemes, road improvements, and technical 
assistance activities. It will consist of four main components, as follows:  
Page  2
Component 1.  Public Transport (PT) Priority Corridor Improvements.  This component will 
consist of integrated improvement to public transport on the center city’s highest demand 
corridors, consisting (i) upgraded and new bus priority lanes in selected public transport priority 
corridors; (ii) conventional bus depots; (iii) interchange terminals; and (iv) bus bay upgrades.  
These improvements would take into account NMT movements and the needs of disabled and 
elderly people.  
 
Component 2.  Traffic Management (TM) Component.  This component includes two sets of 
elements:  
 
•
those focusing on enhancing safety, consisting of: (a) upgrades to traffic monitoring 
facilities including ATC; (b) information technology works in conjunction with the upgrades to 
the traffic monitoring facilities; and (c) traffic management control systems for traffic safety; and  
 
•
those that seek to promote intermodal flows between metro/LRT, buses, and private 
modes of transport.  
 
Component 3.  Road Mobility Improvements.  Includes the rehabilitation, upgrading, or 
construction of three key missing or nonfunctional segments of Wuhan’s urban road network that 
would help redirect heavier traffic away from the core area, and including those elements that 
would facilitate the movement of public transport units along those links, as follows:  
 
•
Rehabilitation of Jiefang Avenue extension (Huangpu Road-Third Ring Road).Jiefang 
Avenue is one of the important radial avenues within the second ring road.  The proposed section 
is the North-East segment connecting the core area to the Third Ring Road and consisting of 6.7 
km of the existing avenue (Huangpu Road-Dijiao Road) and 2.7 km missing link to the Third 
Ring Road (Dijiao Road-Third Ring Road).  The proposed rehabilitation on the existing road 
section would be undertaken within the existing road width of 50 m.  
 
•
New construction of Shuidong Street (Linjiang Avenue-Heping Avenue).  This section is 
a
ground road section under the approach bridge of the Second Yangtze River Bridge.  The 
proposed civil works include a 13-meter wide service street on each side of the approach bridge.  
The length of each proposed service street is 915 m.  
 
•
New construction of Shuidong Road Section (Heping Avenue-Zhongbei Road extension).  
This road section is part of the Second Ring Road with a length of 3.4 km.  The current 
conceptual design is a 6-lane elevated expressway plus a 50 meter-wide ground service road.  
The elevated expressway would be financed with domestic funds, while the Bank loan would 
help finance the ground service streets.  
 
Component 4.  Institutional Development and Capacity Building.  This component will consist 
of four studies, training and study tours, and support to the Project Management Office including 
translation services and selected office equipment.  The studies would complement those carried 
out or being carried out under the ongoing Wuhan Urban Transport Project and with a focus on 
issues related to the PDO for the new proposed project and its components.  Four topics have 
been identified for priority consideration:  
 
•
analysis of freight traffic movements across the central area of the city andstrategies for 
minimizing their impact on traffic in the area;  
 
•
analysis of parking policies, tariffs, and investment options for the implementation of 
congestion pricing schemes in the central area of Wuhan;  
Page  3
•
optimization of bus networks and strategies for minimizing routes overlaps and 
congestion and for maximum integration with rail and other modes and facilities; and  
 
•
strategies for the optimization of overall management of urban transport system in 
Wuhan, with an aim at defining integrated city-wide institutional and management framework.  
 
A
tentative estimation of costs (based on the pre-feasibility study report) and allocation of loan 
resources show that the loan would focus on the PT component, while domestic resources would 
be targeted for the major road investments.  World Bank safeguards policies however would 
apply to all the components of the project regardless of the sources of financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Wuhan, Hubei Province, PR China.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project will be the second World Bank financed urban transport project in Wuhan 
under the responsibility of WUTPO 
–
Wuhan Urban Transport Project Office (a department of 
the Wuhan Municipal Development and Reform Commission). For the previous project, 
WUTPO has shown strong commitment on implementation of safeguards and maintained good 
track records. It has developed in-house capacity to implement, supervise and monitor 
Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans.  For EA preparation, WUTPO 
has retained the 4th Survey Design Institute of the Ministry of Railways, which is quite familiar 
with Bank's safeguards policies through EA preparation for previous Bank projects including the 
Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment TA carried out under the ongoing Wuhan Urban 
Transport Project.  WUTPO has assigned experienced resettlement officers and engaged Wuhan 
University to assist with the resettlement planning and the public consultation process. This 
institute has a long history of engagement with World Bank operations and has accumulated 
much experience and expertise dealing with resettlement issues, including: the ongoing Wuhan 
Urban Transport Project, Bank financed expressways in Hubei Province (Shiman and Xiaoxiang 
Expressways), and Bank financed expressways in Anhui Province. With the good track record of 
WUTPO in resettlement activities for the ongoing Wuhan Urban Transport Project, it is 
anticipated that a RAP and a public consultation process meeting the Bank requirements will be 
carried out in timely manner.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASER) 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Physical works under the project consist of (i) the rehabilitation and expansion of existing 
urban roads; (ii) construction of new road (3x3 lanes) and elevated lanes (3x3); (iii) construction 
of parking lot as part of an integrated hub (metro, bus); and (iv) dedicated bus lanes and stations. 
The most environmentally sensitive subprojects are those related to the construction of the new 
road with elevated lanes. This road links to a new bridge over the Yangtze River and will extend 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
beyond the proposed segment to be included in the Bank financed project. As such, all elements 
of the road (bridge and extension) will have to be considered as one and have to meet Bank 
environmental and social policies. The proposed elevated road will cross a well consolidated 
residential area and affect a city park.  
 
Most impacts are localized along project sites and alignment, and can be dealt through 
proper engineering design and construction practices, and therefore the project merits a B 
category for environmental purposes. However, EIA and EMP  will be prepared for the project. 
Main issues to be addressed by the EIA include:  
 
(a) The need for resettlement of families and businesses;  
 
(b) Potential interruption or limitation of accesses to dwellings or businesses either 
permanently or temporarily (during construction);  
 
(c) Encroachment/reduction of green areas, parks, and other recreational areas;  
 
(d) Demolition of buildings of high architectural or historical value;  
 
(e) Potential deterioration of urban quality and property value in the immediate vicinity of 
the crossings;  
 
(f) The potential for increased traffic safety problems or accidents in areas with high density 
of schools, hospitals, and commercial use;  
 
(g) The effect on urban infrastructure (sidewalks, power and telephone lines, water and 
sewerage mains, etc.); and  
 
(h) Potentially unacceptable nuisances during construction (dust, wastes, and heavy 
construction traffic) specially in sensitive sites (hospitals, schools for instance);  
 
(i) Crossing of flood basins.  
 
Analysis of Alternatives: the EIA report will include an analysis of alternatives at two 
levels: (i) at the transport strategy level it should compare the environmental impacts on air and 
noise of the different scenarios that were considered in the selection of the transport strategy 
(optimized system) # the TA component under the ongoing Wuhan Urban Transport Project 
includes a Strategic EA Study (SEA) on the Wuhan Transport Strategy. The findings of the SEA 
will be used in the EIA # and (ii) alternative sitting and alignment for all physical works, 
especially for the elevated road. All alternatives must be compared on their technical, economic, 
social (resettlement) and environmental merits.  
 
Mitigation: the EIA will analyze all feasible mitigation measures for all proposed works and 
for the transport plan as a whole and will set environmental principles for the design and 
construction of civil works.  These principles will be detailed through specific recommendations 
for design and construction of all civil works, including:  
 
•
The designs should avoid or minimize the need for resettlement of population, as well as 
the impact on green and recreational areas and buildings of historical or architectural value. If 
above impacts are unavoidable, resettlement plans, mitigation and compensatory measures will 
be included in project costs.  
 
•
Access to dwellings and businesses should be guaranteed for both the construction and 
operational phases. Any restriction or limitation to accessibility to properties should be properly 
mitigated or compensated.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
•
Safe and secure pedestrian and bicycle crossings should be integrated into the design and 
construction of all works.  
 
•
The design should harmonize with urban surroundings including landscaping and 
planning for other uses for all additionally created spaces (under-bridges, cul-de-sacs, pedestrian-
only streets) in order to minimize negative impacts on environmental quality and property 
values.  
 
•
Alternative solutions and final designs should be subject to public and community 
consultation with special emphasis on the property owners directly affected, and community 
organizations, and business and professional organizations.  
 
•
To minimize public nuisances, construction activities should follow strict environmental 
guidelines. Construction schedules and the timing of necessary interruption of public utilities 
(electricity, water and telephone) should be informed to the affected community.  
 
•
All areas and infrastructure affected during construction should be restored to their 
original condition, specially sidewalks, green street dividers, gardens, sidewalk trees, utilities, 
and side streets impacted by traffic diversion.  
 
•
Inclusive design of bus lanes and stations to guarantee accessibility to handicapped 
citizens.  
 
Environmental Management Plan: A detailed EMP will be prepared for the project 
including sufficient detail for implementation, including specifications for contractors, detailed 
description of all activities, necessary arrangements and costs for all mitigation measures. The 
EMP which will be part of the EA will outline in detail all the measures needed to minimize, 
mitigate or compensate for expected environmental impacts from the proposed works.  
 
Environmental Guidelines during Construction: A set of environmental guidelines for the 
construction of all civil works in urban areas addressing construction impacts on local population 
(nuisances, dust, noise, accessibility, safety, etc.) will be included as part of the EMP.  
 
Public Consultation: Before appraisal, the EIA/EMP will be presented and discussed with 
communities in the area of influence of particularly sensitive crossings along the proposed 
corridors.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not affect any natural habitats or critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Although at a first screening there are no potential cultural sites affected by the project, 
historical buildings will be screened for all project sites and alignments. Chance finding 
procedures during construction will be prepared and included in all bidding documents and 
contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Bank social specialists interviewed affected communities along the project sites and verified 
that there are no any minority communities to be affected by the project. This fact was also 
confirmed by the collected data information conducted by the socioeconomic survey. Thus, the 
project will not trigger the Bank's Indigenous Peoples Policy OP4.10.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared. The RAP will incorporate the mitigation 
measures to the people and the facilities affected by the project through public consultation and 
participatory approaches.  
 
WUTPO has assigned experienced resettlement officers and engaged Wuhan University to 
assist with the resettlement planning and the public consultation process. This institute has a long 
history of engagement with World Bank operations and has accumulated much experience and 
expertise dealing with resettlement issues.  
 
The task team requested Wuhan Project Entity to consider the measures to minimize the 
negative impacts by narrowing down the proposed avenue widening in specific sections of 
Jiefang Avenue. The impacts to the local citizens were reduced significantly. This was reflected 
into the contents of resettlement action plan.  
 
The task team visited the both sites of the bridge over the Yangze. The resettlement on the 
left hand side of the bridge (close to downtown Wuhan) will comply with the Bank's resettlement 
policy. However,  the resettlement on the right hand side of the bridge had been started  over one 
year ago following  Wuhan municipal policies.  The project team will carry out a due diligence 
on this resettlement to ensure that local criteria and procedures were followed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/10/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of SA and EA will start on February 9, 2009 and should be completed by 
June 30, 2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
06/17/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/08/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
07/08/2009 
Comments:   
