Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4119 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P106956 
Project Name: Ningbo New Countryside Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 8, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (45%);Roads and highways (15%);Water supply (15%);Sewerage 
(15%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to support government efforts of new countryside 
development, which enhance sustainable development and improve living standards in the small 
towns and rural areas of Ningbo. This will be accomplished through a set of basic infrastructure 
investments, technical assistance in rural development strategy, spatial planning, and institutional 
strengthening, and demonstration projects in a selected pilot town 
–
as well as rural wastewater 
treatment and sanitation in about 200 villages in Ningbo Municipality.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project components will be designed to demonstrate a feasible and sustainable model for new 
countryside development.  The tentative design of the project is as follows.  
 
Component 1: Fenghua Chunhu Small Town Development Demonstration (US$29 million 
loan).  To be able to effectively demonstrate the project outcome, Chunhu Town (a rural town 
with a population of about 90,000 in Fenghua City) will be selected as a pilot town for testing the 
concepts and approaches of new countryside development, as well as to improve the town’s 
basic infrastructure and services. This component will comprise: (a) an access road (6.25 km) 
between Fenghua City and Chunhu Town; (b) wastewater collection and treatment (10,000t/d in 
Page  2
the first phase) in Chunhu Town; (c) a water supply pipeline (25 km pipe and a pumping station) 
that conveys drinking water (20,000 t/d in near term) from a Fenghua water treatment plant to 
Chunhu and neighboring areas; and (d) technical assistance (TA) for sustainable small town 
development.  The TA would cover the vision and development strategy (including sectoral 
strategy for agriculture), township master plans, village-level spatial and landscape planning, 
energy efficiency demo projects of rural housing and public buildings,  institutional 
arrangements and reform for implementation, capacity building for local stakeholders (including 
training and awareness raising), and project monitoring, evaluation and dissemination.  
 
Component 2: Rural wastewater treatment demonstration in Ningbo Municipality (US$20 
million loan).  This component will comprise (a) rural wastewater collection and treatment; and 
(b) technical assistance. It will provide wastewater drainage and treatment systems, using 
sustainable and appropriate technologies, with village communities participating in the selection 
of affordable and manageable options from a menu of alternatives, in about 200 villages in six 
counties throughout Ningbo Municipality. The priority will be given to villages located in water 
resource protection zones.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management and Capacity Building (1million).  This component will 
strengthen PMO and PIUs in project management through capacity building and training 
activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ningbo Municipality is an important port city, and one of the key commercial centers in China 
handling international trade. Ningbo has experienced rapid development; its GDP grew at an 
annual rate of 14% per year in the last 5 years. GDP reached RMB 280 billion ($42 billion), with 
a
GDP per capita of RMB 51,285 ($7,541). Government revenue grew at 20% per year over the 
last five years, and reached RMB 56 billion ($8.2 billion) in 2006. Despite this prosperity, the 
rural economy has been lagging, and accounted for only 4.9% of total GDP. The annual per 
capita disposable income of rural residents was RMB 8,847 ($1,301), about 45% of the urban 
figure. Income disparity is still widening. Compared with their urban counterparts, Ningbo’s 
rural population, especially those living in remote areas, are still suffering from lagging 
development, fewer economic opportunities, poor basic infrastructure, shortage and low quality 
of drinking water supply, poor public services (sanitation and basic health) and so on. These 
problems undermine the sustainability of the city and cause frustrations among the young 
population.  
 
Ningbo was selected by the central government to be a pilot site for new countryside 
development. The Ningbo New Countryside Development Project was proposed for the World 
Bank technical assistance and loan. The proposed project would assist Ningbo Municipality in 
implementing its new countryside development program through planning, institutional reforms, 
project management, and investments in selected key infrastructure and services, which are 
important to the sustainable development of selected towns and villages. In particular, a rural 
town (Chunhu Town) has been tentatively selected as a main project site demonstrating new 
countryside development.  In addition to a set of infrastructure investments, the new countryside 
development of Chunhu Town would highlight strategic and spatial planning, institutional 
strengthening, and demonstration projects. Sustainable development featuring resource saving, 
Page  3
energy efficiency, and eco-friendliness growth would be the key to the success of Chunhu town 
and development as a pilot 
model town of the nation’s NCD program. Ningbo is seeking World 
Bank support to implement elements of this program.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project is a continuation of the Bank’s engagements with the Ningbo Municipality, 
specifically following on the success of the Ningbo Water Environment Project. The project ISR 
rated “Satisfactory” for addressing both social safeguard and environmental issues. Several of 
the municipal officials currently serving at the municipal Project Leading Group participated in 
the previous project from the municipal side, and several others served on the WB Project 
Management Office during the previous project. This institutional capacity should provide 
confidence in both the borrower’s commitment to the project and the capacity for Safeguard 
Policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Construction of proposed project components present normal issues associated with 
construction activities (dust, noise, solid and liquid waste disposal etc.) that require appropriate 
mitigation measures to be defined. During operation the WWTP, sludge characteristics should be 
tested and disposed properly.  
 
Construction of water distribution and sewer collection pipelines and pumping stations also 
present the normal construction issues, as well as storage and stockpiling of excavation soils and 
“chance find” of cultural artifacts during excavation.  
 
Alternative analysis for Fenghua City and Chunhu Town in Component 1 is requested by 
Bank team to compare different routes, costs and environmental impacts. If tunnel (about 2.4 
km) will be built as currently proposed, geological information will be important.  
 
According to current design information, project locations will not influence or are not close 
to any sensitive receptors or areas of ecological significance.  
 
There may be a linkage issue associated with proposed water supply pipeline component in 
Component 1. The task team requested information for the existing water plant, from where the 
proposed water distribution pipes are connected from Fenghua City to Chunhu Town.  
 
Environmental Category: Based on current understanding of proposed projects and 
discussion with PMO and their consultant, the task team recommends that the project be 
assigned Category B with following reasons:  
 
•
The size of the proposed facilities are not large and none of them are located in the areas 
with sensitive receptors where likely be influenced negatively by construction or operation of the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
facilities;  
 
•
All environmental issues associated with construction activities for road construction, 
water distribution pipes and sewer network, WWTP, and rural wastewater treatment 
demonstration component are of limited extent, temporary and reversible and readily managed.  
 
With standard practices of good housekeeping and engineering/construction.  
 
The task team proposed following methodologies for the EA preparation:  
 
1.
Strategic and planning EA for the new countryside development plan and the master plan 
for rural wastewater treatment and management in the Municipality;  
 
2.
Specific EA report for the identified components, based on initial environmental 
screening;  
 
3.
EA framework for the rural wastewater management component; and  
 
4.
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to compile the mitigation measures, 
environmental monitoring program and institutional arrangement, training, cost estimates and so 
on.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
There is no significant natural habitats be found in the proposed project areas. However, 
since there would be a large number of villages be involved in the Component 2 of the project,  
the EA consultant is required to do a screening in the EA preparation to see whether the policy to 
be triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
N/A   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
N/A   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
There is no any physical cultural relics be found in the proposed project areas. Chance finds 
during construction may occur and relevant clauses will be included in all construction contracts.  
No other cultural heritage impacts are expected.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Through desk review of demographic information, interview with government official and 
site visit, it is confirmed that all people in the project area are Han Chinese and no ethnic 
minority communities will be affected by the proposed project   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition will be involved in the three components of Chunhu township, including 
water supply, waste water treatment and road. A resettlement action plan will be prepared for 
these three components.  
 
Limited land may be needed for the rural waste water treatment component. The land will 
be obtained through land adjustment on voluntary basis of community members. A resettlement 
policy framework will be prepared to document the process and procedures of the land 
adjustment.  
 
In addition, a social assessment will be carried out in helping with understanding of 
willingness to pay to the services and establishing the participation mechanism in planning, 
construction and operation of waste water treatment facilities at community level.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
N/A.  The water supply component in Component 1 is from city existing water supply 
system.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
First draft EA/SA documentation for Bank review by mid January, 2009. 
 
Updated draft EA/SA documentation for Bank review by early April, 2009. 
 
Final draft EA/SA documentation for Bank review by early May, 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
