Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3816 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P112759 
Project Name: CN- Shandong Ecological Afforestation 
Task Team Leader: Susan S. Shen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 22, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
60.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal is to i
mprove the environmental conditions of Shandong’s most fragile land 
areas through afforestation. Such afforestation including revegetation would help: (a) to stabilize 
the fragile conditions of the alluvial land areas of the Yellow River in the North of the province, 
which are characterized by high salinity and severe wind and water erosion, (b) reduce soil and 
water erosion of some of the most degraded hilly areas in the central province, and (c) to 
stabilize the sandy soils in the old river beds of the Yellow River in the Southeast part of the 
province, which are affected by wind erosion and sand dune movements. The project 
development objective therefore would be to develop and adopt afforestation models for 
Shandong’s Ecological Forestry Programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would include two components.  
 
Component 1: Ecological Plantation Establishment, which would include three sub-
components:  
 
(a) Protective Plantations on Saline Coastal Areas: Under this sub-component some  32,000 
hectares (ha) of mixed forest plantations would be established to stabilize the newly created 
Page  2
alluvial land near the mouth of the Yellow River. Every year about 3-5,000 hectares of new land 
is formed in this area. The Government has already implemented infrastructure works to protect 
and improve the production potential of this land. Pre-project investments by the Government 
include road and dyke construction, drainage and irrigation works, and flushing of salt to reduce 
salinity. The project would complement these investments by planting trees and shrubs along 
roads, canals and blocks of designated afforestation areas to improve the environment and 
stabilized soil movements caused by wind and water erosion.  
 
(b) Re-vegetation of Degraded Mountainous Areas: The project would establish mixed forest 
and shrub vegetation on some  37,000 ha on highly degraded hill sides with a very shallow soil 
cover. These areas are currently unused waste lands. Through supportive tree and shrub planting 
combined with a rigorously enforced protection including a protection from any livestock 
grazing these areas are expected to recover dense and multi-story vegetation with grass, herbs 
and shrubs and different types of trees reducing soil and water erosion and providing a more 
pleasant environment.  
 
(c) 
Wind Erosion Control of Sandy Areas: Some 12,000 hectares of wind protection 
plantation would be established mainly along and in the old river bed of the Yellow River bed. 
This will included grid and bloc type plantation in strategically important areas to prevent 
movement of soil, improve agricultural productivity and reduce environmental hazards caused by 
sand and dust pollution.  
 
Component 2: Technical Support and Project Management, which would include research and 
study activities geared to an improved understanding of ecological afforestations and the public 
good services provided by such afforestations. This would also help to gain a better 
understanding of the public and private funding requirements of ecological afforestation 
activities both for the province as well as for China. A strong monitoring and evaluation system 
will be set up under the project to measure the public goods outputs and outcome of the various 
project activities and to draw lessons. Other supporting activities under this component would 
include the upgrading and expansion of existing nurseries to provide sufficient quantities and a 
wider range of species in particular indigenous species.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is expected to cover three locations in Shandong Province:  Yellow River in the 
North of the province, which are characterized by high salinity and severe wind and water 
erosion; degraded hilly areas in central part of the province, which are affected by soil and water 
erosion; and old river beds of the Yellow River in the Southeast part of the province, which are 
affected by wind erosion and sand dune movements.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The province has participated in three previous Bank-supported forestry projects and therefore 
has hands-on experience in implementing Bank safeguard policies.  All three previous projects 
required EIA/EMP under OP4.01 and Pest Management Plan (OP4.09). The last two projects 
undertook social assessments (SA) with focus on meaningful consultation and participation.  
 
The Borrower has recruited qualified institutes to carry-out the SA and EA/EMP.  The EA team 
will review the EMPs of previous WB financed and other forestry projects to assess adequacy 
and relevance and to extract lessons learned in terms of performance, monitoring, and overall 
Page  3
compliance.  Refresher training on WB safeguards policies and guidelines were provided by the 
WB team to the project entity in July 2008.  The work is being supervised carefully by the 
safeguard specialists to ensure adequate quality and incorporation of findings and 
recommendations into project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main aim of the project is to improve the ecological environment and positive impacts 
on the environment are expected. Nevertheless, negative impacts might occur if the project is not 
properly designed or implemented; e.g., site selection, site preparation, use of pesticides, etc.  
The project will carry-out an analysis of potential environmental impacts so as to design 
activities that can effectively address these impacts in accordance to OP4.01 and government 
regulations.  The project is also developing a consultation and participation plan to ensure that 
participation of any community in the project is voluntary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The EA will confirm that the proposed afforestation sites are not located in or near any 
critical natural habitats or in protected areas, and that the project will not degrade any protected 
areas or known natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project aims to increase forest cover for mainly environmental improvement purposes.  
The project is designed so that it will not lead to the conversion of natural forests or involve the 
establishment of commercial plantations or the introduction of any invasive species.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Since the establishment and management of the afforested areas as well as nursery 
management will require the use of pesticides or herbicides, a Pest Management Plan will be 
developed.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The proposed afforestation sites are not located in or next to any known with physical, 
cultural and natural relics. Site selection criteria exclude such areas. This has been confirmed by 
the Provincial Bureau of Cultural Relics.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Screening indicated that there are no ethnic minority communities in the 32 proposed project 
counties. This has been confirmed by the Provincial Bureau of Ethnic and Religious Affairs.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Preliminary SA findings confirmed that the project activities would not result in any land 
acquisition or relocation. However, there may be temporary restrictions of access to land due to 
th
e
need to establish the vegetative cover which may impact on farmers’ livelihood.  The OP will 
not apply if (a) the restriction of access is voluntarily agreed by the participating households,i.e., 
any changes in land use or restrictions in access are implemented with the informed consent and 
power of choice of the affected people; and (b) if there are no communities or individuals (other 
than those participating in the project) using the project areas for grazing or other economic 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
activities.  Therefore, more information is needed to make an informed decision regarding 
application of this OP.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this 
policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project is not located in any international waterways as defined under the policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/13/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of SA and EA will start Sept 2008 and drafts should be completd by end of 
January 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
12/01/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
12/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
12/03/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
