Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4114 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/03/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P113766 
Project Name: China Energy Efficiency Financing II 
Task Team Leader: Leiping Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: November 18, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (80%);Banking (20%) 
Theme: Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to scale-up commercial debt financing for EE 
investment across China through an EE debt financing mechanism. The financing mechanism 
will be initiated with the proposed IBRD loan. It may be complemented by a loan from the China 
Clean Development Mechanism Fund (CCDMF)  and a possible the International Finance 
Corporation (IFC) risk-sharing facility.  
 
Key performance indicators include: (a) the amount of incremental EE debt financing supported 
and leveraged by the project; (b) the amount of energy saved through investments financed and 
leveraged by the project; and (c) associated reductions of GHGs.  
 
It is anticipated that this approach would sustain EE commercial investments because, if 
successful, the approach developed by Minsheng Bank under the proposed project would be 
scaled up within Minsheng Bank and replicated by other financial institutions in China. 
Furthermore, it is expected that this mechanism would form the foundation for the eventual 
creation of a separate debt investment fund structure in the future. Such a fund would catalyze a 
wide array of commercial investments in the EE sector.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will support the creation of an EE financing facility within Minsheng Bank 
to provide debt financing for EE investments. If implemented successfully, this facility will be 
firstly scaled up within Minsheng Bank and then open to other parties, such as commercial 
banks, bilateral and multilateral financial institutions as well as to private and public sector 
investors that would be interested in pooling their funds to mitigate the perceived high risk of the 
EE business. It will not be a legal entity, but instead will be created by bilateral agreements 
between each individual participant and Minsheng Bank. Agreements will be based on a 
common set of principles and governed by a common structure. A governing body / Participants 
Committee would play a significant a role in developing sub-project eligibility criterion for EE 
lending and advising on the operation of the Facility. Minsheng Bank will be responsible for 
managing the portfolio and the lending processes, including identification, appraisal and 
approval of the EE projects, and for servicing of the EE loans. Other responsibilities and 
commitments are to be defined in the individual bilateral agreements.  
 
Each individual participant will lend to Minsheng Bank at agreed upon terms and conditions, 
and Minsheng will then lend to individual EE projects. It is expected that the participants will 
provide an upfront umbrella funding loan commitment to Minsheng Bank, subject to agreed 
upon criteria for EE lending. The participants in the financing facility will take the risk of 
lending to Minsheng, and Minsheng will take the full credit risk in lending to eligible EE 
projects. The pricing of Minsheng Bank#s loans to the EE borrowers will be market-based. The 
definition of EE investments, the size of the individual project loans and the required equity will 
be determined during project preparation. The loans to the EE projects will follow Minsheng 
Bank's lending policies and an operational manual that includes procedures and eligibility 
criteria to be agreed with the Bank. The financing mechanism would be initiated by a US$100 
million IBRD loan to Minsheng, and a possible US$20 million public sector debt financing from 
CCDMF.  
 
The proposed project will mainly target EE investment opportunities in manufacturing 
industries. A certain amount of the Bank loan would be allocated to finance EE investments of 
small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in these industries. For this purpose, IFC has offered 
to develop, in parallel or subsequently, a risk sharing product / guarantee to Minsheng#s 
underlying EE loans through the IFC China Clean Development Finance Program ("CCDF"). 
This program is a risk-sharing facility that supports a loan portfolio of US$600 million in energy 
efficiency, renewable energy and waste treatment projects. As part of the platform set up in the 
proposed project, this risk-sharing support would be prepared and operated in parallel with the 
proposed project.  
 
A
technical assistance (TA) program will be developed to support Minsheng Bank and other 
project participants. It will be funded by a grant under the umbrella of the Bank's on-going 
CHEEF project and a possible grant from CCDMF to expand EE financing. The grant-based TA 
will support the development of an EE portfolio, including: EE project identification, appraisal, 
and risk management; addressing environmental and social safeguards issues related to EE 
investments; lending to SMEs for energy efficiency improvements; and carbon finance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Minsheng Bank will be required to designate staff to manage environmental and social risk. In 
addition, Minsheng Bank will contract with Chinese environmental consultants to support the 
PFI environmental risk management staff for any technical reviews or any other activities that 
are their responsibility. The World Bank will provide technical assistance to Minsheng Bank and 
its consultants in the identification and management of environmental risk in project evaluation 
and implementation. Since the potential environmental impacts likely to be associated with the 
anticipated subprojects are either minor or negligible, these arrangements are considered 
acceptable.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECAVP) 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EASIN) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
Ms Meixiang Zhou (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The framework will meet World Bank standards and will be consistent with the Equator 
Principles (IFC's Performance Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability), and detail 
EA procedures and institutional responsibilities for identifying, mitigating, monitoring and 
ultimately managing potential environmental issues that may be associated with any proposed 
investment for energy efficiency improvements. The framework would be incorporated into the 
Project Operations Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
All investments would involve facilities either within the existing plant fence or existing off-
site facilities. If appropriate, the issue of #chance find# procedures would be incorporated into 
the environmental assessment framework.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Bank loan will be on-lent by Minsheng Bank to end-borrowers for eligible energy 
efficiency investments. It is expected that all investments, by nature, would involve facilities 
either within the existing plant fence or existing off-site facilities and no resettlement would be 
involved. However, to be prudent, the team proposes that involuntary resettlement policy is 
triggered and resettlement policy framework will be developed in case there are sub-projects 
requiring involuntary resettlement. This would also provide an opportunity for Minsheng Bank 
to learn from the Bank on how to control social and resettlement risks of investment projects.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/01/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No specific studies are required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Leiping Wang 
07/29/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
08/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
07/29/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
