Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3401
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P096923 
Project Name:  Shanghai Urban Environment Project - APL Phase III 
Task Team Leader:  Hiroaki Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (75%);Sewerage (20%);Solid waste management (5%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Water resource management (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
431.14
431.14 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the APL program is to improve Shanghai’s 
environmentalconditions by progressive development and implementation of integrated, 
metropolitan-wide measures, as defined in the PAD of APL1.  
 
The project development objective for APL3 is to improve Shanghai’s resource and 
environmental sustainability, in the core and suburban areas, through strategic priority 
investments and selective institutional reforms in the water and wastewater sectors. The 
particular focus is on increasing the secure provision of good quality water, reducing 
pollution load discharged without treatment into water sources, and facilitating 
sustainable investments in environmental infrastructure in suburban areas.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project consists of three investment components and an institutional 
strengthening and training (IST) component.  The total cost of the proposed project is 
estimated at US$ 631.14 million, with an anticipated Bank loan of US$ 200 million.  
 
(1) Water Supply and Management Component (Estimated Base Cost: RMB 2537.74 
million or US$ 409.31 million/ IBRD loan: US $137.2 million)  
 
The component finances the construction of Nanhui Raw Water Conveyor, which is one 
of the nine components of the Qing Cao Sha Raw Water Project (QCSRWP).   The 
Nanhui Raw Water Conveyor, with a capacity of 1.28 million m3/day, will supply raw 
water to the rapidly growing outer metropolitan areas in south eastern Shanghai, 
including the major new container port development in Nanhui District, and the high tech 
industry and logistical complexes developing around the Pudong International Airport. 
This component consists of about 37.7 km of twin steel pipes of diameters varying from 
DN2000 to DN1200 mm, 3.6 km of steel pipes of diameter DN1800, and 7.3 km of steel 
pipes of diameter DN1600, raw water conveyors with a connecting control system, and a 
north Nanhui pumping station.  
 
The QCSRWP as a whole consists of nine parts: (i) Qing Cao Sha reservoir (area of 70 
km2 and 7 m water depth) and pumping stations for water abstraction, storage and 
conveyance; (ii) raw water conveyor on Changxing Island; (iii) raw water conveyor 
tunnel crossing the Yangtze River; (iv) Wuhaogou raw water pumping station; (v) raw 
water conveyor Yanqiao and associated pumping station; (vi) raw water conveyor of 
Lingqiao and associated pumping station; (vii) raw water conveyor Jinhai and associated 
pumping station; (viii) raw water conveyor of Nanhui and associated pumping station; 
and (ix) rehabilitation of raw water system of Upper Huangpu river.  The Nanhui 
Conveyor under APL 3 is a part of the eighth component.  After completion of the 
project, QCSRW system will cover the core city, Pudong, Nanhui, and Changxing Island, 
serving a population of over 10 million. The total investment cost of the QCSRWP is 
preliminarily estimated to be about RMB 16 billion (about US$ 2.25 billion) of which 
RMB 6 billion (US$ 845 million) will be provided by the Shanghai Metropolitan 
Government (SMG) as equity, and the remaining RMB 10 billion (US$ 1.41 billion) will 
be financed in the form of debt, including the Bank loan (US$ 137.2 million).  
 
(2) Wastewater Component (Estimated Base Cost: RMB 420.61 million or US$ 67.84 
million/IBRD loan: US$ 29.4 million)  
 
The component consists of the construction of the Puxi Trunk Sewer, which is one of 
the two sections of the Bailonggang Southern Trunk Sewer extension system. The Puxi 
Trunk Sewer will collect about 390,000m3/d wastewater in the Xuhui District, and it 
consists of 6.66 km of DN 3000 mm trunk sewer, 1.10 km of DN 3000 mm river 
crossing, 0.45 km of DN 2200 connecting sewer,  and a 7.96 m3/d pumping station.  
 
(3) District Environment Management Program (Estimated Base Cost: RMB 534.49 
million or US$ 86.21 million/ IBRD loan: US$ 30 million)  
Page  3
This component consists of the support to the DFV, a subsidiary of Chengtou General, 
dedicated to financing environmental investments in Shanghai sub-urban areas. The 
component is a continuation and extension of the DFV component under APL2 and 
follows a programmatic approach. As a result, t
he
Bank focused its appraisal on DFV’s 
Operational Manual and pipeline of investment projects. In addition,it agreed on one 
specific investment to be financed under APL3, namely Phase III of Jiading’s Hazardous 
Waste Treatment and Disposal Facility.  
 
(4) Institutional Strengthening and Training (IST) (Estimated Cost: RMB 21.08 million 
or US$ 3.40 million/ IBRD loan US$ 3.4 million)  
 
This component consists of the provision of strategic IST support to Chengtou General, 
its subsidiary raw water and wastewater companies, and SWA. It has two dimensions: 
sector wide policy and institutional issues at the government level, implemented by 
Shanghai Water Authority (SWA); and operational efficiency and institutional 
development issues at Chengtou utility company level, implemented by subsidiary 
companies of Chengtou.  Chengtou will take a leading role in implementing the IST 
components. Specifically, IST components will consist of the following six sub-
components: (i) water sector efficiency and regulation, (ii) water demand management 
(WDM), (iii) water provision security enhancement, (iv) project and financial 
management, (v) asset management system, and (vi) operational improvement and 
optimization for water sector utilities. The IST component will be delivered through a 
combination of strategic studies, training, study tours, and workshop.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Shanghai, China.  All main locations have been determined, except for some of the sub-
projects under the District Environment Management Program as this component would 
adopt programmatic approach.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: Major impacts relate to land acquisition and 
demolition of buildings. The project will require the acquisition of land, relocation of 
houses, compensation for businesses and relocation of infrastructure.  The project will 
require the taking of about 561 mu of land, of which about 110 mu is cultivated. The 
project would also require the
 demolition of 3413 m2 of households’ housing areas and 
will affect 290 people by land acquisition and housedemolition.  
 
OP4.01 Environmental Assessment: The project’s objective is to improve the water 
supply capacity and wastewater management in Shanghai in order to increase the quality 
of life of the urban residents and to comply with the national and Shanghai’s 
environmental plans. The environmental impacts of such project are obviously beneficial. 
However, some negative impacts may result from project implementation, mainly during 
construction.  The expected negative impacts include limited negative impacts on soil, 
air, water, acoustic environment, flora/fauna and surrounding communities. The impacts 
will be temporary and localized, and if proper mitigation measures are implemented 
during the construction period, the impacts can be minimized or even eliminated.  
 
OP4.04 Natural Habitats: It is expected that activities financed by the IBRD loan will 
not have significant impacts on natural habitats. The linked project, the construction and 
operation of the Qingcaosha (QCS) Reservoir will, however, cause the loss of natural 
habitats (though none critical in the senses of OP4.04) which are used by migratory water 
birds. It was confirmed that the affected wetland areas are mainly used as back-up 
habitats for migratory water birds under unfavorable weather conditions. Based on 
discussions with relevant stakeholders, including local ecologists working in the estuary 
area, appropriate measures were designed to properly mitigate the ecological impacts of 
the QCS Reservoir on wetland habitats during the winter time. At this time, the Reservoir 
might need to store water to avoid water quality degradation caused by sea water 
intrusion. A detailed analysis of the impacts and mitigation measures was prepared for 
the QCS EA Summary/Update including a supplementary EMP (mitigation measures) to 
Page  5
be implemented by the client. With proper implementation of the supplementary EMP, 
the Reservoir should in fact generate positive ecological impacts on wetland habitats for 
migratory water birds, as it would create a large wetland area free from human 
disturbance and is likely to be used by migratory water birds.  
 
OP4.37 Safety of Dams:  The QCS reservoir will be used as the raw water supply for the 
Nanhui raw water conveyor subproject, and the reservoir is located at the estuary of the 
Yangtze River. The Reservoir is under construction and will be completed by the end of 
2010. A World Bank dam safety specialist, Mr. Alessandro Palmieri, visited the site in 
May 2008 and conducted a dam safety evaluation. The main structures of the QCS 
project include embankments, water intake and conveying pump sluice.  The reservoir 
has an area of 66.26 km2 and of capacity equal to 524 M m3. The total length of 
embankments is of 48.79 km consisting of 7.65 km south embankment, 2.82 km west 
embankment, 18.96 km north embankment, 3.01 km east embankment, and 16.35 km 
Changxi Island embankment. The maximum height of the embankment and maximum 
level of storage water are 20 m and 7 m respectively.  
 
The reservoir (outside of the embankment)  was designed against 1/100 year flood 
return period with same frequency wind wave, and checked against 1/300 year flood 
return period with same frequency wind wave.  Whereas the reservoir (inside the 
embankment) was designed at maximum storage water level plus wind of Beaufort force 
of 10 scale.  In addition, the level of reservoir was designed at 6.20 m during sea water 
intrusion with minimum design reservoir level equal to -1.50 m. The level of reservoir 
was designed at 3.60 m during fresh water period with average storage water level equals 
to 2.70 m, and minimum operation level at 2 m. The earthquake peak ground acceleration 
at the dam site was designed at 0.10g, corresponding to a seismic damage intensity of VII 
scale.  
 
The Bank has hired (a) Dam Safety Management Center of MoWR (NI) to carry out 
dam safe review, and (b) NEWJEC Inc. from Japan to review the result of the dam 
liquefaction resis
tance review conducted by Chengtou’s consultant, in accordancewith 
Bank’s dam safety policy OP4.37 during the period between September 2007 
andSeptember 2008. The reviews have provided the following conclusions and 
recommendations which were agreed by Chengtou:  
 
(a) The liquefaction analyses were carried out by the PL method and 2-dimensional 
dynamic analysis using finite element method and it was considered that the liquefaction 
analyses were carried out properly.  
 
(b) The safety for earthquake has to be confirmed not with assumption soil properties at 
the design stage but with as-built properties by soil exploration after completion, redoing 
such as liquefaction analysis, stability analysis and so on.  
 
(c) Site monitoring has to be conducted for the sake of the dam safety.  The 
recommended items of the monitoring are pore water pressure in the foundation ground 
and in the hydraulic fill material, settlement and lateral displacement at the crest and toe 
Page  6
of the dyke. During the construction, monitoring the movement of the dykes would be 
useful for later consideration, is necessary. After the construction, the movement of the 
dykes should be monitored in the long term, to catch unusual behavior that might 
influence on the operation.  
 
(d) Soil explorations should be carried out to know the actual characteristics of soils 
after completion of the embankment. Hence, the drilling exploration, in-situ soil tests 
(SPT), laboratory soil tests (density, grain size distribution, triaxial test, cyclic triaxial test 
and so on) should be carried out after the completion of the embankment.  
 
(e) Surface protection on the crown of dyke is also important as well as the protection 
on the slope. The surface protection on the crown of dyke has to prevent not only from 
erosion but also from infiltration by rain, overtopping and overflow.  
 
Furthermore, the following measures have been agreed.  
 
(1) An Independent Panel of Dam Safety Experts: Shanghai has established an 
independent panel of dam safety experts under terms of references acceptable to the Bank 
to review and advise the borrower on matters related to the dam safety and its operations  
 
(2) Operation and Maintenance Plan:  Shanghai will compile the plan, and make it 
available to operating staff, the rules/ procedures and technical/safety requirements for 
operation, maintenance and surveillance (monitoring and inspection) of the dams in 
accordance with the relevant Chinese Government’s technical criteria for large 
embankment dams/reservoirs.  The final plan will be completed no later than six months 
before the initial filling of the reservoir.  
 
(3) Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP): Shanghai to prepare and implement an EEP, 
the plan will be provided to the Panel for review not later than one year before the 
projected date of initial filling of the reservoir.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to bring significant positive benefits for the environment, public 
health due to improved cleaner water supply service and capacity, and wastewater 
treatment capacity.  The Nanhui Conveyor component will increase water supply 
capacity; improve water quality; Bailonggang Southern trunk sewer extension component 
will increase wastewater collection rate, provide environmental protection guarantee to 
urban development; solve wastewater overflow problem during rainy seasons; act as key 
component of shanghai sewerage network.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The initially contemplated resettlement impacts have been significantly reduced through 
optimizing the project design and implementation arrangement. For example, pipe-
jacking technology will be used in project implementation, which reduced the 
Page  7
resettlement impact largely and the southern sewage line project changed its alignment to 
avoid resettlement significantly.  
 
During project preparation, alternative locations, technical process and design were 
explored and considered. Various alternatives including water supply system layout, 
sewage drainage system layout, construction method, pipeline materials and deodorant 
technology etc have been identified, evaluated and compared during the EA with the 
objective to avoid or otherwise minimize potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts and to maximize environmental benefits. The EA teams have worked closely 
with the project planners/ owners and the feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate 
alternatives and optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of or least 
adverse social and environmental impacts as well as other economic, technical, and 
financial considerations for the least cost solut
ions.  A “no project” scenario was also 
considered as an alternativeto each subproject.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Following the Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement, the Shanghai Project Office has prepared two resettlement action plans 
(RAP) for Component one and two of the projects.  A Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) was also prepared for a linkage project of Bailonggang Southern Trunk Sewerage 
(Pudong Section), and a RPF for its DFV component. The resettlement planning work 
was carried out by the line agencies under the guidance of the Hohai University and the 
Shanghai Academy of Social Science.  Planning work included project impact inventory 
surveys, social economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and livelihood 
rehabilitation strategies.  The social economic surveys confirmed that there are no ethnic 
minority communities impacted in the project areas. Resettlement that is required will be 
implemented in accordance with the approved Resettlement Action Plans and 
Resettlement Policy Framework.  
 
The Shanghai Project Management Office (PMO) had sound experience in working for 
the Bank-financed projects. The resettlement performance for the Phase 1 and 2 of the 
APL project are satisfactory at present. The Shanghai Academy of Social Science and the 
Hohai University were contracted to help the preparation of the RAPs and RPF. The 
Shanghai Academy of Social Science will be contracted as the external monitor for the 
project; they will also provide technical assistance to the PMO during resettlement 
implementation.  
 
Shanghai PMO and Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will take the responsibility for 
environmental management and compliance with required environmental standards 
during construction and operation periods. Shanghai PMO and Chengtou Company are 
repeated borrowers and demonstrate rich experiences and capacity to plan and implement 
the mitigation measures.  
 
In order to maximize environmental benefits and to avoid, minimize and mitigate 
potential short-term adverse environmental impacts, stand-alone EMP was prepared for 
Page  8
each subcomponent. The EMP includes detailed information on: environmental 
management; supervision mechanism and institutional arrangements; mitigation 
measures; environmental monitoring plans; training plans; and ways to strengthen client 
capacity.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders: Shanghai Municipal Government, Shanghai Environment Protection 
Bureau, Shanghai Chengtou, Citizens of Shanghai.  
 
Project-affected persons and organizations have been informed about the project and its 
impact through meetings during the preparation of the RAPs. Comments and 
recommendations received from these meetings have been incorporated as appropriate in 
the RAPs and the feasibility studies. Public participation will continue during RAP 
implementation. Project information will be provided to the affected persons through TV, 
newspapers, bulletins and posters. The RAPs will be summarized into a resettlement 
information booklet and distributed to affected households.  
 
Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during the preparation of the EAs; 
the first round was conducted during the EIA TOR preparation stage, the second round 
was conducted during the draft EIA report stage. Both rounds of public consultation 
focused primarily on the project-affected people. The consultation was primarily through 
questionnaire surveys, public meetings of key affected people and other stakeholders, 
supplemented by special seminar or interviews. Public concerns and opinions expressed 
are addressed in the EAs and incorporated into the project design and environmental 
mitigation measures.  
 
The project’s basic information, major anticipated adverse impacts and mitigation 
measures have been disclosed to the public through bulletins, local newspaper, and 
websites. The draft final EA/EMP, EA Summaries will be made available at the public 
libraries, PMO, PIUs and on the websites. The draft English version EA/EMP, EA 
Summaries were submitted to the Bank and disclosed at Infoshop in August 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/22/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/19/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2008 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/22/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  10
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
12/08/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
11/19/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
11/19/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten 
Mr Jiang Ru 
11/23/2008 
11/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
12/12/2008 
Comments:   
