Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3144 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/20/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P096920 
Project Name: Ningxia Highway Project 
Task Team Leader: Simon David Ellis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
300.00
300.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the attractiveness and competitiveness of the 
Ningxia Autonomous Region through a more effective, equitable, and sustainable use of the 
regional road infrastructure in support of industry and poor agricultural producers as measured 
by reduced transit times on improved highways and improved access for rural communities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will consist of three main components as follows:  
 
Component A: Development of Two Transport Corridors to Support the Industrial 
Development of Ningxia:  
 
Component A1: Guyaozi- Qingtongxia Expressway (GQE) - RMB 3113.2 million (USD 451.2 
million): GQE would connect Guyaozi to Qingtongxia on a new alignment bisecting 9 major 
national and provincial highways. It would also include a bridge over the Yellow River.  The 
highway would connect two major industrial areas at the extreme East and West of the corridor 
Page  2
as well as link Wuzhong and Lingwu’s urban areas.  The total length is 78.8 km and it is 
proposed to build the road to a 4-lane expressway standard.  
 
Component A2: Lingwu- Tianshuipu Highway (LTH)  RMB 2498.4 million (USD 362.1 
million): LTH is an important part of national trunk highway NH 211.  It is the shortest trunk 
road in connecting Yinchuan (Ningxia) to Qingyang City (Gansu) and further South-East to 
Xi’an (Shaanxi).  The highway would serve the rich coal resources along its alignment and 
promote the development of the Taiyangshan industrial development areas.  
 
This link would connect Lingwu to Tianshuipu on the border with Gansu province. The road 
would link the Taiyangshan industrial area near Huianpu and eventually form part of a national 
expressway linking with Gansu province to Xi’an. The total length is 123.8 km with the section 
from Lingwu to Baitugang (37.66 km) built to a 4- lane expressway standard, the section from 
Baitugang to Taiyangshan (37.3 km including 0.7 km of integrate subgrade) built using part of 
the existing alignment for NH211 to a 4-lane expressway standard and the section from 
Taiyangshan to Tianshuipu (48.85 km) will be upgraded to a class II standard.  
 
Component B: Rural Road Improvements in Poor Counties (RMB 300 million – USD 43.5 
million): This component will finance improvements to rural roads in the poorest counties of 
Ningxia. It will include the improvement of about 500 km of county and township roads built to 
a
class III or IV standard. The first-year program will be identified but the remaining roads will 
be identified on a rolling annual basis.  
 
Component C: Institutional strengthening (RMB 7.8 million – USD 1.1 million): This 
component will finance a program of technical assistance and training covering highway 
construction management, road mitigation measures including safety, and transport logistics.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project location is Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, in the Northern part of China.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Ningxia's Communication Department has experience of implementing Bank projects through 
the Tri-Provincial project. The ICR for this project identified that the Project Management Office 
(PMO) initially suffered from a lack of familiarity of World Bank procedures. However, this 
improved through the project and eventually implementation proceeded satisfactorily. The 
engineering and project management skills in the province are high and as a result the quality of 
construction work is good. Great success for environmental protection has been achieved for the 
two roads under Tri-Provincial Highway Project, where ecological restoration along project 
corridor was very successful and distinctive in the semi-desert area context. The experience and 
special knowledge in this regards will be inherited in the new project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASRE) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is a Category A project due to its scale of potential environmental and 
social impact and the sensitivity of project areas. Full EIA and EMP will be prepared according 
to OP4.01.  At present stage, a draft EIA is being developed by the EA consultant.  The major 
safeguards issues envisaged include:  
 
Environment  
 
Alternative alignment selection: Given the fragile ecological environment along the project 
corridor and well-developed irrigated lands in the north and west sections, an alignment selection 
to minimize the potential environmental and social impact is the main priority.  Several 
alternative alignments are being considered.  The final choice of alignment is to be based on 
multiple criteria that included upgrading of existing national highway, minimizing land 
acquisition/resettlement and ecological disturbance/degradation, and avoiding separation and/or 
loss of business of local communities who depend on through-traffic for livelihood. Currently, 
NCD has adopted one of the Task Team’s recommendations for the southern part of North-South 
G211 Road, i.e. to upgrade existing G211 instead of building a new “green-field” expressway in 
the fragile desert steppe. This will greatly minimize ecological impact and social impact 
(especially to Tianshuipu Town whose economy is largely dependent on through-traffic, and 
would be virtually bypassed by expressway) and yet meet traffic demand.  
 
Ecological environment impact: The ecological environment in the project corridor features 
desert steppe which is fragile given the arid climate and poor vegetation coverage. The best 
protection would be to minimize disturbance. Therefore, minimization of land disturbance (e.g. 
limit land occupancy of temporary land acquisition, opening of access roads, camp site, 
borrow/disposal areas) and timely reclamation or re-vegetation of disturbed land will be 
adequately addressed in EIA/EMP. Given the special natural environment, valuable local 
knowledge in terms of effective reclamation methods and adaptive species (especially the 
successful experience from Tri-Provincial Project) shall be incorporated into the EIA/EMP. 
Special implementation mechanism might be needed as the restoration time period could be 
more than one year which is the normal defects liability period of contractors after construction 
completion.  
 
The proposed East-West Expressway (Guyaozi – Qingtongxia expressway) will go through 
the Experimental Zone of Baijitan Nature Reserve, which features protection of desert steppe 
ecology and landscape. It is noted that the experimental zone section where the proposed line 
traverses is semi-desert area (far from the core protection zone), and is virtually reserved as a 
transport corridor when the Nature Reserve was established in 1985. There are two railway lines 
and one highway within the corridor. The EIA will include detailed survey and analysis by 
competent expertise in terms of biodiversity significance, potential impacts and necessary 
measures. The current management practice of the reserve management authority will be 
assessed, and if necessary opportunity be identified to strengthen the management and enhance 
environmental benefits of the project. The EIA shall include restrictions on borrow/disposal sites, 
camp sites, access road or any ancillary infrastructure within the boundary of nature reserve.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Social impact: The social impact is a main concern for the project given the limited fertile 
farmland resources in the relatively harsh natural environment context. The high density of 
irrigation canal system in the area also poses potential impacts that need to be adequately 
addressed. Other major social impacts include community severance, access restriction to 
farmland production and livelihood activity. In this regards, public consultation will be fully 
used as a meaningful tool to get public concerns that, in turn, can be incorporated into EIA and 
project design. In addition, a livelihood restoration program will be designed on potential 
impacts arising from restricted access to fertile farming land. More details will also be addressed 
through RAP and MPP.  
 
Indirect impact: The EIA will also address the indirect impact of the proposed expressways 
on the development of Ningdong Energy & Chemical Industry Base, Qingtongxia New Material 
Base and Taiyangshan Development Zone, which in turn pose significant environmental 
concerns in the region in terms of natural resource exploitation, industrial development and 
pollution control, environmental capacity and pollution load, urbanization and related 
environmental issues, institutional capacity of environmental management etc. It is noted that 
strategic environmental assessment for these industrial development zones has been conducted 
by Ningxia Government. It is agreed that a capacity building activity will be included in the 
Institutional Strengthening component, which will build upon the existing SEA practice in 
Ningxia, and focus on awareness raising on SEA among decision-makers and environmental 
management authorities for industrial development zones, capacity training on implementation 
of SEA, knowledge sharing of international good practice etc.  
 
Other impacts, as standard practice, will also be adequately addressed, including noise, air-
borne dust, wastewater, construction management etc.  
 
Rural roads component: According to current status of Rural Road Component, it is agreed 
that an Environmental Impact Assessment Framework (including a project specific EIA report 
for the first year program) would be more appropriate.  
 
The project team will prepare separate EMPs for the implementation of each sub-
component and also an environmental management framework together with a set of general 
EMPs to mitigate construction related impacts for the 500 kim of rural roads. The EMP will 
clearly detail each mitigation measure and implementation arrangements including scheduling 
and monitoring of the EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The proposed line traverses Baijitan Nature Reserve’s experiment zone section which is 
reserved as a transport corridor when the Nature Reserve was established in 1985, and there are 
two railway lines and one highway in the corridor. More details will be addressed in EIA as 
described in OP4.01 section above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project is unlikely to cause significant conversion or degradation of forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on pest 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
management practice. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Cultural property survey shall be conducted during EA preparation for the alignment, 
borrow/disposal sites, camp sites and the historical irrigated area affected by the project. An 
official statement of the findings shall be obtained from related authority. At this moment, 
whether this policy is triggered is to be determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
social screening will be carried out to identify the potential impacts of both the expressway 
and first-year rural roads program on indigenous peoples. As a result, it is too early to determine 
whether OP/BP 4.10 is triggered and the extent, if any, that minority communities would be 
affected by land acquisition and structure demolition. For this screening, the client will pay 
particular attention to analyzing the mitigation measures for livelihoods restoration based on 
broad consultation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement action plan: It is anticipated that collective agricultural land will have to be 
acquired and housing structures affected particularly in the fertile agricultural area of the 
province. NCD has agreed to undertake a screening exercise to estimate resettlement impacts and 
to conduct a comparative analysis of the various proposed alignments. Another survey will be 
undertaken to determine the planning for land development and to locate suitable areas for any 
resettled people. The first draft RAP will focus on the impacts analysis so as to provide guidance 
for alignment selection. The second draft RAP will incorporate the results related to land 
development planning and the detailed locations for housing reconstruction and mitigation 
measures to any affected village facilities. This will be done through public consultation and 
participatory approaches.  
 
Based on the screening exercise, the project team will undertake a more focused assessment 
for livelihoods restoration that concentrates only on the affected people. A livelihoods restoration 
program will be designed especially given the issues raised in the project documentation 
including on potential impacts arising from restricted access to fertile farming lands.  
 
A
resettlement policy framework will be developed in addition to the RAP since the rural 
road investments beyond the first-year have not been identified.  
 
It is anticipated that the impacts to local communities can be minimized through the 
optimizing alignment for the expressway sections and with full participation/consultation in the 
affected communities. The task team proposes to introduce a Safeguard Compliance 
Management System (SCMS) as a useful tool to collect all of the displaced persons concerns so 
as to optimize the expressway project alignment and rural roads selections.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
This policy is not triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
This policy is not triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
This policy is not triggered as the project is not in a disputed area.   
Page  6
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/26/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment - April 2009 
 
Environmental Management Plans - April 2009 
 
Livelihoods Restoration Assessment - April 2009 
 
Resettlement Policy Framework - April 2009 
 
Resettlement Plan - April 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simon David Ellis 
09/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
10/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
10/08/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
