Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3872 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P111421 
Project Name: China: Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 16, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
200.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objective (DO) of the proposed Project is to enhance to the mobility of the 
citizens of the Project Cities along critical corridors. The DO will be achieved in a manner 
consistent with:  
 
1.
The cities# growth patterns;  
 
2.
National priorities related to planning including #people centered# development, application 
of a scientific process, and incorporation of inclusive participatory processes; and  
 
3.
National priorities related to urban transport including State Council Opinion #46 on giving 
priority to public transport, and the National Road Safety Law  
 
This objective would be achieved through integrated investments for all modes in key transport 
corridors, including selected priority investments to support public and non motorized transport.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. The project components proposed in each city consist of the key interventions for the 
comprehensive improvement of a major transport corridor, namely:  
Page  2
a. Road capacity enhancements based on an analysis of current traffic bottlenecks and future 
traffic projects;  
 
b.
Public transport enhancements that combine on-street priority for buses (building dedicated 
lanes preferably in the median), improvements in supporting infrastructure (terminals, pedestrian 
signals, lighting, bus stops, signage), acquisition of higher quality vehicles, installation of new 
fare systems (IC cards), and rationalization of bus service operational plans; and  
 
c. Traffic safety physical improvements and management on the corridor.  
 
2. In some cases (such as in Anqing) the capacity enhancement is proposed on the same roads 
as the integrated improvements focused on safety, management and public transport.  In other 
cases, such as in Luan and Wuhu, the Bank will finance a new greenfield road to enhance 
capacity in the demonstration corridor and the integrated improvements will be targeted at all the 
key roads in the corridor.  
 
3. All these proposed interventions are currently part of the cities# urban development plans, of 
which enhancements to urban transport conditions is a critical element.  In this respect, 
additionally, each city has proposed supplementary roads to complete missing links in their road 
network.  Many of the cities have also proposed investments in public transport terminals and 
depots. Exhibit 1 summarizes the key components in each project city.  Additionally, all the 
cities have agreed in principle to undertake a consultative public participation process as part of 
project preparation.  
 
Exhibit 1.  Proposed physical project components  
 
Project City  Integrated corridor development 
Other roads 
Public transport 
Loan 
amounts  
 
An Qing 
Capacity enhancement and integrated treatment: Huxin Lu  Shuguang road 
(640m), Yanjiang road (900m) 
Hongguang & Shizishan depots 
US$19 million  
 
Huai Bei 
Proposal under revision 
Tuohe (9.5km); Nanhunan Lu (2.8km) 
 
US$14 million  
 
Lu An 
Capacity enhancement:  Bagongshan Lu (2.2km); Integrated treatment: Jiefang 
and Meishan roads 
Xicheng (3.2km); Pihe (2.8km); Longhezhong Lu (6.4km),  bus 
maintenance center 
US$15 million  
 
Wuhu Capacity enhancement: Sanhuan Expressway segment (9km); Integrated treatment:  
Yijiang Lu, Jianhua Lu   
 
 
US$52 million  
 
4. Implementation Arrangements.  Similar to other similar projects in urban transport and urban 
environment sectors, a Project Agreement will likely be signed with the Anhui Provincial 
Government.  A PMO at the Anhui Provincial Construction Bureau would be the main 
counterpart and provide key oversight to the project.  At the task team#s suggestion, the 
provincial authorities have visited otherBank-financed projects under implementation and 
decided to further formalize and strengthen project management measures at the provincial level.  
Ideally, the provincial PMO will include staff knowledgeable of environmental, resettlement, 
FM, and procurement issues, and available to support the project cities.  The project cities would 
sign a subsidiary agreement with the Provincial Government consistent with the legal agreements 
signed with the World Bank.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
An Qing, Huai Bei, Lu An, Wuhu  
 
Anhui Province   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
One of the project cities, Lu An has just completed a World Bank financed project on sewage 
treatment plant and the PMO staff appeared to be quite familiar with the WB procedures and 
requirements.  There is also considerable institutional capacity and knowledge of World Bank 
Safeguard policies at the Provincial level where there is a lot of experience with World Bank 
financed investments.  
 
There is no expectation that particularly sensitive or challenging circumstances will arise on 
safeguard policy issues. The project cities and the provincial authorities are committed to 
carrying out the necessary actions including consultation and information disclosures in 
accordance with the Bank safeguard policies.  
 
That said, three of the project municipalities, of Anqing, Wuhu and HuaiBei, have little 
knowledge of World Bank Safeguard policies and there will be a need to ensure that relevant 
staff in these cities have adequate training during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (GEFEO) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
EA process was conducted for four project cities by experts from Provincial Academy of 
Environmental Science, a top-level certified institute for EA in Anhui Province. Based on 
individual EAs, a consolidated EA(CEA) and four stand-alone EMPs were developed by the 
same expert team.  
 
As a standard urban transport project, environmental impacts will be mostly construction-
related, such as noise and dust, construction waste disposal, damage of vegetation, soil erosion, 
sewage discharge, traffic impact, social disturbance and safety, and indirect impacts caused by 
resettlement and industries relocation. Major negative impacts during operation include air 
pollution, noise, road safety and wastewater from bus depots built by the project.  
 
These negative impacts could be readily avoided and mitigated by sound project design and 
construction management and operation practice. They were analyzed thoroughly in the EA for 
each city and the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was designed for each project city 
detailing comprehensive mitigation measures to address these impacts. The EMPs will be 
incorporated into bidding documents and civil work contracts to ensure their implementation.  
 
The EMP for each project city defines institutional arrangement for its implementation and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
supervision mechanism, specifies mitigation measures for all potential adverse impacts, and 
includes an environmental monitoring plan and a training plan with budget estimate.  
 
China and Anhui regulations require all contractors to have #Plan and design for organizing 
construction#, which covers environment and safety, as one of the conditions for awarding 
contract. In addition, EMPs also emphasize additional code of conduct for mitigating 
environmental impacts. (Both can serve as Environmental Code of Practice for the project#s 
implementation).  
 
Linked project:  
 
The northern endpoint of Sanhuan road in WuHu is the site of a proposed bridge over 
Qingyi River as well as two nearby dikes. As this bridge will be constructed as a separate project 
with domestic funding, it is regarded as a linked project to the Bank financed Sanhuan Road.  
Copy of the EIA for this bridge as well as approval letter from Wuhu Environmental Protection 
Bureau were provided to the Bank in April 2009 for due diligence review to ensure that it poses 
no reputation risk for the Bank project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
One of the project road alignments in Huaibei lies in parallel in part with Nanhu wetland 
park, a protected area designated as national-level urban wetland park in 2005. The word Urban 
indicates the man-made nature of the park (created by land subsidence due to decades of 
underground coal mining) in an urban setting and is thus used mainly for city recreation 
purposes. The alignment was modified so that the shortest distance to the border of the park 
would be more than 200 meters. Moreover, at the closest point there are a ditch and railway line 
in between the road alignment and the border of the park.  
 
Notwithstanding, the wetland park authority in Huaibei has been consulted and consent 
obtained, all recorded in the CEA. Both the CEA and the EMP for Huaibei specify measures to 
protect the Park during the project implementation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The CEA has listed all protected areas and physical cultural resources in the project areas 
which are mainly Nanhu wetland park in Huaibei and an ancient Linjiang temple in Anqing.  A 
section in the CEA was dedicated to analyzing potential impacts of the project on both.  
 
Specific attention is paid to the temple due to its closeness to one of the project road in 
Anqing.  Though no widening is needed for this road section, construction activities (e.g. 
vibration and noise of vehicles or equipment) and induced traffic changes potentially risk 
affecting the temple due to the short distance.  
 
The EA team investigated the site, assessed the nature and extent of impacts from the 
project, and consulted and obtained consent from the responsible authority (Anqing Bureau for 
Cultural Relics and Religion). The EMP further requests that expert guidance from Anqing 
Bureau for Cultural Relics and Religion be sought during construction.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The resettlement inventory aspect survey would be requested to screen whether any 
indigenous minority communities are located in the project area. If so, IPDP might be 
approached.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement action plan: It is anticipated that collective agricultural land would be required 
and housing structures would be reconstructed. The PMO has contracted Hehai University who 
has Bank project experiences to guide the resettlement inventory aspect survey and the draft 
resettlement action plan. PMO agreed to lead detailed survey to the resettlement inventory 
aspects so as to conduct the analysis to the negative impacts. The first draft RAP would be 
submitted for Bank review in the end of November, 2008. The second draft RAP would 
incorporate the results of the impact analysis and the location of the housing reconstruction and 
the mitigation measures to the village facilities affected by the project through public 
consultation and participatory approaches.  
 
Linked project:  
 
The Bank will finance one section of Sanhuan Road in Wuhu that will connect with another 
section of the same road that is being financed using domestic funds. The Wu Hu PMO agreed 
that Bank would exercise the due diligence review to identify whether there are any reputational 
risks for the Bank project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/26/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/01/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of SA and EA will start Oct. 2008 and should be completed by April 2009   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
05/28/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
06/04/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
05/31/2009 
Comments:   
