Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3701 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P101211 
Project Name: CO Second Social Safety Net Project 
Task Team Leader: Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (50%);Health (20%);Primary education (15%);Secondary 
education (15%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Education for all (P);Gender (P);Social safety 
nets (P);Other social protection and risk management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would finance the continuation of Colombia’s expanded conditional cash 
transfer (CCT) program, Familias en Accion, covering approximately 1.7 million poor families 
(including about 200,000 displaced families).  The principal project development objective is to 
complement the income of poor families (identified through the Selection System of 
Beneficiaries of Social Programs - SISBEN -  the proxy means targeting instrument or the 
registry for the displaced) with children under 18 years of age, promoting the formation of 
human capital through:  
 
•
The incorporation of good nutritional and health practices (including regularcheck-ups 
and vaccinations for children)  and growth monitoring of children under 7 years of age  
 
•
Attendance and maintenance of children in basic and/or secondary education.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The lending instrument requested by the Government of Colombia is a Specific Investment Loan 
(SIL).  Based on the projected financial requirements to cover the operation of the expanded 
Page  2
Familias en Accion from 2007-2010, mainly the cash transfers to families, as well as associated 
bank commissions, and the respective roles of the Bank and the IDB, the Bank loan would total 
around US$400 million. The amount specified in the approved CONPES document is US$638 
million, but is subject to revision during project preparation to incorporate associated costs, such 
as financial charges and the cost of impact evaluations.  
 
During 2007, Familias en Accion carried out a major re-registration of eligible SISBEN I 
families (those with minors under 18 years of age) using the results of the updated SISBEN  in 
municipalities already covered by the Program, as well as expanding into new municipalities.     
Currently, all but 5 of the 1098 municipalities in Colombia have participants in the Program.  In 
about 15 large urban areas, the Program combined the eligibility requirement of SISBEN 1 with 
geographical targeting (limiting access to those SISBEN I families living in poorer 
neighborhoods).  In all other municipalities and Bogota, any family classified as SISBEN I and 
with minors under the age of 18 was eligible to register for the Program.  
 
Given the expansion of Familias en Accion during 2007 to reach the current level of 1.7 million 
participants (SISBEN I and displaced households) throughout the whole country, including in 
large urban areas, the Program working in cooperation with the National Planning Department 
(DNP) has changed the structure of subsidies, in large part based on the results of previous 
impact evaluations.  During the period of the proposed project, the Program is testing out 
different structures of subsidy levels, replacing the subsidy for primary school students given its 
lower impact in urban areas with a “family allowance” for families with children under 12 who 
have not yet entered secondary school, and experimenting with different types of incentives for 
attendance, retention, and completion for secondary and middle school levels.  The impact 
evaluation for the expanded Familias en Accion has been designed to test the effectiveness of the 
different structures in meeting the objectives of the Program.  
 
The proposed Bank project would support the financing of approximately 1.7 million Program 
participants over 2009 and part of 2010. Total transfers under the Program, including associated 
financial fees, are expected to average about US$90-100 million for each bimonthly payment 
during 2008-10.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
During 2007, Familias en Accion expanded to cover the whole country, including large urban 
areas.  Currently, only 5 municipalities in Colombia have not as yet signed participation 
agreements with the national government.  The Program is currently operating a pilot in 
indigenous communities in 4 municipalities (Valledupar, Cordoba – Narino, Natagaima, and 
Covaima), with the intention of expandingto include other indigenous communities during 
implementation of the proposed project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has demonstrated adequate institutional capacity for safeguard policies.  The 
previous loan triggered the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  Progress on 
implementation of the agreed action plan was somewhat delayed, but satisfactory.  In fact, the 
Government expanded a planned study intended to develop a program strategy for ethnic 
populations, by adding a test of its recommendations in a few pilot areas in order to develop a 
Page  3
special annex for the operational manual. Consultations have been undertaken appropriately and 
publicly disclosed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
As was the case with previous loans supporting Familias en Accion, the proposed project 
would trigger the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  In regards to indigenous 
communities, during implementation of the ongoing Social Safety Net Project (Ln. 7337), the 
Government advanced in the adaptation of Familias en Accion in order to implement it in 
indigenous communities while ensuring the consideration of the cultural characteristics of that 
population.  A pilot is in progress with an initial coverage of 5810 eligible families in indigenous 
communities, corresponding to about 90 percent of families.  In each of these communities an 
agreement was reached with the indigenous peoples authorities and the municipal authorities on 
the implementation of the program following the institutions and traditions of the indigenous 
communities. The operation of the pilot is being monitored with the idea of using the results as a 
base to establish operating procedures which could be used to expand the Program into 
additional indigenous communities. Consultations were organized to discuss the strategy 
developed by the Program to work in indigenous areas. The results of these consultations have 
been disclosed in Colombia.  Once the findings of the pilots are available, expected in 
July/August, the existing IPDP would be updated and issued as an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) 
as per O P 4.10. In addition, a special annex covering the operation of the Program in indigenous 
communities would be prepared for the operational manual.  Both of these documents are 
estimated to be available in September 2008, before appraisal. Based on the results of the initial 
activities of the pilot (consultations), the Program has initiated the first approaches to the rest of 
the indigenous communities, through forums in which the indigenous authorities are invited to 
participate, with the aim to learn about the Program and to initiate the process of specific 
consultations in each community.  
 
The project preparation teams includes a consultant experienced in the application of 
indigenous safeguards policy, who will review progress under the ongoing project, identify if 
there are any additional issues and/or need for additional mitigation measures, and reach 
agreement on necessary steps with the Government.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
June-September, 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
07/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/16/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
07/16/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
