Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/12/2009 
Report No.:  AC3003
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P083904 
Project Name:  Justice Services Strenghtening 
Task Team Leader:  David F. Varela 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 20, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (50%);General public administration sector (50%) 
Theme:  Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (67%);Access to law and 
justice (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Judiciary to deliver 
efficient, timely and transparent services in the civil, family and labor courts of the 
country's six major cities, and to facilitate citizens' access to such services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will strengthen the Judiciary by scaling up the management model developed 
under a previous LIL.  The investments in information and communications technologies 
(ICT) systems under subcomponent 1.1 will help the Judiciary authorities to eliminate 
structural backlogs by relying on regular, consistent, and reliable information as a key 
tool for improved planning and implementation capabilities, while enhancing governance 
by allowing citizens to exert social control under a two-way communications 
subcomponent (1.2). The Project will not finance any new physical infrastructure, only 
the refurbishment of existing infrastructure.  The only courts eligible for financing will be 
civil, family, and labor courts of the ordinary jurisdiction.  
 
The Project will comprise four components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1 - Strengthening of Judicial Case Management  
 
Strengthening of the managerial capacity of the Judiciary to improve the performance of 
civil, family, and labor courts in Barranquilla, Bogota, Bucaramanga, Cali and Medellin.  
 
Activities to be financed:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1. Efficiency of justice services management  
 
Subcomponent 1.2. Communication systems between citizens and the Judiciary  
 
Component 2 - Development of judicial human resources  
 
To develop the Judiciary's human resources on the basis of periodic performance 
evaluations and capacity building.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1. Judicial staff training  
 
Subcomponent 2.2. Judicial staff performance evaluation  
 
Component 3 - Facilitating access to justice services  
 
To facilitate access to justice services by vulnerable groups, through the generation and 
dissemination of reliable information, the extension of geographic coverage and the 
strengthening of mediation services.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1. For all justice services  
 
Subcomponent 3.2. For formal justice services  
 
Subcomponent 3.3 For alternative dispute resolution mechanisms  
 
Component 4 - Project coordination  
 
To achieve successful Project implementation, through standard Project coordination, 
and specific M&E activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will serve the most immediate needs of the courts in the country's six largest 
cities (Barranquilla, Bogota, Bucaramanga, Cartagena, Cali and Medellin, cities that head 
the most congested judicial districts) to implement an integrated solution that can be 
replicated in other cities in subsequent phases.  
 
The selection of the project cities was based on the geographical distribution of justice 
services demand identified by the PHRD-financed studies. Barranquilla, Bogota, 
Bucaramanga, Cali, and Medellin concentrate more than 60 percent of judicial demand in 
the civil, family and labor courts, and show poor performance in terms of contract 
enforcement under the "Subnational Doing Business 2008 Report".   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None of the activities included in this project will trigger any of the safeguard policies 
listed in Section 5 above. The safeguard screening category of the project is S2 (no 
safeguard issues). The environmental screening category of the project is C (no adverse 
environmental impact)  
 
The proposed project will address the priority justice sector issues defined in the 
National Development Plan, and the Justice Sector Strategic Plan, including the 
development of a few innovative approaches to enhancing access to justice through 
formal and non-formal mechanisms (decentralization, mediation).  
 
A
social assessment was undertaken during project preparation that included attention 
to, and documentation of, indigenous groups’ preferences and priorities along with other 
relevant stakeholder groups (poor, women, youth).  The consultation process also 
included representatives of indigenous groups. The assessment was conducted between 
April-September 2008 by local experts. The social assessment process has provided 
sufficient information to make a judgment regarding the non-applicability of OP/BP 4.10.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The possibility of addressing indigenous people's justice issues was considered during 
preparation. However, the final decision was not to involve the Bank in this area because 
other donors (the EU in particular) are very active with a significant amount of financing. 
Moreover, as the project setting is urban, indigenous groups are highly unlikely to be 
affected.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project preparation included attention to, and documentation of, indigenous groups' 
preferences and priorities along with other relevant stakeholder groups (poor, women, 
youth). The consultation process also included representatives of indigenous groups.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  5
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David F. Varela 
08/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
08/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Nicholas Paul Manning 
08/11/2009 
Comments:   
