Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/06/2009 
Report No.:  AC4170
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P101279 
Project Name:  CO Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Taimur Samad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
11.50
11.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the quality and coverage of integrated 
solid waste management services in Colombia by ensuring that waste generated by 
approximately 300,000 consumers is adequately disposed of in sanitary landfills 
constructed under the Project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would be developed as a ‘framework’ operation, under which 
specificregional landfill investments to be financed would not be identified during 
preparation. The Project would instead define overall technical, financial, economic, 
social, and environmental guidelines to be applied in the preparation and implementation 
of subprojects, and transparent eligibility criteria for their selection. Colombia has 
developed a comprehensive regulatory framework in the sector that in many respects 
already details technical norms for the screening, development and implementation of 
sector investments – including norms for environment and social management.  
 
The Project works within this regulatory framework, which has been found to be 
consistent with Bank technical and safeguards requirements. The team has appraised the 
Page  2
application of existing environmental norms in a sample of three regional landfill 
operations recently financed by the Government of Colombia and found them cases to 
have complied with prevailing environmental norms.  
 
Project Components:  
 
The Project is a comprehensive initiative composed of three separate, integrated 
components, and involving both technical assistance and investment funding, as well as 
management costs. Most resources (86%) would be used to finance the construction of 
four to six mid-sized regional landfills and to close open-air dumps. Capacity building 
and entrepreneurial programs for waste pickers affected by dump closures and 
resettlement and compensation actions, in conformity with the standards of OP 4.12, are 
also envisioned. The Project further provides for technical assistance to develop studies 
to identify optimal SWM contracting and investments, as well as improved waste 
collection and transport services. Specific assessments and initiatives directed at 
improving recycling and waste minimization would be conducted in parallel with public 
sector capacity building, and public awareness and education campaigns. Finally, the 
Project foresees the implementation of mechanisms and procedures to increase 
Colombia’s access to the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) resources and expand 
landfill gas recovery measures throughout the country.  
 
Component 1: Regional Solid Waste Disposal Systems (US$29.5 million, of which 
US$20.0 million is Bank financing). The component would primarily finance the 
construction of an estimated six to eight commercially viable regional landfills, ranging 
in size from approximately 40 to 300 tons/day. It would also finance the construction of 
transfer stations in selected sites and closing of open-air landfills, principally in areas 
where investments in new regional landfills are funded under this component. The 
component would also potentially finance the rehabilitation and expansion of landfill 
sites that may currently be operating at sub-sanitary levels. In addition the component 
would finance technical assistance for the development of regional landfill subprojects, 
including engineering designs, environmental impact assessments, social assessments and 
other related studies required under the sector regulatory framework and Bank guidelines. 
Technical assistance and consultant services to be financed under this component would 
also include social inclusion, capacity building and entrepreneurial programs for waste 
pickers to mitigate any adverse impact on livelihoods caused by the closing of open-air 
dumps. The component would also finance costs associated with resettlement and 
compensation for loss of property in the case that such adverse impacts might emerge 
under subprojects.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening in Solid Waste Management (US$0.7 million 
of Borrower financing). The component would finance three key areas of technical 
assistance as outlined below.  
 
•
Strengthening Sector Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building: The 
component will finance at the national level through technical assistance the review, 
adjustment and development of the sector regulatory framework. At the subnational level 
the project would finance capacity building for local governments and regional 
Page  3
environmental authorities in: (i) elements of the regulatory framework; (ii) tariff regime; 
(iii) use of the Sistema Unico de Informacion (SUI); and (iv) technical norms and 
benefits associated with sanitary landfills.  
 
•
Strengthening of Solid Waste Management Planning Systems: The component 
will finance the updating and strengthen of regional integrated solid waste management 
plans (PGIRS). The planning instruments would focus on: (i) improved diagnostics of 
solid waste management systems; (ii) regional integration of collection, transport and 
disposal systems; (ii) institutional modernization through the transfer of service provision 
to professionalized operators; (iv) adoption of tariff systems; and (v) the promotion of 
recycling, waste minimization and carbon finance practices.  
 
•
National Assessment of Recycling Markets and Strategy Framework: The 
component would finance: (i) a national market and demand assessment for recycling 
products and associated cost-benefits analyses for recycling, composting and waste 
minimization; and (iv) the development of a national draft strategy framework for 
recycling.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (US$ 0.8 million of Borrower financing). The 
component would finance costs associated with project management including goods, 
works, services and operating expenses associated with financial audits, mid-term and 
end-project evaluations, training and capacity building of MAVDT, Comision de 
Regulacion de Agua Potable y Saneamiento Basico (CRA) and Superintendencia de 
Servicios Publicos y Domiciliarios (SSPD) and other regional and local government staff. 
The component will also be used to reinforce technical, environmental, community 
outreach, communications, administrative and fiduciary capacity within MAVDT.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is being developed as a framework, demand-driven operation, in which the 
specific regional landfill investments to be financed would not be identified during 
preparation. It would instead define a basic set of technical, financial, economic, social 
and environmental guidelines to be applied in the preparation and implementation of 
proposed investments, as well as transparent eligibility criteria for the selection of 
subprojects. Colombia has developed a comprehensive regulatory framework in the 
sector that already details many of the necessary technical norms for the screening, 
development and implementation of sector investments. During preparation, the team has 
found that these existing norms, complemented with some minor additional procedures, 
are within the standards of the Bank’s social and environmental safeguard requirements. 
The team has also appraised the application of existing norms in a sample of three 
regional landfill operations recently developed under the Colombian legal framework. 
Finally, the team has rapidly reviewed an identified sample of 5-6 regional landfill 
investments, currently in the advanced stages of development and which might 
potentially be financed by the Project to: (i) confirm their compliance with preliminary 
technical and economic eligibility criteria; and (ii) validate that a pipeline of ready 
operations exists.  
 
Page  4
Under Colombia’s existing legal and regulatory framework, indigenous communities 
possess veto rights over public infrastructure investments in areas of immediate 
influence. –In recognition of this constraint and the potentially controversial nature of 
landfill investments, the Government has made the de-facto decision not to site landfills 
on registered indigenous lands or in areas where indigenous communities are present. 
This decision has been taken out of consideration for indigenous belief systems, which 
treat the earth as sacred, and the large-scale dumping of waste as a potential violation of 
that sacredness. In order to ensure that proposed subproject investments would not affect 
indigenous communities, a screening instrument has been developed, to be applied prior 
to the selection of each subproject site.  
 
It is important to note that the scope of Project activities relates to the final disposal of 
waste and does not finance municipal waste collection. While indigenous peoples may 
experience potential indirect benefits from future improvements and expansions in solid 
waste collection, therefore, such benefits would not considered to be directly caused by 
the Project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Although no site-specific investments have yet been selected under the Project, an 
environmental risk category A has been assigned to it, due to the potential environmental 
risks associated with the construction of new regional landfills. During Project 
implementation, a detailed process for the screening of potential site-specific 
environmental impacts would be undertaken to determine the scope of environmental 
assessments and mitigation measures required for each proposed investment. The 
following aspects have been particularly important in determining the Environmental 
Screening Category:  
 
(i) 
the selection of specific subprojects have not yet been finalized;  
Page  5
(ii) 
some of the potential impacts are irreversible;  
 
(iii) 
there is a risk that the surrounding environment might be affected as a result of 
failure to construct or manage the subprojects as designed; and  
 
(iv) 
most of the potential environmental impact can be mitigated when locating the 
site for the new sanitary landfills.  
 
The Project expects to deliver significant environmental benefits, by reducing or 
eliminating existing environmental impacts associated with the current practices of open 
waste dumps in Colombia. Open dumps pose risks and environmental hazards to the 
affected population and natural resources, including air pollution, bad odors, water 
contamination, pests, health affections, landscape morphologic impact, soil 
contamination, and social impacts associated with child labor and poor quality of life. At 
the same time, developing sound landfills and solid waste management systems could 
also result in potentially negative environmental impacts and social sensitivity associated 
with site-selection; waste handling and disposal procedures; and local concerns over 
location and site selection. The Project screening procedures would reduce these risks 
through sound site-selection procedures and ensure that solid waste collection and 
disposal management systems incorporate proper risk mitigation measures for exposure 
to disease vectors, odors, and other unpleasant impacts often associated with the landfills.  
 
Although resettlement would be avoided and minimized in the siting of facilities, there 
is still a minor risk that the development of new sanitary landfills and transfer stations 
may require land acquisition and impact property values of surrounding populations.   
 
The closing of existing open dumps and controlled landfills may also affect people 
living and working on these sites (i.e., waste pickers).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The cumulative impacts from the solid waste management interventions under this 
Project are expected to be wholly positive. The potential environmental risks and 
impacts, as described in the point A.1 above, cannot be fully anticipated until specific 
sites are selected. As a result, significant and/or or irreversible impacts are possible, and 
particularly with regard to the geological risks of landfill areas. On the whole, however, it 
is expected that most environmental impacts associated with landfills can be mitigated 
through proper site selection, technical engineering design, and sound operational 
management.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to specific proposed subprojects would be identified and documented as part 
of the site-selection and planning process. During the planning process, alternative sites 
would be considered and evaluated, as well as alternative operational modalities (such as 
the size, volume and type of waste materials to be handled at specific locations). An 
environmental analysis of alternatives would be conducted, either in the development of 
individual Integrated Solid Waste Management Plans (PGIRS), or through the 
Page  6
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). In the former case, landfill site selection would 
be the responsibility of municipalities; while, in the latter case, this would be the landfill 
developer’s responsibility. EIAs and technical designs for the new landfills to be funded 
by the project, will be developed by separate contractors, to avoid potential conflict of 
interest, in accordance with the Bank safeguard policies applicable to category A 
projects. Developers, the MAVDT and the Bank will ensure that recommendations 
arising from the EIA process can be take into account when finalizing technical designs. 
In some cases, transfer stations would be useful in helping to avoid the construction and 
operation of new sanitary landfills, thereby significantly reducing environmental risks 
and impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Mitigating the potential environmental impacts of solid waste management activities is 
best done upstream, during the planning process. Good planning, landfill siting and 
construction standards, and waste collection and disposal practices can play a significant 
role in mitigating potentially negative downstream environmental impacts. In this sense, 
and in compliance with the requirements of OP 4.01, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) has been produced and disclosed, both in-country and 
through the Bank’s InfoShop. The EA report includes: (i) a description of Colombian law 
and policies related to solid waste management and final disposal; (ii) a description of the 
relevant World Bank environmental and social safeguard policies, and their application to 
the Project; (iii) an assessment of the environmental and social impacts normally 
associated with waste disposal activities; and (iv) the ESMF, including guidelines to 
minimize Project-related environmental and social impacts.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by the borrower to address 
any potential resettlement issues that might emerge during implementation. Beyond this, 
potential impacts on waste pickers are being specifically addressed through a 
comprehensive Waste Picker Inclusion Strategy, based on – but surpassing, in breadth 
and depth – the requirements of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and aimed at 
restoring the livelihoods of those affected to at least their pre-intervention levels. This 
includes a strategy for addressing the presence of children on open dumps in an equitable 
and sustainable way.  
 
An assessment undertaken of the MAVDT’s capacity and experience with regard to 
environmental and social safeguards has indicated that this is adequate to ensure 
compliance with the Bank safeguard policies. As a rule, all Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs), Social Management Plans (SMPs), Environmental Management 
Plans (EMPs) and, if necessary, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), would be 
implemented by the specialized operators in charge of the related civil works, and their 
compliance with Bank standards and Colombia national would be required by the bidding 
documents and legal contracts, and monitored by MAVDT. Regional Environmental 
Corporations (CARs) and other local and national environmental authorities, including 
MAVDT, would be responsible for overseeing the implementation of works, according to 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Periodic quarterly 
Page  7
audits to ensure compliance would be undertaken by independent technical supervisors, 
validated by the CARs and reviewed by MAVDT. Regional and local environmental 
authorities and the Ministry of Environment, Housing and Land Use Planning all have 
specialized and trained sanitation and solid waste and social management personnel to 
evaluate and assess compliance with EIAs, SMPs, RAPs, and and EMPs.  
 
The Ministry of Environment and the regional environmental authorities in charge of 
monitoring and enforcing both national regulations and compliance with the ESMF have 
technical guidelines for development and construction of landfills and the closure of 
open-air dumps. In addition to the guidelines established by Resolution 1096 of 
November 2000 (Chapter F), technical guidelines are currently available and in use 
(Environmental Guidelines for Closing Waste Dumps and Environmental Restoration of 
Waste Dumps (2002) ; and Environmental Guidelines for the Design, Construction and 
Closure of Landfills (2002)). The ESMF has been developed to complement local 
regulations and the ESMF, to ensure that additional consultation and an adequate 
assessment of alternatives take place. All EIAs, EMPs, SMPs, and RAPs will be subject 
to the Bank approval, to ensure full compliance and consistence with the Bank 
environmental and social safeguards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key local stakeholders include waste collection and disposal operators, citizens living in 
the vicinity of open-air dumps, potential landfill sites, and transfer centers, and informal 
waste workers (“waste pickers”) earning their livelihoods within the waste system.  
 
According to the Bank’s Environmental Safeguard Policies, for consultations between 
the borrower, Project-affected groups and local NGOs to be meaningful, the Ministry of 
Environment and regional environmental authorities will provide, where applicable, 
relevant information on the Project in a timely manner prior to consultation and in a form 
and language understandable and accessible to those being consulted. In compliance with 
Category A project requirements, and consistent with Bank and regional safeguards 
practice, MAVDT has conducted a series of consultations on the Project, objectives, 
description and potential impacts with key stakeholders, including waste picker 
associations. Stakeholder feedback from these consultations has been incorporated into 
the final version of the ESMF and other Project documents, and those consulted have 
been informed of which suggestions have been incorporated and how, and which have 
not been incorporated and why. More detail on these consultations and resulting 
modifications to the Project design are to be found in the final draft of the ESMF, which 
has been duly disclosed.  
 
The draft ESMF, including Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), has been posted by 
the Ministry on its website. As public availability of safeguards-related documents in the 
borrowing country and official receipt by the Bank of the ESMF are prerequisites for 
Bank Appraisal, the Ministry will ensure that the ESMF and any subsequent EIAs, SMPs, 
RAPs and EMPs for specific subprojects are made available in a public forum accessible 
to affected groups and local NGOs, in accordance with Bank disclose guidelines. All 
Page  8
EIAs will include a public consultation process on the specific landfill development, to 
ensure that public feedback can be taken into account for final technical designs. An 
advance draft of the ESMF was disclosed in country and on the Bank InfoShop on 
December 8, 2007. The task team has also submitted a summary of the ESMF in English 
to the regional safeguards team for clearance on July 24, 2008, prior to circulation to the 
Board.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/28/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  9
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Taimur Samad 
12/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva 
12/23/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Peter Cohen 
12/23/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Margarita Rosa De Castro Illera 
12/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
