Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC3263
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P105164 
Project Name:  SCALING -UP STUDENT LOANS TO PROMOTE EQUITABLE 
ACCESS PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Alberto Rodriguez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (95%);Secondary education (5%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S);Improving labor 
markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
87.00
87.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed program are to: (a) improve coverage by 
increasing the enrollment and graduation rates of students in tertiary education; (b) 
improve equity by increasing enrollment and graduation rates of tertiary education 
students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds; and (c) increase and diversify 
the sources of alternative funding available to ICETEX in order to increase ICETEX’s 
sustainability.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Program is a 6-year APL divided into two 3-year projects. The Project Phase I 
(2008-2010) will be financed with a $300 million equivalent loan from the Bank and 
approximately $87 million in co-financing from ICETEX. The Project Phase II (2011-
2013) will be financed with a $200 million equivalent loan from the Bank and 
approximately $245 million in co-financing from ICETEX.  
 
Page  2
The Program consists of two components: (a) providing student loans to talented but 
needy students; and (b) improving management practices to allow ICETEX to operate 
more efficiently and increase sustainability. The latter includes preparations to attract 
private capital in order to scale up access to student finance and contribute to attaining 
sector-wide policy objectives.  
 
Through Component 1, ICETEX will contribute to expanding equity and access in 
tertiary education by: a) financing and disbursing student loans, and b) forming alliances 
with higher education institutions to support students pursuing a tertiary education. 
Through Component 2, it will improve its management practices by: a) strengthening 
loan administration, portfolio management and collection procedures and upgrading data 
technology hardware & software; b) preparing to expand its funding base to ensure long-
term sustainability; and c) overseeing all project monitoring and impact evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover all departments of Colombia, but it is primarily financial in nature 
and involves no physical infrastructure. Therefore, there are no salient physical 
characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not finance any civil works and is therefore expected to have no 
environmental or physical impacts. However, the project does trigger the Bank’s 
Indigenous People’s Policy because it targets low-income students in Colombia. Nearly 
1.4 million Colombians, or approximately 3.4 percent of the population, self-identify as 
Indigenous peoples. Well over half of these citizens live on resguardos – Indigenous 
Page  3
areas that are typically rural 
–
and they are disproportionately represented among the 
poor.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A. No civil works are planned for any specific project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative of restricting financing only to the very neediest students was considered 
but it was rejected in favor of a model that balances need with merit. Targeting only the 
neediest might channel more aid to Indigenous students, but there is no baseline data 
available to test this hypothesis because the ACCES Program has not collected 
information on the ethnicity of beneficiaries in the past. ICETEX will begin collecting 
data on ethnicity under the proposed ACCES project in order to establish a baseline for 
future analysis. Until evidence proves otherwise, it was decided that lending to 
academically talented students from a mix of lower- and middle-income levels will help 
produce a more diversified loan portfolio, enhancing the sustainability of the student loan 
program for all talented but needy students.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ICETEX will begin collecting data on ethnicity under the proposed project to determine 
whether its loans are reaching Indigenous, and also Afro-Colombian, students. This data 
will establish a baseline for future analysis and may serve as the basis for designing new 
interventions to target Indigenous and Afro-Colombian students in culturally appropriate 
ways. ICETEX has demonstrated its capacity to collect various types of data on students 
and will upgrade its data management practices under the proposed project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Decree 2406 established the National Labor and Participation Commission for the 
Development of Education for Indigenous Peoples in 2007. This commission, which 
includes various Indigenous organizations and representatives from the Education and 
Interior Ministries, meets three times a year to formulate, follow-up and evaluate public 
education policies agreed with Indigenous Peoples. There main national and regional 
organizations representing Indigenous peoples on education issues are described in detail 
in Annex 8 of the PAD.  
 
Under Decree 2248 (1995), Afro-Colombians are represented by Regional Consulting 
Groups, which nominate representatives to Regional Pedagogical Commissions and one 
overarching National Pedagogical Commission. The Commissions formulate, implement, 
advise on and follow-up on ethno-education policies at all levels, and the National 
Commission acts as an advisor to the Education Ministry.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/06/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/07/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Rodriguez 
12/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
12/06/2007 
Comments:   
