Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/26/2008 
Report No.:  AC3888
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P101211 
Project Name:  CO Second Social Safety Net Project 
Task Team Leader:  Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 29, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);Health (20%);Primary education (15%);Secondary 
education (15%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Education for all (P);Gender (P);Social safety 
nets (P);Other social protection and risk management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
636.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
139.70 
 Inter-American 
Development 
Bank 
403.20
542.90 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project would finance Colombia’s conditional cash transfer (CCT) 
program, Familias, which was expanded during 2007 to cover about 1.7 million poor 
families (including about 250,000 displaced families).  The principal project development 
objectives are:  
 
•
Complement the income of poor families with minors under 18 (SISBEN level 
1and the displaced)  
 
•
Promote human capital formation of poor children by increasing regular check-
ups, including growth monitoring, and vaccinations and by increasing enrollment and 
school attendance (basic and/or secondary education)  
 
•
Strengthen program quality   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project has one component 
–
the consolidation of the recently expanded Familias 
program which now covers about 1.7 million families.  The program is directed to poor 
families (defined as those classified as level 1 in the Selection System of Beneficiaries of 
Social Programs (SISBEN), the proxy means instrument used in Colombia, and to 
displaced families, who have children younger than 18 years of age.  Familias is a 
conditional cash transfer program which disburses cash transfers (grants) to families 
conditional on compliance with certain requirements.  Currently, these include, with 
some variation for large urban areas: a) assuring that children 0-6 regularly visit health 
centers and participate in the growth monitoring and other services, according to the 
Ministry of Social Protection (MSP) standards; and b) assuring that children 7-17 years 
of age are enrolled in school, maintain a class attendance rate of not less than 80 percent, 
and not repeat grades more than once.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
During 2007, Familias expanded to cover the whole country, including large urban areas, 
and some municipalities with a high proportion of either Afro-Colombian or indigenous 
population.  Currently, only 5 municipalities in Colombia have not signed participation 
agreements with the national government.  The aim of the program is to expand coverage 
to indigenous communities during implementation of the project.  In order to gain 
knowledge about the possibilities of the program and the adjustments which might be 
required in indigenous communities during 2007 the program carried out a pilot in 
indigenous communities in 4 municipalities (Valledupar, Cordoba – Narino, Natagaima, 
and Covaima), in 3 departments encompassing 3 ethnic groups.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project triggers the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  The 
objectives of the project include complementing the income of beneficiary families and 
increasing human capital accumulation in the children of these families.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long term, the project aims to improve the economic opportunities for the children 
in these families by promoting higher education levels and better health and nutrition 
status.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the project no adverse impacts are expected.  Moreover, the operating 
procedures of the program include provisions to identify the adjustments that might be 
necessary to ensure that the Indigenous People receive social and economic benefits that 
are culturally appropriate through free, prior, and informed consultations in each locality.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In regards to indigenous communities, during implementation of the ongoing Social 
Safety Net Project (Ln. 7337) and associated Additional Financing (Ln. 7433) the 
Government advanced in the adaptation of Familias in order to expand its coverage into 
indigenous communities while ensuring the consideration of the cultural characteristics of 
the population.  A pilot was implemented with an initial coverage of 5810 eligible 
families in 4 indigenous communities, encompassing 3 different ethnic groups in 3 
different departments of the country.  About 90 percent of eligible families registered in 
the program, compared to an average national take-up rate of 70 percent.    In each 
community the program reached agreement with the indigenous peoples authorities, the 
municipal authorities, and the indigenous communities on implementation consistent with 
indigenous institutions and traditions. Based on the results of the pilot, the program 
prepared an annex to the operational manual setting out the guidelines (including for free, 
prior, and informed consultations) and operating procedures for Familias in indigenous 
communities to be applied in the expansion into additional communities during project 
implementation.  
 
The annex to the operational manual includes several specific measures designed to 
ensure that the indigenous peoples receive social and economic benefits that are 
culturally appropriate and that there is broad community support.   They include:  
 
•
The agreements signed during preparations for installation of the program aretri-
partite, between the indigenous and municipal authorities, and the program.  
 
•
The program uses the indigenous census as the targeting instrument, enabling 
communities to participate even if they are not registered in the SISBEN.  In addition, the 
Page  4
registration of eligible families takes into account accepted community practices on 
stewardship of abandoned or orphaned families.  The list of eligible families is validated 
at an indigenous assembly.  
 
•
Within the local organization, the role of Enlace Indigena has been established, in 
addition to the Enlace Municipal.  They are jointly responsible for the local operation of 
the program.  The Enlace Indigena is responsible for promoting the program in the 
indigenous community and with service agents and for facilitating its operation. If there 
is an indigenous language, the Enlace Municipal must speak the indigenous language, 
without exception.  The Enlace Indigena is elected in an indigenous assembly.  
 
•
The program changed the terminology of madres lideres to madres consejeras 
tobe more consistent with the existing leadership structure and indigenous legislation.  
Many of these individuals would have complementary roles in other activities in their 
communities.  
 
•
Possible incorporation of traditional indigenous health and education agents into 
required health and education services and/or verification of conditions.  
 
•
The program includes activities designed to strengthen local institutional capacity 
to operate the program.  The specific activities and their intensity are determined by an 
evaluation of the performance of the locality, in particular, using an extensive set of 
management indicators.  In the case of indigenous communities these activities would 
take into account existing community assemblies in order to work to strengthen their 
organization and autonomy.  
 
Based on the findings of the pilot, an IPP was prepared.  It includes the annex to the 
operational manual as well as documentation of the consultations which have taken place 
in about 15 other indigenous communities.  In these forums the program invited the 
indigenous and municipal authorities to participate, with the aim to learn about Familias 
and if they agree, to initiate the process of specific consultations and other necessary 
preparations in each locality.    The IPP was reviewed by the Bank and found acceptable.  
It has been issued and disclosed as an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) as per O P 4.10.  
The program had disclosed previously the results of the pilot, including a summary of the 
results of the consultations held during its preparation and implementation.  
 
The Borrower has demonstrated adequate institutional capacity for safeguard policies.  
The previous loan triggered the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  Progress 
on implementation of the agreed action plan was somewhat delayed, but satisfactory.  In 
fact, the Government expanded a planned study intended to develop a program strategy 
for ethnic populations, into the pilot described above.  Free, prior and informed 
consultations have been undertaken appropriately and publicly disclosed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include traditional authorities and the indigenous communities.  The 
program organized consultations to discuss the strategy to be used to work in indigenous 
areas during the pilot. The results of these consultations have been disclosed in 
Colombia. More recently, the program organized forums and invited about 15 additional 
indigenous communities (together with municipal authorities) in order to present and to 
Page  5
discuss its possible expansion into those areas.  Written materials, including the results of 
the pilot and the consultations undertaken during its development, as well as the IPP have 
been disclosed on the program’s webpage in Accion Social.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/26/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
N/A 
Page  6
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
09/26/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda 
09/26/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
09/26/2008 
Comments:   
