Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4227
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P104687 
Project Name:  Mainstreaming Sustainable Cattle Ranching 
Task Team Leader:  Juan Pablo Ruiz 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 3, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Animal production (40%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (23%);Environmental policies and institutions (22%);Participation 
and civic engagement (22%);Climate change (22%);Land administration and 
management (11%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
33.00
33.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to promote the adoption of environment-friendly 
silvopastoral production systems in Colombian cattle ranching in project areas, to 
improve natural resource management, enhance the provision of environmental services 
(biodiversity, land, carbon, and water), and raise the productivity in participating farms.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would focus on reducing key constraints to the adoption of land use 
practices that are beneficial both for the farmer and the environment , such as lack of 
knowledge or capital, through the following components: (i) Improving productivity in 
participating cattle ranching farms in project areas, through SPS; (ii) Increasing 
connectivity and reducing land degradation in participating cattle ranching farms, through 
differentiated PES schemes; (iii) Strengthening subsector institutions and dissemination 
and M&E efforts contributing to the broader adoption of environment-friendly SPS in 
Colombian cattle ranching; and (iv) Project management.  
Page  2
The GEF Regional Silvopastoral Project demonstrated that not all silvopastoral practices 
have the same profitability for farmers or contribute equally to biodiversity conservation . 
The project would therefore apply distinct strategies in each area to promote 
environment-friendly land management in cattle ranching farms.  
 
Total project cost is US$42 million, of which the Global Environment Facility would 
finance $7 million through a full-size grant with co-financing totaling US$35 million 
from: (a) the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) and the Fund for 
Agricultural and Livestock Sector Financing (FINAGRO); (b) FEDEGAN; (c) project 
partner NGOs such as CIPAV, the Environmental and Childhood Action Fund (FPAA), 
and The Nature Conservancy (TNC); and (d) contributions of producers and local cattle 
ranching organizations. The proposed project would also help develop additional 
financing sources from service users to support PES payments.  
 
Component 1. Improving productivity in participating cattle ranching farms in project 
areas, through SPS (Total cost US$29.2M; GEF financing $1.7M)  
 
The aim of this component is to sustainably increase productivity in cattle production 
farms through the adoption of environment-friendly SPS. The proposed project would 
offer a package that includes: (i) farmer training and technical assistance (TA) to promote 
cost-effectiveness and sustainability; and (ii) support to access financial resources for 
SPS adoption, namely attractively-priced loans already in place for the adoption of 
intensive SPS with specific tree densities and species (fodder and timber), from the 
GoC#s second-tier bank FINAGRO. Project resources would be directed to raise 
awareness on and support farmers' access to FINAGRO and other existing financial 
instruments for investments in SPS, particularly by small and medium-scale farmers. TA 
to design and implement SPS conversion plans would be provided through FEDEGAN's 
assistance centers and other regional/local TA providers in project areas.  
 
The main activities under this component would include: (a) SPS training to national, 
regional, and local TA providers; (b) beneficiary selection and baseline farm assessments; 
(c) TA to farmers and implementation of SPS in the different regions, including through 
peer-to-peer information exchange with farmers already implementing SPS; (d) 
improving access to financial resources for SPS adoption, namely but not limited to 
FINAGRO credit and subsidies already in place for investments in SPS, in particular to 
enable small and medium-scale farmer participation; (e) assessing and adjusting sector 
technologies applied in each project area; and (f) supporting market-based initiatives to 
secure long-term funding (agroecotourism and certification proposals).   
 
Component 2. Increasing connectivity and reducing land degradation in participating 
cattle ranching farms, through differentiated PES schemes (Total cost US$6.5M; GEF 
financing $2.7M)  
 
The aim of this component is to increase connectivity between natural ecosystems in 
cattle ranching landscapes through the establishment of riparian and terrestrial corridors . 
Page  3
Biodiversity assessments completed during project preparation helped determine key 
natural ecosystem remnants in each area, as well as the priority axes along which to 
connect and conserve them during project implementation; such axes are located along 
water courses or in terrestrial areas in selected cattle ranching landscapes.  
 
The most desirable and relevant land uses for each corridor#both strictly conservation 
and productive, as described in Annex 4#would be promoted through the proposed PES 
scheme whereby: (i) short-term payments using GEF resources would support SPS that 
offer clear economic returns in the mid to long-term such as trees in pastures and live 
fences, in order to compensate for the initial investment costs (along with intensive SPS, 
these are expected to be the predominant land use changes). Farmers that adopt strict 
conservation land uses (e.g., preserving natural ecosystems or establishing new 
conservation areas) would also receive short-term PES during project life; and (ii) long-
term payments from water and other ES users would be sought to induce the adoption of 
land uses that are highly attractive from a biodiversity perspective, but are less profitable 
for farmers. PES contracts would promote an integrated farm management that enhances 
farm productivity while ensuring a sustainable use of natural resources. The proposed 
project would also support efforts to establish long-term funding sources in at least two 
cattle production areas by facilitating buyer-seller participation, fund administration, and 
by monitoring ES generation and contract compliance for water and potentially carbon 
services.  
 
The main activities under this component would include: (a) adjustment and 
implementation of a PES mechanism offering short-term payments to SPS that are 
privately profitable in the mid to long term (e.g., live fences, pastures with trees), 
including the identification of indicators for performance-based PES payments; and (b) 
design and implementation of local PES mechanisms financed by service users that 
would offer long-term payments for SPS that are important for service provision, but are 
unattractive to farmers  
 
Component 3. Strengthening subsector institutions and dissemination and M&E efforts 
contributing to the broader adoption of environment-friendly SPS in Colombian cattle 
ranching (Total cost US$1.5M; GEF financing $0.8M)  
 
The aim of this component is to establish key alliances with project partners and 
stakeholders through a communications strategy that ensures project instruments and 
results are disseminated from the start. In addition, efforts would focus on establishing a 
monitoring and evaluation system that provides timely and relevant information 
contributing to the future broader adoption of sustainable cattle ranching production 
systems in Colombia. Producer associations would also be strengthened to apply to and 
benefit from project instruments.  
 
The main activities under this component would include: (a) M&E and applied research 
on SPS contributions to environmental services, including to climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, particularly the contributions of introducing trees as cattle feed in the 
provision of shade and water retention; (b) results dissemination to key stakeholders, 
Page  4
including engaging in policy-dialogue with the National Planning Department and the 
Ministries of Environment and Agriculture; and (c) strengthening producer associations 
through capacity-building efforts.  
 
Component 4. Project management (Total cost US$3.1M; GEF financing $0.7M)  
 
The aim of this component is to improve institutional capacity to develop the project 
and enable the project's financial, technical, legal, and administrative execution.  
 
The main activities under this component would include: (a) coordinating intra-and 
inter-institutional efforts for effective project management; and (b) monitoring and 
evaluation of project management activities, including the consolidation of project 
oversight and coordination mechanisms   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The following five areas were prioritized for intervention taking into account 
environmental, production, and social criteria to allow for feasible project 
implementation: (i) the traditional livestock production region in the Cesar River Valley; 
(ii) the adjacent lower Magdalena River region; (iii) the traditional dairy cattle production 
regions of B
oyacá and Santander (linked to the #Andean Oak Forests Corridor#); (iv) the 
coffee producing eco-region and upper Cauca river, and (v) the low foothill region in the 
eastern cordillera of southern Meta.  
 
Globally important biodiversity would be safeguarded in the five target regions, which 
were selected for their high levels of biodiversity and their proximity to strategic 
ecosystems and protected areas. The Cesar River Valley and Magdalena River regions 
contain the last remaining fragments of dry tropical forest, considered one of the 
Neotropical zone#s most endangered ecosystems # degraded in 98.5 percent of its surface 
area in Colombia. Other strategic ecosystems are the wetlands associated with the 
Magdalena River, considered of high priority by IUCN and TNC due to the existence of 
migratory birds and endemic species. The Boyacá-Santander region contains the Andean 
Oak Forests Corridor, one of the richest areas of vascular plants in the Andean region, 
harboring populations of several endangered species (e.g., mammals such as the Puma 
concolor, birds such as the gorgeted wood-quail, and endemic frogs such as the Gámbita 
robber frog and Eleutherodactylus spilogaster). The coffee-growing ecoregion 
concentrates most of Colombia#s coffee landscapes, where about 16% of the country#s 
1,750 bird species have been registered (including multiple endemic, threatened, and 
migratory species), along with several threatened flagship species such as the spectacled 
bear (Tremarctos ornatus), and butterfly species both endemic and new to science. The 
southern Meta region is part of the larger Eastern plains that have a diverse landscape of 
dry forests, tropical grasslands, and seasonally flooded plains#ecosystems traditionally 
underrepresented in the Colombian protected areas system.  
 
Page  5
The primary target group is predominantly small to medium-scale farmers from the five 
regions identified above. Larger-scale farmers located in the proposed connectivity 
corridors in each area would also be able to participate .  
 
Potential beneficiaries in the five regions have different socioeconomic conditions, as 
assessed by socioeconomic surveys of sample farms in each area and regional workshops 
with project stakeholders undertaken as part of the project#s social assessment (see 
below): (a) property size varies across project areas, however, 89 percent of polled 
farmers reported less than 200ha; (b) land occupancy is predominantly single ownership 
or family owned, where 10 percent of polled farmers, particularly in the coffee growing 
eco-region, are associated to the farm as administrators or tenants; (c) residence in farms 
also varies across regions, where 48 percent of polled farmers reported residing 
elsewhere. This situation affects farmer priorities differently regarding access to basic 
public services, particularly in the Caribbean regions where 70 percent of polled farmers 
reside at the farm; (d) cattle ranching is the main productive activity (only 14 percent of 
polled farmers, particularly in the coffee ecoregion, have diversified their productive 
activities) and the main source of income for farm owners; (e) self-reported monthly 
income ranges between less than 1 to more than 10 monthly minimum legal wages in 
force (at US$216 for CY2009), where 63 percent of polled farmers reported earning less 
than 7 SMMLV; (f) most polled farmers reported having less than 15 workers in the 
farm; (g) 66 percent of polled farmers are adults between 40 and 60 years of age (nearly 
19 percent are over 60); (h) association levels are high, as 75 percent of polled farmers 
indicated pertaining to a local/regional producer association or cattle ranching committee. 
The Boyacá-Santander region registers the lowest levels (52 percent); and (i) 63 percent 
of polled farmers reported low levels of indebtedness.  
 
The social assessment did not identify significant public order threats in selected areas, 
neither in its review of background/secondary information on public order difficulties 
resulting from the activities of illegal armed groups, nor through the survey of farmers 
(59 percent of polled farmers feel safe in their municipality, 31 percent feel relatively 
safe, and 74 percent have not been the target of property extortions). Migration indicators 
show that nearly 37 percent of polled farmers were born in the same municipality in 
which the farm is located, while 23 percent were born in a capital city. 29 percent were 
born in a different municipality either from the same or a different region. The majority 
of selected municipalities have low levels of internal displacement over the last 10 years 
as per the National Register of Internally Displaced Population administered by the 
Presidential Agency for Social Action and International Cooperation.  
 
The selected project areas are not located near collectively-owned, Indigenous or Afro 
Colombian territories (see PAD Annex 16) and the proposed project sites are already 
used as pastures for cattle ranching, in regions not considered active agricultural frontiers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSAR) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social issues identified  
 
A
social assessment was undertaken (see Annex 10) with the aim of: (i) describing 
socioeconomic conditions of cattle ranchers in the 5 project areas; (ii) identifying 
potential barriers for small and medium-scale farmer participation; and (iii) assessing 
potential social and political risks in project areas, including mitigation measures and 
criteria for inclusion. Valuable information was provided by socioeconomic surveys of 
sample farms in each area, four regional workshops, and interviews with project 
stakeholders such as environmental authorities, producer associations, banks with local 
presence, universities, and NGOs. In addition, project partners led 5 regional workshops 
with local stakeholders to present the proposed project instruments.  
 
Characterization of potential beneficiaries. Although potential beneficiaries in the 5 
regions have different socioeconomic conditions (see Section I.4 above), overall the 
participants consulted appreciate the project#s potential to improve farm production 
conditions while contributing to the environment. According to their appraisal of local 
situations, the farmers in the coffee eco-
region and the Boyacá-Santander area prefer 
technical assistance; the farmers in the Caribbean regions prefer credit they can access for 
productive investments; and the farmers in the Eastern foothills of the Meta region are 
more concerned with environmental degradation and positively value PES.  
 
Barriers identified for small and medium-scale farmer participation are primarily related 
to compliance with conditions necessary to access FINAGRO#s credit lines (e.g., lack of 
land titles and initial capital to assume transaction costs and guarantees, not having bank 
accounts, being reported in financial risk centers or being over 60 years of age) and little 
farmer interest in becoming financial system users. Proposed mitigation measures 
include: (i) strengthening and expanding memberships to producer associations for 
collective approaches to project instruments; (ii) engaging in high-level policy dialogue 
with MADR-FINAGRO to introduce flexible conditions for SPS applicants and offering 
specific training to FINAGRO operators evaluating credit applications for SPS 
Page  7
implementation; (iii) considering microfinance options under recent implementation by 
the GoC (such as Banca de Oportunidades) and other institutions, or 
cooperative/associative credits and other loan sources such as the Bolsa Nacional 
Agropecuaria (National Agriculture and Livestock Market) or the Biotrade Fund, among 
others; and (iv) focusing first-year efforts on adequate outreach activities to inform 
farmers of SPS benefits (regional cultural aversion to trees in pastures still exist, 
particularly in the Caribbean), associated implementation costs, and possible funding 
sources. Detailed technical assessment of farm conditions is also recommended prior to 
interventions. In addition, linkages to rural extension programs offered by FEDEGAN 
(e.g., Circles of Excellence for the promotion of improved, collective cattle ranching 
management and fostering regional leaders and innovation) and to governmental social 
programs are also recommended.  
 
Potential social conflicts and mitigation measures. The risk of promoting extensive 
cattle ranching or conflicts with peasants or small-scale producers is assessed as non-
existent, as the project#s objective is to mainstream an intensive approach to cattle 
ranching with active participation from small and medium-size farmers. Furthermore, 
since the proposed project would impact farm areas already used as pastures for cattle 
ranching in regions not considered to be active agricultural frontiers, tensions between 
producers and adjacent communities over land tenure or access to natural resources are 
not expected. The reputational risk assessment concluded that a moderate to non-existent 
risk exists of having farmers with current associations to illegal armed groups participate 
in the project, or having project resources captured by national or local elites. The 
assessment recognizes that the proposed collective project implementation (by agencies 
with ample experience in project management, funds administration, and recipient 
selection) and the targeted beneficiary selection criteria would guarantee otherwise.  
 
Regional consultations identified potential conflicts with municipalities not selected for 
project intervention, particularly in the Eastern foothills of Meta, including dissatisfaction 
with the site selection approach used. In particular, environmental authorities in the 
different regions indicated that selection should not be based solely on satellite image-
supported studies, but rather on the social and environmental realities in each area. Both 
concerns will have to be carefully addressed through the project#s communication 
strategy, highlighting: (i) positive spill-over effects from project capacity-building 
efforts, whereby neighboring farms not selected to participate, but interested in adopting 
SPS would have access to the TA and training offered under the project; and (ii) the 
three-step methodology employed for site selection, which took into account previous 
national and regional priority-setting exercises to identify key conservation areas  and 
focused on ecosystems underrepresented in the National Protected Areas Systems, and 
which includes a final on-site assessment to adjust connectivity corridor designs to the 
social and environmental realities found in each area.  
 
Screening procedures to ensure social impact mitigation. Screening procedures foreseen 
to guarantee that project activities do not have adverse social impacts include: (a) 
information collection formats distributed by FEDEGAN and core partner agencies 
during PY1 dissemination events with farmers and ensuing training events, to obtain data 
Page  8
on potential beneficiaries regarding land ownership and willingness to participate, among 
others; (b) baseline assessments undertaken in farms by CIPAV and TNC personnel## 
agencies not seen by local communities as involved with either guerrilla or paramilitary 
groups and therefore not preempting farmer enrollment in project; (c) beneficiary 
selection undertaken collectively by the project#s Steering Committee to avoid local or 
regional pressures ; and (d) a social communications strategy that ensures local 
participation and feedback through: periodic account rendition events in each area; 
complaint boxes set up locally in sites considered impartial by farmers to deposit their 
claims regarding adverse impacts; and campaigns through local bulletins, gazettes, or 
community radio stations that include instructions and addresses (electronic or mail) to 
formally denounce irregularities. Local complaints would be permanently reviewed by 
the project#s Steering Committee to ensure early warnings are generated and corrective 
measures devised. Consolidated claim reports would also be examined during Bank 
supervision missions and MTR. Subsequent M&E indicators and checklists to guarantee 
that procedures have been adequately applied would be determined in the project#s 
Operational Manual.  
 
Environmental issues identified  
 
The proposed project is expected to directly generate important global and local 
environmental benefits, as demonstrated by the GEF/IBRD Regional Integrated 
Silvopastoral Approaches to Ecosystem Management project implemented in Colombia, 
Costa Rica, and Nicaragua, and highlighted in the project#s Environmental Assessment. 
It seeks to contribute to the conservation of globally important biodiversity in cattle 
ranching production systems by increasing connectivity between ecosystems and 
reducing land degradation in five key productive areas, through the adoption of SPS. As 
areas have been chosen taking into account their geographic proximity to PA, among 
other criteria, connectivity between ecosystems would also include connectivity to PA 
and their buffer zones. This would allow for the mutual reinforcement of biodiversity 
protection within cattle ranching farms and PA buffer zones, enhancing the benefits from 
SPS.  
 
Land uses fostering higher levels of biodiversity and carbon sequestration and reducing 
land degradation would be promoted in participating farms through the proposed 
financial, capacity-building, and market-based instruments. Resources would be directed 
to create connectivity corridors to reduce fragmentation of important natural ecosystems 
in the five project areas, through eligible land use adoption. This strategy would also 
contribute to protect water springs, streams, rivers, and wetlands, since 80 percent of 
those corridors would be implemented in riparian habitats and their buffer zones. Equally, 
SPS adoption would contribute to the restoration of areas currently without vegetative 
cover and protect and restore degraded lands, as well as help reduce the use of farm areas 
unfit for grazing such as steep slopes or areas protecting water courses and wetlands. As 
demonstrated by the GEF Regional Silvopastoral Project, farmers trained by the project 
were dissemination agents outside intervention areas, resulting in greater adoption of 
silvopastoral systems and natural resources sustainable use.  
 
Page  9
The use of deep-root perennial trees in proposed SPS would reduce farmer vulnerability 
to environmental change, as such species are drought tolerant, act as wind barriers, and 
provide shade, helping farmers become more resilient to climate change. In addition, 
their use would enable more stable forage production during drier seasons.  
 
The silvopastoral practices to be supported by the project have demonstrated to 
substantially reduce total greenhouse gas emission from ranching, both directly (by 
sequestering carbon both in the soil and in trees) and indirectly (by reducing pesticide use 
and requiring fewer applications of nitrogen fertilizers and, through improved nutrition, 
reducing methane emissions from cattle). Carbon stocks measured in silvopastoral 
habitats were higher than in degraded lands, and GHG emissions were lower. Therefore, 
the proposed project is expected to provide enhanced carbon benefits, including for 
climate change adaptation and the reduction of emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation.  
 
Adverse environmental consequences from project implementation are highly unlikely. 
Several mechanisms were used to avoid negative environmental effects: (i) none of the 
five selected areas are considered active agricultural frontiers as they are currently 
consolidated areas for agricultural activities (mainly cattle ranching); (ii) the proposed 
PES scheme grants a baseline payment for preserved forests to recognize previous 
conservation efforts by participating farmers; subsequent payments would be made each 
year if they are preserved. Highest ES values and therefore payment levels, are assigned 
to existing mature forests and wetlands to discourage their conversion to production land 
uses; (iii) the proposed Integrated Pest Management Plan would reduce the use of 
pesticides and their impact on human health and the environment; and (iv) the proposed 
connectivity corridors along which to prioritize activities under Component 2 were 
designed to reconnect fragments of key remnant natural ecosystems identified in each of 
the cattle ranching landscapes analyzed.  
 
The implementation of PES schemes along with the promotion of environmental and 
production good practices are expected to raise farmer awareness on sustainable natural 
resource management. The proposed strategy to promote SPS adoption is expected to 
provide key elements needed to make cattle ranching in Colombia more sustainable, 
including inputs for the necessary institutional framework and arrangements.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The cumulative impacts from the interventions to mainstream biodiversity in sustainable 
cattle ranching in Colombia are expected to be wholly positive, as demonstrated by the 
GEF Regional Silvopastoral Project. The positive global and local environmental benefits 
of SPS include: (i) substantial increases in biodiversity (among other indicators, the 
number of species and individuals of special indicator groups observed increased in all 
sites, among which, birds (including many forest-dependent and endangered species), 
butterflies, and terrestrial mollusks. Globally important flora was also protected); (ii) 
substantial carbon sequestration (GHG emissions were reduced through fewer 
applications of nitrogen-based synthetic fertilizers (urea and others), reduced use of fire 
Page  10
as a pasture management tool, and improved animal nutrition (methane emission 
reductions were estimated at 21 percent and nitrogen dioxide emission reduction at 36 
percent); and capacity to store carbon in the soil and in the above ground biomass 
increased. Carbon removals were estimated at 1.5 Cton/ha/yr); (iii) improved water 
quality (a rapid drop in turbidity, biological oxygen demand, and coliform counts was 
registered as riverbanks were reforested and protected from livestock entry, as well as the 
return of invertebrates indicative of unpolluted water); (iv) improvements in soil retention 
and productivity; (v) land rehabilitation; (vi) diversification of farm benefits; and (vii) 
scenic beauty enhancement.  
 
Additional evidence from the GEF Regional Silvopastoral Project demonstrates positive 
mid to long-term impacts, as farmers who were only awarded 2-year PES had not 
converted back to pastures without trees by project end, and to the contrary, had kept the 
land use change induced by the project. Finally, no adverse, long term impacts are 
expected from the promotion of agroecotourism in participating farms, given the type of 
tourism and the sustainable management principles its promotes.  
 
Potential related activities (e.g., building of roads) that might also have environmental 
and/or social impacts were considered but none are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project concept alternative considered was rejected as being more costly and socially 
infeasible given negative farmer response: a traditional conservation approach taking land 
entirely out of production. As cattle ranching occupies a considerable portion of the 
Colombian territory, partly due to its low efficiency and technical and financial barriers, 
the proposed strategy for biodiversity-friendly SPS adoption under the project would 
promote more efficient production while using less farm area. Conversion to SPS 
provides an alternative that substantially increases on and off-farm biodiversity, while 
allowing farm productivity to improve. The GEF Regional Silvopastoral Project also 
showed that working directly with producers on the conversion to SPS helps raise 
awareness about their role in protecting on-farm natural resources and related/subsequent 
impacts on surrounding areas. Farmers positively value the impact of sustainable natural 
resource management on the price of their land.  
 
Location alternatives were considered during the site selection exercises undertaken 
with project partners. Thirteen areas complying with the biodiversity, productive, ES, and 
social criteria were initially outlined and assessed, resulting in the five areas prioritized 
for intervention. The alternative of selecting degraded areas distant to PA and their buffer 
zones was discarded as the GEF Regional Silvopastoral Project demonstrated that 
implementing SPS in cattle ranching landscapes close to PAs enabled PA and SPS 
biodiversity protection outcomes to reinforce one another, leading to stronger eco-
regional biodiversity protection.  
 
As for project technical design alternatives, extending the GEF Regional Silvopastoral 
Project#s model of offering only short-term payments to all SPS on similar terms was 
Page  11
discarded, as it would provide excessive support to those systems that are highly privately 
profitable, and insufficient support to those systems that provide high levels of 
environmental services but are not very privately profitable. The differentiated approach 
adopted under the project of (i) facilitating access to credit and TA to support adoption of 
highly profitable SPS; (ii) short-term payments to SPS that are privately profitable once 
established; and (iii) long-term payments to SPS that provide high levels of ES but are 
less profitable for farmers, better respond to field conditions, allows a much larger area to 
be reached for the same cost, generates a mix of land uses that provides higher levels of 
environmental services, and better ensures the long-term sustainability of land use that 
are particularly environmentally valuable.   
 
Given FEDEGAN#s key role in ensuring positive project impact, both because of its 
influence on cattle ranching development and its interest in the subsector#s 
transformation to sustainable production models, as well as its ample experience in the 
administration of public funds and project execution by delegation of the GoC, an 
alternative choice of lead executing agency has been discarded. The association has full 
support from State entities involved in the sector and maintains a good reputation in 
several of the regions selected for project intervention.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The environmental and social assessments conducted during project preparation include 
frameworks to address related safeguard policy issues.  
 
An institutional assessment conducted to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of each 
core partner agency (FEDEGAN, CIPAV, FPAA, and TNC) concluded that despite 
FEDEGAN#s capacity to efficiently administer funds, as recognized the Colombian 
General Comptroller#s Office, it has no prior experience in Bank safeguard or fiduciary 
procedures. FEDEGAN#s procurement risk is considered moderate. Therefore, activities 
under component 4 would initially focus on identifying up-front training needs in 
FEDEGAN, both at the central and the regional levels. Tailor-made capacity building 
activities would be designed and implemented, including for the execution of the 
project#s Environmental and Social Management Plans under the frameworks.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders such as the National Planning Department (DNP), the Ministries of 
Agriculture and Environment, FINAGRO, Regional Environmental Authorities, local 
authorities, technical assistance providers, NGOs specializing in sustainable rural 
development, and producer associations would need to be actively engaged in project 
implementation to ensure that the proposed strategy for the broader adoption of 
environment-friendly cattle ranching production systems in Colombia is validated and 
scaled up. A Public Policy Committee comprised of representatives of the MAVDT, the 
MADR/FINAGRO, the DNP, and the Association of CARs (ASOCARS) would advise 
the overall implementation of the proposed project and provide guidance on its scope.  
 
Page  12
The institutional assessment identified a number of key regional and local partners that 
the project can associate with in each region to maximize its positive impacts. Therefore, 
it is foreseen that FEDEGAN would enter into agreements with these stakeholders such 
as regional environmental authorities, governors and mayors (interested in providing co-
financing for PES and/or SPS implementation), local planning councils, universities (to 
ensure the replicability of capacity-building efforts), and other local NGOs working on 
similar activities for sustainable rural development.  
 
Additional national partners have also been identified to scale up project impacts. These 
include agricultural research and development institutes such as CORPOICA and 
INCODER, the National Learning Service (SENA), AGROECOTUR and other NGOs 
supporting agro/ecotourism in rural farms.  
 
Participation Strategy. First-year efforts would focus on adequate outreach activities to 
inform stakeholders of project strategy and SPS benefits, as well as on adjusting proposed 
connectivity corridors to on-site realities. Initial peer-to-peer sessions and visits to farms 
successfully implementing SPS would take place with potential participants identified in 
each area to demonstratively explain SPS benefits, discuss associated implementation 
costs and technologies for different ecosystems, jointly identify possible funding sources, 
and discuss farmer concerns to adjust local strategies. Replication of PY1 training 
activities would be sought with support from local and regional cattle ranching 
associations/committees and TA providers. Neighboring farms not selected to participate 
but interested in adopting SPS would have access to training offered under the project. 
Consultations on project progress with key public officials and local participant 
representatives would take place in the framework of the project#s advisory Public Policy 
committee, as well as in regional events described above.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/21/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  13
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/17/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/29/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  14
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz 
08/03/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah 
07/30/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
07/31/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
08/03/2009 
Comments:   
