Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4546
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P051306 
Original Project Name: Peace and 
Development Project (1st Phase APL) 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P101277 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Peace and Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSSO 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (30%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (20%);Crops (20%);Other industry (10%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (29%);Participation and 
civic engagement (29%);Improving labor markets (14%);Access to urban services and 
housing (14%);Other public sector governance (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
7.81 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.07
7.07 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed objective of the Additional Financing remain the same as under the original 
project: To assist vulnerable, low-income and displaced populations in rural and urban 
communities in the conflict affected region in order to reduce the risk of their exposure to 
conflict and mitigate the negative impact of possible derived effects. The investments of 
the project seek to improve the quality of life of vulnerable communities and permit the 
sustainable social and economic reintegration of families displaced by violence.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would contribute to the consolidation of the 
strategy advanced by the Peace and Development Project while at the same time 
expanding its activities to the Department of Valle del Cauca. Therefore the conflict 
affected regions for the proposed Additional Financing would include 9 departments 
Page  2
(Antioquia, Bolívar, Cauca, César, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Santander, Sucre and 
Valle del Cauca).  
 
No major changes are proposed to the design or implementation arrangements of the 
project. The proposed AF would continue to support investments that seek to assist 
vulnerable, low income and displaced populations in rural and urban communities in the 
conflict-affected regions in order to reduce the risk of their exposure to conflict and 
mitigate the negative impact of possible derived effects. The AF would enable the project 
to expand and consolidate the implementation of the Regional Development and Peace 
Programs financed by the Government, other international donors and several institutions 
of the private sector. The consolidation of activities would contribute to improve the 
quality of life of vulnerable communities and permit the sustainable social and economic 
reintegration of families displaced by violence.  
 
The activities would allow for the consolidation of project financed activities into 
strategic territorial development processes. This would involve institutional strengthening 
and capacity building in designing, implementing and monitoring peace and development 
initiatives, thus contributing to an increase in the physical, social and human capital in the 
participating areas and communities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in selected areas of 9 departments of Colombia 
(Antioquia, Bolívar, Cauca, César, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Santander, Sucre and 
Valle del Cauca).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The initial Evaluaci
ón
Rápida de Impacto Ambiental (ERIA) found that the project was 
mostly expected to have either positive or neutral impacts on the environment. Ongoing 
supervision, the Mid-Term Review, independent evaluations, and the recent 
Environmental Stock-Taking Report, prepared by external consultant Juan Lopez-Silva in 
June 2009, all confirmed that subprojects have had either positive or neutral impacts on 
the environment, and those with potential negative impacts have implemented mitigation 
plans accordingly. This indicates that recommended mitigation measures from the ERIA 
were taken into consideration and incorporated into the projects. The initial Evaluación 
Rápida de Impacto Ambiental (ERIA) found that the project was mostly expected to have 
either positive or neutral impacts on the environment. Ongoing supervision, the Mid-
Term Review, independent evaluations, and the recent Environmental Stock-Taking 
Report, prepared by external consultant Juan Lopez-Silva in June 2009, all confirmed that 
subprojects have had either positive or neutral impacts on the environment, and those 
with potential negative impacts have implemented mitigation plans accordingly.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
For the Peace and Development Project, the EA indicated that potential short-term, small-
scale, reversible impacts might result from demand-driven sub-projects that include both 
agricultural and small-scale enterprises. The original project#s EA was incorporated an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that proposed mitigation measures for 
these potential impacts, including an implementation plan and monitoring framework. 
The project environmental impact is in most cases positive, and where there are potential 
negative environmental impacts, the level of impact is very low, and normally relate to 
the construction period when there is such activity. This is basically due to the size 
(USD10,000-25,000 per sub project and a maximum cap of USD700 per person) and 
scope of investment works being financed by the project. The partner organizations (PO) 
that played a crucial role in approving subproject during implementation, will also be 
responsible for ensuring that potential cumulative impacts (if any) are properly addressed, 
either by introducing proper management measures or limiting the investments that could 
cause cumulative impacts.  
 
As the project specific investments with potential environmental impact are not known 
at the time of approving the AF (as was the case when the project´s first phase was 
approved), it is necessary to have a proper screening procedure to help determine the type 
of response or mitigation measure needed. This is precisely what was done as part of the 
preparation process for the Bank project; in accordance with the Bank´s OP/BP 4.01, a 
rapid environmental assessment was conducted, which helped set up the current 
screening procedure, and which determined the safeguard policies to be triggered and the 
overall project´s environmental category B.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
It has been found that both the Borrower has highly sufficient capacity to address 
safeguard issues in this project. It is important to recognize that the Peace and 
Development projects employ a community driven development methodology, which 
implies a demand-driven, participatory process, based on local existing structures. With 
respect to OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, this methodology is highly consistent with the 
manner in which indigenous peoples operate. In addition, one of the Partner 
Organizations (CRIC) is led by indigenous peoples, and thus already has an 
understanding of critical issues for these populations.  
 
With respect to Environmental Safeguards, every partner organization has technical 
specialists in the main working areas, including an environmental specialist. Wherever a 
subproject needs additional expertise, technical specialists are hired specifically for the 
tasks at hand. This capacity has been recognized by the Peace Laboratory Program, 
sponsored by the European Union and implemented through the same POs. The European 
funded program will adopt the project#s environmental screening procedures and apply 
them to their activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include: (i) the Colombian Government, and particularly Acción Social 
(ii) the Regional Partner Organizations; (iii) the Beneficiary Entities; (iv) local 
governments; and (v) the European Union-funded Peace Laboratories.  
 
Extensive consultations in the format of participatory diagnostic workshops were 
conducted with a broad spectrum of potential beneficiaries, including with indigenous 
communities, and intermediary organizations in order to: (i) characterize potential 
beneficiaries; (ii) analyze their views/perceptions of rural poverty and existing programs; 
and (iii) identify principal problems and potential solutions. This process ensured that 
free prior informed consultations with IP communities were carried out, and indicated 
broad IP community support for the original project. It is clear from a review of the 
original project preparation reports that indigenous communities manifested broad 
support for the project.  
 
Again, it is important to highlight that Peace and Development Projects employ a 
community driven development methodology, which implies a demand-driven, 
participatory process. Therefore, communities themselves determine which projects to 
implement, and support for the project is a pre-existing condition for participation.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/12/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/12/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/12/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/22/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/22/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/22/2004 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/16/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
Yes 
Page  6
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
07/27/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva 
07/27/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Hernan Dario Correa 
07/27/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
07/27/2009 
Comments:   
