Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4429 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Original Project ID: P051306 
Original Project Name: Peace and 
Development Project (1st Phase APL) 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P101277 
Project Name: Additional Financing for Peace and Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSSO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (30%);Sub-national government administration (20%);Adult 
literacy/non-formal education (20%);Crops (20%);Other industry (10%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (29%);Participation and 
civic engagement (29%);Improving labor markets (14%);Access to urban services and 
housing (14%);Other public sector governance (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
7.81 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.07
7.07 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed objective of the Additional Financing remain the same as under the original 
project: To assist vulnerable, low-income and displaced populations in rural and urban 
communities in the conflict affected region in order to reduce the risk of their exposure to 
conflict and mitigate the negative impact of possible derived effects. The investments of the 
project seek to improve the quality of life of vulnerable communities and permit the sustainable 
social and economic reintegration of families displaced by violence.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would contribute to the consolidation of the strategy 
advanced by the Peace and Development Project while at the same time expanding its activities 
to the Department of Valle del Cauca. Therefore the conflict affected regions for the proposed 
Page  2
Additional Financing would include 9 department
s
(Antioquia, Bolívar, Cauca, César, Nariño, 
Norte de Santander, Santander, Sucre and Valle del Cauca).  
 
No major changes are proposed to the design or implementation arrangements of the project. 
The proposed AF would continue to support investments that seek to assist vulnerable, low 
income and displaced populations in rural and urban communities in the conflict-affected regions 
in order to reduce the risk of their exposure to conflict and mitigate the negative impact of 
possible derived effects. The AF would enable the project to expand and consolidate the 
implementation of the Regional Development and Peace Programs financed by the Government, 
other international donors and several institutions of the private sector. The consolidation of 
activities would contribute to improve the quality of life of vulnerable communities and permit 
the sustainable social and economic reintegration of families displaced by violence.  
 
The activities would allow the consolidation of project financed activities into strategic 
territorial development processes. This would involve institutional strengthening and capacity 
building in designing, implementing and monitoring peace and development initiatives, thus 
contributing to an increase in the physical, social and human capital in the participating areas and 
communities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in selected areas of 9 departments of Colombia (Antioquia, 
Bolívar, Cauca, César, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Santander, Sucre and Valle del Cauca).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In preparation for the Additional Financing, a review of existing procedures was conducted by 
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU). In addition, both an Environmental Specialist and an 
Indigenous Peoples Specialist (external consultants) worked with the PCU to revise the 
environmental and social safeguard procedures, respectively. The Environmental Specialist 
confirmed the Environmental Category B rating and the appropriateness of the existing 
procedures. The AF does not trigger any new environmental safeguard policy (OP 4.01; OP 4.04, 
OP 4.09).  
 
During supervision and other independent assessments, it has been found that both the Partner 
Organizations (PO) and the PCU have sufficient capacity to implement the environmental 
requirements established by the project, and these are all included in the Operational Manual. 
Partner Organizations have technical specialists in the main working areas, including 
environmental specialist(s). If a subproject requires additional expertise, technical specialists are 
hired for specific tasks at hand. This capacity has been recognized by the Peace Laboratory 
Program, sponsored by the European Union and implemented through the same PO. As a result, 
the European-funded program will adopt the project#s environmental screening procedures and 
apply them to their activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSHS-DPT) 
Mr Hernan Dario Correa (LCSSO) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
Safeguard Compliance Note was submitted on 6/10/2009. The Note summarized the 
project#s current performance in implementing its safeguard instruments and particularly,  
modifications made to the instruments during project implementation, any additional measures to 
be taken during the AF to address implementation of the safeguard instruments, and feedback 
from consultations on safeguard instruments.  
 
The Additional Financing would fund similar activities to those already approved under the 
original project design, the initial Environmental Category rating of B would be maintained.  
 
Th
e
initial Evaluación Rápida de Impacto Ambiental (ERIA) found that the project was 
mostly expected to have either positive or neutral impacts on the environment. Ongoing 
supervision, the Mid-Term Review, independent evaluations, and the recent Environmental 
Stock-Taking Report, prepared by external consultant Juan Lopez-Silva in June 2009, all 
confirmed that subprojects have had either positive or neutral impacts on the environment, and 
those with potential negative impacts have implemented mitigation plans accordingly. This 
indicates that recommended mitigation measures from the ERIA were taken into consideration 
and incorporated into the projects.  
 
The project has created a comprehensive Environmental Screening procedure that helps 
define the Environmental Management Plan and measures required to mitigate or avoid any 
potential environmental impact derived from implementing investment activities at the local 
level. The procedure has been fully institutionalized and is thoroughly used by the local PDPs 
and PCU.  
 
All subprojects result from the participatory Community Driven Development strategy, 
which caters to local demand. These subprojects are, and will continue to be subject to the 
following environmental procedures:  
 
(1) 
Environmental screening of subprojects:  
 
a. Subproject Typology  
 
b.
Environmental Classification  
 
(2) 
Definition of Required Environmental Work  
 
a. Preliminary Site Sensitivity Screening  
 
b.
Environmental Management Plans  
 
(3) 
Implementation of Required Environmental Work  
 
(4) 
Environmental subproject monitoring  
 
A
more complete description of this process can be found in the Operational Manual.  
 
Subprojects financed under the original loan were of the following categories:  
 
a. Farm production to provide staple foods and goods for local markets. These subprojects 
entail financing of materials, seeds and nurseries, technical assistance, animals, and labor to set 
up farming units (e.g., small greenhouses, plantations, pig farms, cattle). These subproj
ects 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
generally have very low environmental impact. The activities are small-scale (project areas 
covering less than 2-3 ha in the large subprojects), do not affect bodies of water nor areas where 
waste is composted to return nutrients to the field. Pesticides are used in small quantities and if 
used are on a list of WB and WHO permissible pesticides (Class III and IV and organic).  
 
b. Non-farm productive services and small business activities. These subprojects include 
varied small scale business activities such as home textile garment production, and food 
production. These subprojects may have some minor environmental impact related to any 
construction taking place. In the case of some of these activities there might be a need for an 
environmental management plan.  
 
c. Housing and sanitary infrastructure. These small scale subprojects involve construction 
materials and equipment to upgrade housing and set sanitary facilities (i.e., septic tanks, compost 
pits). These projects may also have some low environmental impact related to the construction 
phase, for which a minimal environmental management plan may be necessary.  
 
d. Environmental management. These projects involve equipment, material and TA to 
improve natural resources management such as composting, water saving, and forestation 
activities. These projects have positive environmental impacts. However, EMPs may be needed 
for set up or construction activities.  
 
These projects were classified during the Preliminary Screening Phase according to a Type 
I, II, III, or IV classification. Only projects of Type I, II, or III were supported under the original 
loan and this will be the case during the AF. About 82% of the subprojects financed had minimal 
environmental impact (Type II) and were oriented to agricultural production. About 2.9% of the 
subprojects financed were considered of Type III (moderate environmental impact), and were 
mostly related to cattle ranching and agro-forestry. There was only one subproject located in a 
Critical Area, but it is a conservation-oriented project which produced positive environmental 
benefits. Of these subprojects, it can be estimated that the total number of hectares affected by 
the project is 8,565 hectares.  
 
The other activities financed by the project (89 subprojects) that do not have relevant 
environmental impact include Technical Assistance, services and materials needed to support 
administrative activities and workshops.  
 
The Additional Financing would maintain the environmental safeguard procedures already 
in place for subproject screening, evaluation, approval and monitoring. The specific 
environmental screening procedures were revised to ensure proper classification and monitoring 
of environmental impacts and mitigation plans. Specific recommendations made to improve the 
monitoring of the environmental management plans were incorporated into the Operational 
Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
None of the activities supported have impacted natural habitats and it is expected that the AF  
 
will not have impacts on natural habitats. The policy was triggered on a precautionary basis. 
In the case of sub
-
projects close to natural habitats or buffer zones, specific measures have been 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
incorporated into the Operational Manual for the AF.  
 
As part of the Environmental Screening of subprojects summarized above, Preliminary Site 
Sensitivity Screening is done for all subprojects, using a map of sensitive areas in each region. 
These maps facilitate subproject screening (e.g., 250,000 or 1:500,000) to identify critical areas 
according to the classification as critical areas, fragile areas, or other areas for consideration. Site 
sensitivity is defined by consulting the map of sensitive areas to determine whether the 
subproject location falls within any critical or fragile areas. The map for the new region, Valle 
del Cauca, is located in the Operational Manual as well as the Project Paper. Results of this 
assessment are used to determine initial subproject eligibility. With the exception of 
conservation-friendly subprojects, all subprojects located within a critical area are ineligible for 
funding. Eligible subprojects are one of three types: (1) Outside of critical or fragile areas - all 
subprojects are eligible (Type I, II or III); (2) In Fragile Areas - Type II and III subprojects 
receive a flag indicating the need for additional environmental work; and (3) In Critical Areas - 
Only conservation-friendly (Type I) subprojects are eligible.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
A
Pest Management Plan (PMP) was developed for the parent project including a negative  
 
list, to exclude potential acquisition and use of hazardous pesticides. The AF has maintained 
the same procedures and incorporated an additional list of authorized pesticides, which has been 
reviewed by Bank staff. Any new beneficiary organization that intends to use pesticides will 
receive additional training in pest management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous Peoples Development Framework (IPDF) was prepared for the original 
project, and consultations were undertaken in each of the departments where the project 
originally operated. Based on supervision, the Mid-Term Review, and external evaluations 
(including those by an external consultant), the existing Indigenous Peoples Development 
Framework (IPDF) is fully consistent with the requirements of OP4.10. Small adjustments were 
made to the IPDF during implementation to reflect the actual conditions in the communities. In 
addition, slight adjustments to the IPDF will be made for the AF to reflect the incorporation of a 
new department (Valle del Cauca), as well as the changes that have taken place in the current 
departments. The Operational Manual has also been updated accordingly. The IPDF will allow 
for indigenous community in project areas to submit projects based on their own Planes de Vida. 
The institutional arrangements to support and monitor the implementation of the IPDF will 
continue to be the same, and will include the new Partner Organization, Vallenpaz, to implement 
subprojects in Valle del Cauca.  
 
The IPDF has been consulted with Indigenous leaders in Cauca and Valle del Cauca, and 
prior to start working with specific indigenous communities sub-project, further consultations 
with the participating communities will follow the same methodology used before, which is 
consistent with their Planes de Vida. For the AF, consultations were undertaken by an external 
consultant # Hernan Dario Correa- in June 2009 in Valle del Cauca, where the project would 
expand its activities. The consultant held meetings in Cali, with indigenous representativies from 
Nasa communities from various #resguardos#, as well as with members of Vallenpaz (PO), and 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
p
easants organizations. The consultant also held meetings in Bogotá with indigenous members of 
the Association of Indigenous Councils of Northern Cauca (ACIN). The methodology utilized in 
the consultations was semi-structured interview combined with open dialogue regarding lines of 
work of Vallenpaz (past and present), perspectives and expectations of community members 
about the work of Vallenpaz, particularly as it relates to their Planes de Vida, and based on the 
central elements of OP 4.10. Further consultation with indigenous communities in specific 
communities that will be involved in the future will take place prior to subproject 
implementation. Based on the consultant#s evaluation, Vallenpaz has sufficient capacity to work 
with indigenous communities and adequately adhere to OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/25/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Completed by June 25, 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
07/16/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
07/16/2009 
Comments:  Approved by Pilar Larreamendy, acting SM, LCSSO 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
