Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/09/2009 
Report No.:  AC4162
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Comoros 
Project ID:  P114740 
Project Name:  Services Support Project (FPCR Co-Financing and Restructuring) 
Task Team Leader:  Philippe Auffret 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (70%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(30%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (50%);Social safety nets (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives are as follows: (i) new objective: increase access to 
short-term employment in food-insecure areas; (ii) reformulated objective: increase 
access to basic social services in poor communities; and (iii) reformulated objective: 
contribute to building the capacity of communities to plan their development.   
 
3. Project Description 
After the proposed restructuring, the Project would comprise the following five 
components of which only Component 1 and Component 5 would be financed from the 
proposed Co-Financing:  
 
Component 1: Social safety net (cash-for-work) (US$850,000 from the FPCR Trust 
Fund).  This component would finance a cash-for-work program to increase access to 
short-term employment in food-insecure areas.  By providing employment, this 
component would raise disposable income, and thus improve food consumption of 
vulnerable groups, including women.  This component would finance highly labor 
intensive sub-projects including street cleaning, basic road maintenance, activities to 
Page  2
prevent soil erosion, rehabilitation and construction of feeder roads, collection of 
garbage, etc.  This component would also provide training to the agencies involved in its 
implementation.  
 
Component 2: Community-driven basic infrastructure (the proposed Co-Financing 
would not finance this component).  This component would include the first two 
components of the original Project: the Community-based Subprojecs component and the 
Capacity Building component.  
 
Component 3: Health services (Completed).  The Health Services component financed 
the training of selected medical personnel (identified as part of an IDA-financed Health 
Project closed in June 2004) and the maintenance of medical equipment.  These activities 
have been successfully completed under the original Credit.  
 
Component 4: Urban water supply (Completed).  The Urban Water Supply component 
(whose activities had been identified as part of an IDA-financed Infrastructure Project 
closed in August 2003) included the rehabilitation and extension of water supply in the 
capitals of Anjouan and Mohéli.  This component also financed capacity building of 
water management committees and information, education and communication campaign 
on water management, sanitation and hygiene.  These activities have been successfully 
completed under the original Credit.  
 
Component 5: Project management, monitoring and evaluation, and audit (US$150,000 
from the proposed FPCR TF Additional Grant) to cover incremental operating costs and 
FADC consultants fees for administering, monitoring and evaluating the proposed cash-
for-work program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rural and urban areas on the three islands of the Union of the Comoros.  
 
Activities under the proposed cash-for-work program are of the same nature as those 
implemented the original Credit and first Additional Financing. However, cash-for-work 
sub-projects which trigger any safeguard policy other than Environmental Assessment 
(OP/BP 4.01), including OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, would not be not 
eligible for financing.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The cash-for-work sub-projects are smaller and involve less construction than those 
implemented under the first two financing phases of the Project.  Therefore, they are 
expected to have less impact on the environment.  In fact, cash-for-work sub-projects are 
not expected to have any significant or irreversible impacts on the environment while 
some sub-projects like stabilization of road embankment are expected to have a positive 
environmental impact.  
 
While the ESMF applies to the cash-for-work program, the RPF does not, since cash-
for-work sub-projects which would trigger any resettlement would not be eligible for 
financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There is no potential indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the Project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In 2003, the FADC prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in preparation for the Services 
Support Project.  These documents were dislosed on December 3, 2003.  
 
The safeguard arrangements for the implementation of the cash-for-work program 
financed by the proposed co-financing would be identical to those currently used by the 
FADC for the implementation of the Services Support Project with the important 
Page  4
exception that cash-for-work sub-projects would be selected in such a way that cannot 
trigger any resettlement, so that the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the original 
Project would not apply to the cash-for-work program.  The FADC would screen the 
cash-for-work sub-projects to determine whether they trigger any safeguard policies. 
Cash-for-work sub-projects which trigger any safeguard policy other than Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) would not be not eligible for financing under the Project.  
 
Cash-for-work sub-projects which trigger OP/BP 4.01 would comply with the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The Environmental Manual 
of Procedures has been updated to take into account the proposed cash-for-work 
component.  During Project implementation, the FADC would ensure that appropriate 
remedial measures are taken to mitigate any negative social and environment impacts of 
sub-projects.  The safeguard arrangements for the cash-for-work program would be 
outlined in the Social Protection Manual, which would refer to the ESMF and the 
Environmental Manual. Importantly, the FADC would extend the responsibilities of the 
environmental and social specialist currently in place to cover the cash-for-work 
program.  
 
Compliance with safeguards is satisfactory for the existing Social Services Project.  The 
FADC has the institutional capacity to manage the safeguard aspects of the Project, 
including a dedicated environmental and social specialist.  Activities under the proposed 
cash-for-work program are of the same nature as those implemented the original Credit 
and first Additional Financing. The FADC has sufficient resources and capacities to 
manage the incremental safeguard aspects brought about by the cash-for-work program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been re-disclosed in 
the Infoshop of the World Bank and would be re-disclosed in the Union of the Comoros 
before effectiveness of the proposed additional grant.  
 
The ESMF would be disclosed in all three islands in a public place in a form and 
language that are understandable and accessible to communities and local NGOs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/04/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/27/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/03/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/04/2003 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the original Project would not be re-
disclosed as cash-for-work sub-projects which trigger OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement would not be eligible for financing.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  6
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe Auffret 
06/02/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
05/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
06/03/2009 
Comments:   
