Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/13/2008 
Report No.:  AC3405
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P105729 
Project Name:  DRC: Emergency Demobilization & Reintegration - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader:  Alexander A. McPhail 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (95%);Health (5%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Other social protection and risk management (S);HIV/AIDS (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objectives are as follows: (i) Contribute to the transition of ex-
combatants into productive civilian life; and (ii) assist child soldiers to reintegrate into 
their community of choice.   
 
3. Project Description 
An SDR68.1 million (estimated US$100 million) IDA grant (H-089) in support of the 
Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project was approved by the Board on 
May 25, 2004, and became effective on November 9, 2004.  A parallel MDRP Trust 
Fund grant (TF054242) for US$100 million became effective at the same time.  Both 
grants are expected to close on March 31, 2008.  As of January 2008, the Project has 
disbursed 98 percent on the IDA grant and 90 percent on the MDRP Trust Fund grant.  
 
The World Bank is now processing an Additional Financing operation of US$50 million 
equivalent. The African Development Bank has already approved parallel funding in the 
amount of US$22 million equivalent that will have cross-conditions with IDA’s project.  
 
Page  2
The EDRP consists of: (i) demobilization; (ii) reinsertion support; (iii) and reintegration 
support.  Disarmament occurs outside of the MDRP framework, by UNDP.  
 
Demobilization activities include: (i) the verification of ex-combatant status; (ii) the 
provision of an identity card; (iii) the collection of socio-economic data; (iv) medical 
screening (including HIV/AIDS counseling and voluntary testing); (v) transport; and (vii) 
pre-discharge orientations about civilian life and program benefits.  Women will be 
housed in separate sections of camps and all protection rules followed to ensure safety, 
and kits have been adapted for their specific needs.  Children released from armed groups 
will be treated in separate centers run by child-focused implementation partners, receive 
appropriate specialized care and are assisted with family tracing and reunification.  
 
Reinsertion comprises a reinsertion kit containing basic subsistence items for all ex-
combatants upon completion of demobilization. This will accompanied by a transitional 
safety allowance totaling around $400.  Under the initial Project, these payments are 
funded through the MDRP multi-donor trust fund and not through IDA.  However, these 
costs are included in the proposed Additional Financing operation. Children do not 
receive cash payments.  
 
Reintegration support has endeavored to provide economic and social reintegration 
assistance to help ex-combatants establish sustainable livelihoods.  Reintegration 
comprises placing ex-combatants in on-going activities carried out by selected agencies 
(e.g., FAO, UN Habitat, NGOs) covering agricultural, and non-farm income-generating 
activities, vocational and apprenticeship training, local employment opportunities.  Tools, 
education and scholarships can also be provided.  Children receive education and other 
appropriate support.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope and covers every province in the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An environmental audit of activites under the initial Project has been commissioned and 
the consultant and IDA are currently negotiating the contract.  The study is to last about 
one month and should be completed in March 2008.  
 
Minimal or no environmental impacts from the original or the new Project are expected, 
however see also No 4. below which requires an EIA before any works are started.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives were considered, given that minimal or no environmental impacts are 
anticipated.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
No civil works are currently planned under the proposed Additional Financing operation.  
However, if during implementation any works are undertaken, then an environmental 
assessment shall be carried out for that activity and prior to the start of construction.  This 
requirement shall be covenanted in the Financing Agreement. The responsibility for 
safeguards rests with the Project Implementation Unit and this will be outlined in the 
Project Implementation Manual.  There is adequate budget in the consultants component 
of the Project to carry out any required EIAs.  
 
During project supervision, and especially if the Project’s activities are revised, the 
World Bank and Government shall consider the potential environment and social impact 
of the Project’s implementation.  If it is determined that the Environmental Assessment 
Category will change, then appropriate action shall be taken, including the carrying out of 
an Environmental assessment.   
 
Borrower capacity for environmental and social management capacity is weak.  As this 
Project is rated “C” and is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts, it 
does not address building up the Borrower’s capacity for Safeguard policies. However, 
the World Bank has an extensive portfolio of projects in the country.  In this context, 
other IDA Projects will seek to address this capacity concern through: environmental and 
social management components; the employment of experts on environmental and social 
development; the strengthening of the social and environmental unit within executing 
agencies, and the forming of partnerships with NGOs and civil society organizations to 
enhance environmental and social management.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
If any works are undertaken, then the TOR for the related EIA will identify key 
stakeholders and determine an appropriate consultation and disclosure action plan.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
N/A 
Page  5
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander A. McPhail 
02/12/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
02/12/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
02/12/2008 
Comments:   
