Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1664 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P083813 
Project Name: Support for the Rehabilitation of the Protected Areas System 
Task Team Leader: Laurent Debroux 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Other rural 
development (S);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
42.10
48.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project’s Global Environment/Development Objective is “to strengthen capacity in the DRC 
to conserve globally important biodiversity”.  
 
Specifically, the project aims to: enhance the Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation's 
(ICCN)overall capacity; help rehabilitate two key protected areas and their buffer zones; foster 
collaboration with NGO partners; develop constructive and mutually beneficial relationships 
with local communities; and contribute to expanding the protected areas network,   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will include three components intervening at national level (1, 3) and at site level (2):  
 
Component 1: Support to ICCN institutional rehabilitation, at national level  
 
Component 1 of the project will focus on re-establishing a functional financial directorate 
(DAF) within the ICCN headquarters. The DAF is expected to be adequately staffed, trained and 
Page  2
computerized by year 3, with the quality of financial management being measured through 
external audits. This component will also help streng
then ICCN’s coordination platform 
(CoCoCongo), as well as its communication, M&E, social management, and replication systems. 
The project will complement other donors’ interventions which will focus on other key functions 
(UNDP, EU,GTZ and KfW). Through its support to the CoCoCongo and to the ICCN’s social 
monitoring and management system, the project will give priority to ensuring effective local 
NGO participation.  
 
Component 2: Site-level direct support to selected national parks and buffer zones  
 
Component 2 will help rehabilitate two key protected areas: the Garamba national park, and the 
Mikeno sector of the Virunga National Park. The strategy of intervention is in line with ICCN’s 
national strategy, and it complements other donors’ interventions to ensure that all priority 
protected areas receive adequate support. The two selected sites have the status of World 
Heritage Sites. The project will also cover buffer zones. In each park, the project will work on 
restoring ICCN’s basic human and material capacity; strengthening ongoing partnerships with 
local and international NGOs; and stabilizing the populations of key flagship species (gorillas, 
northern white rhinos, giraffes). It will also provide social services and infrastructures to local 
communities, and will support local consultations, socio-economic surveys, and community-
based development initiatives including local participation in hunting zone management and in 
eco-tourism. Some of the inputs will be packaged through contractual arrangements and 
partnerships with national and international NGO partners already working in the field.  
 
Component 3: Identification of new protected areas  
 
Component 3 will help ICCN and its partners to conduct a country-wide assessment comprising 
studies, surveys and local consultations needed to identify potential new protected areas, 
including community-managed reserves. Through this component, ICCN will engage in 
collaborations/contracts with local and international NGOs as well as academics, and in 
consultations with national and local authorities. It is expected that 1 million 
hectares(corresponding to areas already identified for which some work has already been done) 
would reach the level of gazettment, and another 5 million hectares would be mapped out on the 
basis of intensive local consultations and biological surveys. This component will help ensure 
that the DRC’s future protected areas system is fully representative of the country’s bio-
geographical diversity. It will emphasize consultations with local people, in keeping with the 
principle of free, prior and informed consent. It will aim at securing the traditional rights of local 
communities, especially indigenous groups, and at promoting participatory community-based 
management. It will be implemented by ICCN through a series of partnerships with local and 
international NGOs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 2 (site level support to selected protected areas) will be implemented in the Garamba 
National Park, as well as in the Mikeno Sector of the Virunga National Park, and in the buffer 
zones. Component 3 (identification of new protected areas) will be implemented in targeted areas 
that will be defined in the course of project implementation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo is becoming more familiar with the 
Bank’s Safeguard Policies, based on experience with other Bank funded projects in different 
sectors. The GEF PDF-B advance is being used to carry out the required safeguards work and 
related consultations, in particular the preparation of the Socio-Environmental Impact 
Assessment, the Socio-Environmental Management Plan (SEMP), the Indigenous People 
Development Plan (IPDP), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and the Process 
Framework (PF), as well as the related workshops and local consultations.  
 
ICCN has expressed commitment to implement and monitor the above-mentioned safeguards 
instruments. However, in practice, its capacity to do so remains insufficient. Therefore, at 
national level, the project will support the creation, training, equipment and operating costs of a 
social management team within ICCN. This will complement support from other donors 
(especially GTZ) in the area of monitoring and evaluation. At the site-level, the project will 
mostly be implemented through partnerships with local and international NGOs which are 
already operating on the ground and are specialized in social and environmental programs. In the 
Mikeno sector, the project will support a specific Indigenous Peoples Program through three 
local NGOs that are already working with indigenous Batwa communities on the ground. The 
project will also include community development programs around Garamba and around 
Mikeno, which will be implemented through specialized international NGOs in support of local 
entities. The Process Framework (PF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the 
partner NGOs in determining whether there are any potential income or livelihood displacement 
impacts. The delegated management contracts with these partner NGOs will provide for these 
NGOs to implement or help ICCN implement the social and environmental measures 
recommended in the SEMP, IPDP, PF and RPF. The same approach will be used for component 
3, where local consultations will be delegated to local NGOs to ensure proper consultations and 
compliance with the principle of prior, free, informed consent.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment, and the Socio-Environmental Management Plan 
(SEMP) will be used to manage environmental risks.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will operate in natural habitats with the aim of preserving them   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will operate in forested areas with the aim of preserving them   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The presence of physical cultural resources in project areas will be screened before the start 
of activities, and appropriate measures will be designed and implemented.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some areas covered by the project are inhabited by indigenous Pygmy people.  An IPDP is 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
being prepared and will be implemented.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is designed to avoid any physical resettlement; enhanced park management may 
in some cases reduce access to economic resources and the project will promote participatory 
approaches and alternative livelihoods in buffer zones in line with the Process Framework.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/07/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
social and environmental impact assessment is being finalized along with the following 
safeguards instruments: a Socio-Environmental Management Plan (SEMP), and Indigenous 
Peoples Development Plan (IPDP), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a Process 
Framework (PF). Local consultations are being finalized. These documents will be approved, 
and disclosed in the Democratic Republic of Congo by the Government, and will be sent to 
the Bank for disclosure at the Info Shop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Debroux 
03/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/27/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
03/27/2008 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
