Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3262
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P104041 
Project Name:  Enhancing Governance Capacity 
Task Team Leader:  Antonius Verheijen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (50%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Decentralization (P);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Other accountability/anti-
corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To enhance transparency and efficiency in central and sub-national public finance and 
human resource management.  
 
To establish and consolidate an equitable resource sharing mechanism between central 
and sub-national government.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening public financial management and public service 
management at central government level, including establishing a functioning system of 
intergovernmental fiscal relations  
 
Component 2: Building Public Sector and Financial Management Systems at Provincial 
Level  
 
Component 3: Governance reform implementation capacity   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kinshasa and the provinces of Bandundu, Katanga and Sud-Kivu   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not include new construction activities. The minor works to effectuate 
the rehabilitation of buildings required to install equipment and IT systems do not require 
an environmental assessment and the project is therefore categorized as 'C', 
environmental assessment not required.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
none   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n.a.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
No safeguard policies have been triggered   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
No safeguard policies have been triggered   
 
Page  3
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
12/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
12/17/2007 
Comments:   
