Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.48744 
Date prepared/updated:  May 24, 2009 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Democratic Republic of Congo 
Project ID:  P096414 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  IBI BATEKE CARBON SINK PLANTATION 
Task Team Leader:  Giuseppe Topa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  CN (Carbon Finance) 
Sector:  Forestry 
Theme: Climate Change 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
BioCF Amount (US$m.): USD2 million (through an Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement) 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises 
and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
The project will promote the afforestation of 4,220 hectares on the Bateke Plateau, contributing 
to the supply of fuelwood to Kinshasa, while creating a carbon sink capable of sequestering 
around 2.4 million of tons of CO
2
over 30 years. The project will be implemented in the Ibi 
estate, village of Mbankana, Maluku municipality. The project has been designed and will be 
implemented by NOVACEL
 
(
Nouvelle Société d’Agriculture, Culture et Élevage
), a local private 
company founded and headed by the Mushiete family, natives of the Bateke region.  
 
3. Project Description: 
 
The project is organized in two main components: 
1.  Establishment and maintenance of 4,220 hectares of fast-growing tree species on grass 
savannas of the Bateke plateau. 
2.  Promotion of community development activities to benefit local population (including 
agriculture, health and education services).  
 
Page  2
NOVACEL is in charge of the overall design, implementation and monitoring of the plantation 
activities. NOVACEL was founded by natives of the Bateke region and its main areas of 
intervention are agroforestry and food processing (mostly cassava). NOVACEL is currently 
employing 30 permanent staff and creating temporary jobs that add up to 200 equivalent 
permanent positions. It has offices in the Ibi estate and in Kinshasa. 
 
The community development component of the project will be managed by 
NOVACEL’s 
Division of Social and Technical Development, in partnership with the NGO GiAgro (Groupe 
d’Initiatives Agroforestières), a Congolese NGO working in the area for 10 years. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
The Ibi state is a 20,410 hectares shrubby savanna area located 140 km East from Kinshasa on 
the Bateke plateau, in the municipality of Maluku, part of the Kinshasa administrative area.  
 
This plateau is composed of 90% herbaceous or shrubby Soudan-Guinean savannah, burnt many 
times per year. The project area is characterized by scarce and isolated trees. The shrubs and 
trees are of very small size, rarely reaching beyond 3 m in height. The remaining 10 % is forest 
gallery degraded for subsistence farming (maize, cassava) and charcoal making. 
 
The project area identified for the afforestation activities, which present a vegetation cover of 
less than 30 %, apparently has never been used by local population for goods nor services. A 
comparison of the actual state of the land designated by the project and infrared aerial pictures at 
a
scale of 1 / 42,000 taken in May – June – July 1953, shows that the land has essentially 
remained the same for more than 50 years. 
 
Activities with safeguards Category A impacts will not be funded. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Mr. Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour - Lead Social Development Specialist (AFTCS) 
Mr. Mohammed A. Bekhechi – Lead Counsel (LEGEN) 
Mr. Robert A. Robelus – Consultant (AFTQK)  
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
Due to the potential social and environmental impacts from the 
project, OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered. 
 
A
Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment was commissioned by 
NOVACEL and elaborated by a consulting firm (Forest Resources 
Management). The final report was delivered in July 2006. As part 
of the assessment, an extensive consultation was carried out with the 
local population, local institutions and NGOs, who confirmed their 
support to the project through an “
Acte de Validation
”, issued by the 
Cheferie
 de Mbankana (Commune de Maluku, Ville Province de 
Kinshasa). In June 2008, the World Bank’s lead social development 
specialist led another public consultation which was attended by the 
traditional leaders, other key local partners and the promoters of the 
project. The purpose of these meetings was to clarify rights, 
obligations and expectations of the involved parties. In May 2009, 
the project promoter updated the Socio-Environmental Impact 
Assessment, by clarifying the issues raised during the consultation 
and the safeguards review process of the World Bank. 
 
Activities with safeguards Category A impacts will not be funded. 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
The project will occupy a rather small area of the large Bateke 
plateau, a treeless environment not considered a high value natural 
forest. By creating a sustainable supply of fuelwood and controlling 
bush fires, the project is expected to reduce pressure on natural 
forests and promote natural regeneration.
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
In June 2008 a consultation with the population and the traditional 
local leaders clearly ascertained that the 25 year land concession on 
which the project will be implemented is free of claims and is not 
populated.  Hence the decision not to trigger OP/BP 4.12 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts on human populations or 
environmentally important areas. The environmental impact is expected to be positive, mainly 
through (1) the rehabilitation of degraded lands; (2) a reduction in pressure on forests around 
Kinshasa (these forests are under strong pressure for charcoal, fuel wood and timber supply); (3) 
the contribution to natural regeneration by controlling bush fires; and (4) the mitigation of 
climate change through the capture of greenhouse gas.  
 
The social impact is expected to be positive with the creation of local jobs and provision of 
social services by NOVACEL to local communities. The project is expected to generate 
employment opportunities for the establishment and maintenance of the plantation (around 50 
permanent jobs, and around 500 equivalent full-time positions in temporary job). Social services 
will also be provided to local population in the area of agriculture development, health and 
education.  
 
The table below summarizes the main socio-environmental benefits from the project: 
Environmental Benefits 
Natural Forests 
Reduction in pressure over native forests for fuelwood production.  
Natural regeneration 
Protection of savannah from fires, resulting in natural regeneration. 
Studies indicate that for every hectare of planted forests, 40 to 50 
hectares are protected from cutting and fire.
 
Local fauna 
Creation of habitat for local fauna. 
Social Benefits 
Employment 
opportunities 
Creation of 30 permanent jobs, and around 200 equivalent full-time. 
Eventually, permanent jobs should rise to 50 and 500 equivalent full-
time positions in temporary jobs.
 
Agro-forestry 
Development of agriculture production through technical services to the 
population, provision of inputs for the development of agriculture and 
silviculture. 
Health 
Lower rate of prevalence of infectious diseases, through the construction 
of a health dispensary. 
Education 
Higher rate of literacy and success at school, through the construction 
and maintenance of a local school. 
An important safeguard issue identified during project preparation is the need for the 
establishment of a benefit-sharing mechanism whereby revenues from the carbon transactions 
are shared with local communities in the form of social services. During the consultations with 
local communities, the traditional leaders emphasized that the land concession to the Mushiete 
family was dependant on the provision of social services to the local communities. NOVACEL 
has addressed this concern by creating a mechanism through which proceeds from the carbon 
credit sales will directly fund community development activities to benefit local population. 
Page  5
From 2009 to 1017, NOVACEL will be investing around 240,000 US$ in these activities, which 
represent around 12% of the overall carbon sales. These investments would cover: i) local 
infrastructure, including potable water facilities, electrification and social service facilities 
(schools and pharmacies); ii) capacity building, including teachers and educators, agricultural 
extensionists, medical services, applied research and development. The table below gives a 
breakdown of the investments in community development. 
 
The only adverse social impact raised in the Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment is a 
potential reduction in the charcoal business by local communities. It is argued that charcoal 
merchants’ could potentially stop visiting the region, as NOVACEL would trade charcoal and 
fuelwood directly in Kinshasa. This is a very low risk due to the high unmet demand for 
fuelwood and charcoal in Kinshasa. 
 
The clarification of the land tenure status of the afforestation area has also been assessed during 
the WB safeguard review. The 
Ministère des Affaires Foncières
 has granted the use of 6,000 
hectares in the Ibi estate (within which the 4,220 planting activities will take place) to Olivier 
Mushiete, general director of NOVACEL, through a 25-year lease (
bail d’emphyteose
). The 
grantee is currently applying to state authorities for a permanent concession title to this area. In 
order to transfer the land use rights from Olivier Mushiete to NOVACEL, a long-term lease has 
been signed between the parties. As consequence, NOVACEL currently possesses the rights to 
the land and to the trees. According to the Congolese law, NOVACEL holds the full and 
unchallenged rights to the emission reductions for the duration of the project. 
 
As a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) operation, the project has received the Letter of 
Approval from the Designated National Authority to the CDM (Ministry of Environment, Nature 
Conservation, Waters and Forests), whereby the Congolese government confirms that the project 
contributes to the sustainable development of DRC. 
 
No large scale, substantial and irreversible impact is expected to be caused by the project.  
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
A
potential indirect impact from the project is the emergence of conflicts between local 
communities and NOVACEL, resulting from diverging views over the benefit-sharing 
mechanism adopted by NOVACEL. 
The main mitigation measure for that is the establishment of a transparent channel of 
communication between NOVACEL and local communities. This will be the role of the 
specialist on customary affairs hired by NOVACEL (as part of its Division of Family and 
Customary Affairs). Divergent views on benefit sharing will have to be negotiated between 
NOVACEL and the community leaders. The World Bank supervision should also closely 
monitor this issue throughout the duration of the project. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
 
Please see 2 above. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
NOVAC
EL’s capacity to deal with safeguards issues is adequate at this stage. 
 
NOVACEL has created two new divisions to deal with the safeguards-related aspects of the 
operation:  
i) 
the Division of Social and Technical Development
,
in partnership with the NGO 
GiAgro, will be in charge of the community development component; 
 
ii) 
the Division of Family and Customary Affairs
will be responsible for overall 
communication between NOVACEL and the customary leaders and community 
leaders in the Mbankana and neighboring villages. NOVACEL has already hired a 
specialist on customary affairs, an agronomist, a nutritionist and an agricultural 
technician specialized in socio-organization and communication to manage the 
community development component of the project. 
 
NOVACEL has taken concrete measures to address concerns about revenue sharing by 
establishing a mechanism whereby social services (local infrastructures and capacity building 
activities) will be financed with the proceeds from the carbon sales in the international market. 
The initial part of this commitment runs from 2009 to 2017 (which covers the period of the 
ERPA with the BioCarbon Fund) and should be extended further once NOVACEL engages in 
other carbon transactions with new buyers. These arrangements have been communicated and 
vetted by the local communities. 
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
The key stakeholders in this project are NOVACEL, the members of the local communities 
surrounding the Ibi station and local decision-makers. 
 
In July, 2006, an initial consultation with the population of Mbankana (Commune de Maluku, 
Ville Province de Kinshasa) took place with the goal of presenting the preliminary results of the 
Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment. 
During this “solemn assembly”, the local population 
confirmed their support to the project through an “
Acte de Validation
”, issued by the 
Cheferie
 de 
Mbankana. Through this document, the local population expresses their understanding of the 
IBCSP and their expectation that the project would bring social-environmental benefits for the 
local community. 
 
In June 2008, the World Bank’s lead social development specialist led another public 
consultation attended by the traditional leaders, other key local partners and the promoters of the 
project. The purpose of these meetings was to clarify rights, obligations and expectations of the 
involved parties in the project. The minutes of this meeting, signed by the local traditional leader 
(
chef de terre
)
restates the support from local community to the project and reconfirms the 
concession of 8,000 hectares (within which the IBCSP’s afforestation activities will take place) 
to the Mushiete family. The document also clarifies that the land granted is free of claims by 
third parties. 
 
The Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment, in French language, has been posted on the 
website 
www.ibivillage.cd
.
The May 2009 updated version of the Socio-Environmental Impact 
Assessment, which clarifies the issues raised during the consultation and the safeguards review 
process of the World Bank, has also been posted on this website. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
August, 2006. 
Updated in May, 2009 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
July, 2006
1
Date of submission to InfoShop 
May 27, 2009 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
N/A 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
1
A
meeting to discuss the results of the Socio-Environmental Assessment was held in Kinshasa, in July 2006. 
Page  8
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
N/A 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes. The EA was finalized in July 
2006 and updated in May  2009, 
responding to questions raised during 
World Bank safeguards review to 
concerns raised during subsequent 
consultation with local communities. 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
The social development component 
of the project covers the social 
development activities to be 
promoted during the life of the 
project. 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Page  9
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
Yes, but not of natural forests. The 
project will establish new forest 
stands to be used for fuelwood and 
timber. The project promoter, 
NOVACEL, is considering FSC 
certification, and also CCB 
(Community, Climate and 
Biodiversity), a world-recognized 
certificate for carbon projects 
promoting local community’s 
welfare and protection of 
biodiversity. 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Page  10
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [  ]          No [X]          N/A [  ] 
The updated EA will be sent to the 
Infoshop as soon as safeguards 
clearance is obtained. 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes, all project documents were 
disclosed in French language in the 
website 
www.ibivillage.cd
.
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes, they are included in the Social 
Development component of the 
project. 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
The Project Design Document 
establishes a detailed monitoring of 
environmental conditions in the 
project site. Data related to social 
safeguards will be collected by 
NOVACEL’s Division of Social and 
Technical Development. 
Page  11
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes, the Emission Reduction 
Purchase Agreement between the 
WB and NOVACEL addresses the 
safeguards responsibilities by 
NOVACEL. 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Giuseppe Topa (AFTEN) 
05/24/09 
Environmental Specialist: 
Robert A. Robelus (AFTQK) 
02/05/09 
Social Development Specialist 
Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
02/05/09 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mohammed A. Bekhechi (LEGEN) 
03/03/09 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Warren Walters
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Marjorie-Anne Bromhead
 
Comments:   
