Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3544 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P111133 
Project Name: Support to the Social & Economic Reintegration of Demobilised CAFF 
and OVC in the DRC 
Task Team Leader: Roisin Ellen Mary De Burca 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTCS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (60%);Vocational training (20%);Primary education (20%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Other social protection 
and risk management (S);Social risk mitigation (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to support the socio-economic reintegration of Children Formerly Associated 
with the Fighting Forces (CAFF) in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project components to be financed through the MDTF include:  
 
1. 
Social Reintegration: Save the Children UK (SCF UK) will support the reintegration of 
demobilized child soldiers back into their families through the provision of  transitional support, 
family tracing and reunification services, community 
–
based outreach and sensitization, and 
family based care and transitional independent living arrangements.  
 
2. 
Economic Reintegration: In parallel, the project will also support the child in developing 
a
civilian livelihood through the provision of vocational training, accelerated learning programs, 
and opportunities for income generating activities.  
 
Page  2
3. 
Research and Advocacy: The project will add to the existing body of lessons learned and 
good practice in the field of CAFF reintegration through research on girls associated with the 
fighting forces, livelihood options, and community context. In addition, SCF UK will actively 
lobby national entities to adopt relevant legislations and monitoring systems to prevent or 
minimize child recruitment.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
North Kivu and Orientale Province (Ituri, Beni and Goma Areas), Eastern Democratic of the 
Congo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency will be required to submit as part of its Project Implementation 
Manuel a screening check-list to be used for the selection and financing of all micro-projects and 
sub-grants. Exclusionary criteria will include: negative environmental and social impacts. The 
PIM is a condition of effectivness of the project. Compliance with the PIM will be reviewed by 
the Task Team during supervision.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
No civil works will be financed by the project. The implmenting agency will use pre-existing 
community centers to provide services to the beneficiaries. The selected centers (3) will receive 
basic materials and funds for minor repairs.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/20/2008 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project does not trigger any safeguard-related studies. The Task Team will however 
ensure that the screening check-list for income generating subprojects includes clear 
guidelines disqualifying any project which may negatively impact the local environment. The 
screening check-list is a mandatory section of the Project Implementation Manuel, which in 
turn is a condition of effectiveness. Compliance with the screening check list will be 
monitored by regular supervision missions carried out by the task team on the ground.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Roisin Ellen Mary De Burca 
04/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/11/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Carolyn Winter 
04/10/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
