Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3166 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Republic of 
Project ID: P106851 
Project Name: CONGO HEALTH SECTOR SERVICES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Khama Odera Rogo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Child health 
(S);Population and reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed sector investment would be a five-year health sector development project to 
support the Republic of Congo’s sector-wide reform and investment program.  Congo has a high 
disease burden due to largely preventable causes.  Sixty to ninety percent of the morbidity in 
Congo is due to infectious diseases and maternal and child illnesses.  In 2006, fifty five percent 
of out patient consultations in public hospitals in Congo were due to malaria.  The average life 
expectancy in Congo is only 49 years. Infant mortality rate is 75/1000 and maternal mortality 
ratio 781/100,000. Although there is a level of uncertainty about this ratio, the trend is 
worrisome.  The country's HIV/AIDS prevalence rate, around 4.3 %, has remained stagnant for 
some years but the TB incidence is rising. The health status of the 3.4 million Congolese has 
been deteriorating, and if present trends continue, the country's Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) are not likely to be achieved.  
 
Multiple factors account for good health, and the adversity and multiplicity in these factors has 
engendered the worsening health status of Congolese. Although the economic situation has 
recently improved and the country is now classified as lower-middle-income, 50.1% of the 
population is still poor and it remains IDA eligible.  The contrast between the wealth and the 
Page  2
social conditions of Congolese is stark. Going by recent simulations by the World Bank, even 
with a growth rate in GDP 5.% per capita between 2006 and 2015, a quarter of the population 
will still be poor in 2015. This level of destitution compounded by food insecurity renders 
malnutrition a major underlying factor in child mortality in Congo. With the surge in oil 
revenues, Congo today has an excellent opportunity to reduce poverty and improve living 
standards if institutions can be strengthened and governance improved (ISN, 2007).  
 
In 2002-2005, the government strengthened policies and institutions, and as a result attained the 
HIPC decision point in March 2006. To reinforce this, the I-PRSP focuses on improving social 
indicators through governance reform and prioritizes reorientation of the budget towards 
education and health and more effective targeting and monitoring of these sectors.  This was 
reflected in the recently approved medium-term comprehensive health sector policy and strategic 
framework (PNDS) which will enable Congo to improve the health status of the population.  
 
The PNDS has also received support from technical agencies, local and external partners.  
There is thus, a clear consensus on a comprehensive framework for the reforms and future 
investment priorities.  The proposed sector support project would build on and strengthen 
government initiatives already underway to promote and involve community and beneficiary 
participation in managing and health services at all levels.  Particular attention would be given to 
maternal and child outcomes, the reduction the heavy toll in morbidity and mortality from 
malaria.  
 
In addition, the Bank now has considerable experience implementing development assistance in 
Congo and is increasingly being looked up to by partners to provide leadership in structural 
dialogue. This project will build upon health sector activiti
es realized through the Bank’s support 
of a multi-sectoral, national HIV/AIDS and Health Program, effective since October 2004 and 
disbursing satisfactorily. The mid term review of the project conducted in April 2007 revealed 
among other lessons, the inability to address systemic issues through a limited project, the added 
value of broad based partnerships based on a 3-1s concept and the value of continued vigilance 
to fiduciary risks.  
 
The proposed emphasis on health systems strengthening is in conformity with the Bank’s new 
HNP strategy and complies with the Africa Action Plan’s main objective to stay engaged in 
conflict affected countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
Sector Investment Lending (SIL) is the proposed lending instrument. It has worked well in 
Congo previously as confirmed in the Interim Strategy Note (ISN, 2007). A sector-wide 
approach is favored for Congo as the country is now in a stable post-conflict situation. The 
health sector is grossly underperforming and is in dire need of significant overhaul for improving 
efficiency and effectiveness.  
 
Congo does not have a plethora of external support and aid is both limited and fragmented. 
Most partners in this sector lack significant portfolios and channel support largely through 
disease initiatives (immunization, Onchocerciasis, HIV/AIDS etc) or confined project activities 
that have not been able to address underlying systemic problems. Following the recent joint 
Page  3
identification mission, the African Development Bank (AfDB) has given a strong indication of 
its intention to participate in a SWAp focusing on infrastructure rehabilitation. The Agence 
Francaise de Developpement (AFD), the European Union, the US Embassy and the South 
Africans have also expressed their willingness to support such initiatives. The UN agencies, led 
by the UNDP, has welcomed the proposal because of its alignment with UNGASS, the HIPC 
agenda and Congo’s Interim Strategy Note.  
 
The sector-wide reforms proposed by the PNDS include:  (a) building sector leadership 
capabilities for improved partnership coordination, monitoring and evaluation and management 
of the decentralized healthcare system at all levels; (b) instituting an efficient performance-based 
human resource management system; (c) rehabilitating health facilities, particularly at primary 
and first referral levels to improve access and quality of care, and; (d) defining and streamlining 
priority curative, preventive, and promotional interventions, integrating 12 ongoing vertical 
programs in both public and private health services. The project proposes to address them under 
the following components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening leadership capacities in managing a functioning and decentralized 
health system.  This component will strengthen management and leadership capacities at all 
levels within the government’s decentralization program.  This process will involve building 
capacities in planning and managing sector operations, working within a framework of 
partnership and stakeholder coordination.  A subcomponent of the project will focus on activities 
for building the fiduciary capabilities of the sector in financial management, setting up an 
efficient accounting system to provide transparency in government budgets and donor funding 
expenditures. Studies would be conducted to identify an appropriate health sector financing 
policy and system Congo by drawing upon ongoing experiences with cost sharing and 
community mutuelles. MoH procurement capacities at the central, regional, and district levels 
will be strengthened through appropriately designed procedures.  A separate subcomponent for 
strengthening monitoring and evaluation systems will encompass health information systems 
(SNIS), epidemiological surveillance and operational research.  
 
Component 2: Institution of an efficient and effective system for managing health sector human 
resources (HRH).  A baseline HRH database currently being developed will be used to establish 
a
separate HRH Directorate in the central Ministry with specific HR management functions and 
the technical capacity to create position descriptions and build a repository of technical fields and 
professions employed throughout the health sector.  The Directorate will also organize a multi-
sector consultative framework for working with ministries of education which is responsible for 
training staff to serve in the MoH.  Under this component, incentives will be created to motivate 
staff in all areas (e.g. equitable in-service and longer-term training programs, the institution of 
more transparent appointments, and performance-based assignment and promotion systems 
based on merit and required competencies). The proposed project will design and set up a 
medium-term development plan for HRH.  
 
Component 3: Rehabilitation and equipment of health facilities. The proposed project will 
maintain and use an ongoing inventory to upgrade facilities for primary health and referral 
services at the district level. Existing facilities will be upgraded and new construction undertaken 
only in exceptional cases based on new standards and norms for decentralized primary healthcare 
Page  4
and first referral services. A standardized maintenance system for buildings and equipment will 
be set up and monitored for further improvements during project implementation. Performance 
indicators and other details will be worked out during project preparation.   
 
Component 4: Improvement of access to a package of quality essential health services (PES).  
This component will comprise four subcomponents including the following:  
 
(a) Define and provide a PES to the population with defined contents of services for children, 
mothers, adolescents, and combating major communicable and non-communicable diseases. 
Maternal and child health outcomes and malaria will receive special focus. Norms, treatment 
guidelines, and service organization will be clearly defined and used in the training of clinical 
staff at all levels.  
 
(b) Strengthen the procurement and efficient management of essential medicines and medical 
supplies within the framework already established by the EU under PASCOB (COMEG).  
 
(c) Empower communities in their roles as co-managers of health services.  This will entail 
building of professional capacity at MoH to strengthen state-community partnerships, create 
avenues for improving community participation in health services management. This process 
will include training community members and health staff to co-manage the district health 
program, strengthening community participation in BCC and combating harmful traditional and 
social practices.  
 
(d) Promote equitable access to quality health services for all.  Activities will include an 
analysis of constraints to service access among the most vulnerable and poor segments of the 
population, and the establishment of solidarity initiative to support the basic needs of the poor.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Republic of Congo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Consultant has been recruited and is working in order to update the Institutional capacity 
assessment and the Waste Management Plan of 2003.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In accordance with OP4.12 on resettlement, the project preparation will ensure that the first 
12-18 months of civil works are screened for environmental and social impacts and (ii) an 
Environmental Assessment needed for those first sites are ready to disclose (along with the draft 
ESMF and medical waste management plan update) before appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The medical waste management plan of 2003 will be updated and attention given to 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
indigenous minority population to ensure that they benefit from the project as has been done with 
the HIV/AIDS and Health Project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Safeguards and environmental plan will be completed. The medical waste management 
plan of 2003 will be updated continuing to focus on ensuring that indigenous minority groups 
benefit from the project as is currently the case under the HIV/AIDS & Health Project.  An 
environment and social assessment are planned to take into account indigenous, any risks to 
people's land that any new health facility construction might cause.  The MoH's project 
preparation efforts entail setting clearly how to manage risks of land acquisition and how to 
ensure indigenous peoples continue to benefit from the project. Reporting instrument will be 
prepared, approved and disclosed prior to Appraisal,in the country and at the Bank's 
InfoShop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Khama Odera Rogo 
03/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/12/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
03/12/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
