Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3390
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P083813 
Project Name:  Support for the Rehabilitation of the Protected Areas System 
Task Team Leader:  Paul Jonathan Martin 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 14, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Other rural 
development (S);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50 
 
EC: European Community Humanitarian Organization 
12.50 
 UN 
UNESCO 
3.40 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
23.00 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
1.10 
 
Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 
2.10
48.60 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project’s Global Environment/Development Objective is “Enhanced ICCN capacity 
for management of targeted protected areas."  
 
ICCN (Institut Congolais pour la Conservation de la Nature) is the Congolese Institute 
for Nature Conservation.  
 
Specifically, the project aims to: enhance ICCN’s overall capacity; help rehabilitate two 
key protected areas and their buffer zones; foster collaboration with NGO partners; 
develop constructive and mutually beneficial relationships with local communities; and 
contribute to identifying new protected areas.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project includes 3 components:  
 
•
Component 1 will help strengthen ICCN’s institutional rehabilitation with a focus 
on financial management and procurement functions.  
 
•
Component 2 will support biodiversity protection and community-based 
development in and around the (a) Garamba national park and (b) the Mikeno Sector of 
the Virunga national park.  
 
•
Component 3 will help identify potential new protected areas (national 
level)through partnerships with NGOs and with a focus on local consultations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
•
Component 1 will operate in the ICCN Headquarter in Kinshasa.  
 
•
Component 2 will operate in two protected areas and their buffer zones: (a) the 
Garamba National Park, Orientale Province; and (b) the Mikeno Sector of the Virunga 
National Park, North-Kivu.  
 
•
Component 3 (identification of new protected areas) will be implemented in 
targeted areas across the country that will be defined in the course of project 
implementation.  
 
Salient features of the Garamba national park are as follows:  
 
ï‚§ 
The Garamba National Park (4,900 kmÂ²) and its three contiguous hunting 
reserves (7,500 kmÂ²) form a patchwork of savannas and forest galleries. It harbors 
thelast endemic Northern White Rhinoceros and Congo giraffes, as well as important 
herds of elephants and buffaloes. The local population around the park practice 
traditional agriculture. There is scope for community-based game management in the 
hunting reserves. Sharing a long border with Sudan, Garamba is one of the parks that 
suffered most from the wars in both countries, especially from heavily armed Sudanese 
horsemen targeting elephants and rhinos for ivory and horns.  
 
ï‚§ 
The Mikeno Sector (250 kmÂ²) is the southern tip of the Virunga National 
Park,Africa’s oldest park created in 1925. It is geographically separated from the rest of 
the Park and it represents about 3% of its total area. It runs along the Rwandan border and 
consists of a range of five volcanoes intertwined with high altitude forests. It harbors the 
largest population of the endemic mountain gorilla, and is also known as the ‘gorilla 
sector’. The foothills of the volcanoes outside the park are heavily populated rural lands, 
with an estimated 80,580 people living in a 10-km belt around the Mikeno sector.  No 
agriculture or human settlement is reported inside the Mikeno sector. A series of Batwa 
settlements have been identified around the Mikeno sector totalling about 1250 people. 
These communities rely on agriculture and gathering for their living. They suffer from 
limited access to arable lands, as well as limited access to social services and weak 
participation in decision-making processes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Page  3
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). A socio-environmental impact assessment 
was carried out; and a socio-environmental management plan was integrated into the 
project design. The project involves small-scale infrastructure works, i.e. rehabilitation of 
rural roads, community infrastructures and park station. These works will be subject to 
specific environmental clauses to mitigate the risks of direct impacts such as soil erosion 
or water pollution.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The project aims to protect two critical natural habitats 
listed on the UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Danger. It will also help identify potential 
new protected areas to ensure that the DRC’s diversity of natural habitats is adequately 
represented in the national protected areas network. If the project is successful, it will 
have a positive impact on natural habitats, and no mitigation measure was identified.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP4.10). A series of Batwa settlements have been identified 
adjacent to the Mikeno Sector totalling about 1250 people. These communities rely on 
agriculture and gathering for their living. They suffer from limited access to arable lands, 
as well as limited access to social services and weak participation in decision-making 
processes. The project will help identify and implement a series of economic and social 
actions to enhance their participation in the management of the park; help secure their 
access to agricultural lands and to social and economic opportunities in a culturally 
appropriate way. A specific program in support of the Batwa communities was built into 
the project (component 2) and will be implemented in partnership with three local NGOs 
currently working on the ground with Batwa groups (CIDOPY, PIDEP, and ECO-
Action). It represents about 21% of the budget allocated to Mikeno, i.e. $0.5m out of 
$2.4m. The project will not restrict the Batwa’s traditional forest uses as compared to the 
situation at start of the project. It will aim to ensure these pygmy communities are not 
Page  4
marginalized with regard to park management, and enjoy equal rights and opportunities 
as other local communities.  
 
Cultural Property (OP 4.11). Physical cultural resources that could possibly be affected 
by the project shall be identified in close collaboration with the communities concerned 
following a free, prior and informed consultation process. This work is likely to focus on 
natural sites with spiritual values. The project shall avoid any negative impact on such 
physical cultural resources. Where impacts are inevitable, they shall be discussed with the 
communities concerned and appropriate mitigation solutions shall be determined and 
implemented with the participation of local communities.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). The proposed GEF intervention will not, in 
anyway, finance any activity related to physical resettlement. It is designed specifically to 
prevent any such physical resettlement. Measures are included to that effect in the project 
design and the Resettlement Policy Framework. To date, no permanent settlement or 
agricultural activity is reported inside the Garamba Park or the Mikeno Sector, the two 
areas that will receive support under component 2. The project has no connection with 
the refugees’ relocation program that is underway in the South and Central sectors of the 
Virunga, which are geographically separated from Mikeno. Under component 3, the 
identification of new protected areas will put emphasis on local consultations and 
protection of local livelihoods.  
 
The impact assessment also identified the risk of economic losses to local communities 
as a result of better protection of natural ecosystems inside the parks. In response, the 
project will support participatory processes, community-based management and 
development initiatives, as proposed in the Process Framework. To the extent possible 
these measures were built into the design of components 2 and 3 so as to form an integral 
part of the project and to increase the chance of success.  
 
Forests (OP 4.36). The project aims to protect high-conservation value highland forests 
in the Mikeno sector, and to support the creation of new forested protected areas. The 
project will not support any logging activities. It will help reduce pressure from fuel-
wood harvesting in natural forests by promoting participatory local land use plans and 
community-based afforestation projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Mikeno sector faces significant long-term challenges in connection with the high 
surrounding population densities and the poverty level. On the one hand, there is the risk 
that these communities will not benefit sufficiently from park-related activities and 
projects. This would probably lead to a lack of local buy-in for the park, with 
unsustainable pressures on the few remaining fuel-wood and wildlife resources and local 
tensions with ICCN. On the other hand, if conservation programs are successful in 
improving the livelihoods of surrounding communities, this may attract outsiders who 
also want to improve their livelihoods and may not share the same interest for protecting 
the resource base in the longer-term. In this regard, ICCN and its conservation partners, 
Page  5
including the proposed project, will need to work closely with local communities to 
strengthen their buy-in for the park, empower them with managing resources and lands 
around the park, and promote less destructive practices.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
number of ICCN donors and NGO partners are
 supporting a refugees’ resettlement 
program in the Virunga national park, in an effort to restore the integrity of the entire 
park (8,100 km2) and provide war-affected people with better living conditions in 
neighbouring rural areas. It was decided that the proposed GEF project should be clearly 
disconnected from any resettlement activity in Virunga, and anywhere in DRC. It was 
noted that the Virunga resettlement program started in 2003 well before the proposed 
GEF project; is receiving significant financial and technical support from the European 
Commission, WWF, CARE and others, and it is due to go on regardless of the GEF 
project. Although positive results have been reported, alternative options such as 
degazetting portions of the park will probably need to be explored in the future. The GEF 
project will focus on the Mikeno sector, a geographically separate entity, with no 
reported permanent settlement or agricultural activities. It will finance activities which, 
although essential and urgent, were not taken on board at the time other partners 
reengaged in this area   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In view of the safeguards issues identified above, the project was classified A; a Socio-
Environmental Management Plan, an Indigenous People Development Plan, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework and a Process Framework were prepared, discussed and 
disclosed in-country and in the World Bank Infoshop.  To the extent possible, the 
mitigation measures proposed under these instruments were built into the project’s 
components so as to become an integral part of its intervention strategy, e.g.: support to 
multi-stakeholders coordination at national level (component 1); support to community 
development in Garamba and Mikeno (component 2); and local consultations in 
identifying new protected areas (component 3). Over 40% of the funds allocated to field 
activities, i.e. about $1.9m out of $4.5m, will be dedicated to community development 
and community conservation programs, reflecting their importance in the intervention 
strategy.  
 
In addition to project-specific mitigation measures, the ICCN will adopt a Letter of 
Policy laying out the principles of participatory management that will guide its 
conservation strategy at national level.  
 
ICCN has little experience and capacity to implement and monitor a social management 
programs like the one recommended in the SEMP, IPDP, RPF and PF. For this reason, it 
was agreed that a social management unit will be established within ICCN before the 
start of the project with specific mandate to monitor the implementation of the social 
management plan, the IPDP, the RPF and the PF under components 2 and 3 of the 
project. The social management unit will be strengthened by the recruitment of a social 
Page  6
management technical assistant, who will organize training of other members of the unit 
to enhance their capacities to fulfill the unit's mandate.  In the field, community 
conservation programs will be entrusted to specialized civil society organizations, such as 
the Pygmy organizations around Mikeno. The project will also support national and local 
consultative bodies (CoCoSi and CoCoCongo) to get feedback from partners on the 
quality of implementation of the social programs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Local communities living around Garamba and Mikeno are expected to benefit directly 
from the project’s emphasis on concrete socio-economic benefits and participatory 
management methods. In Mikeno, micro-projects will be identified and monitored 
through the existing CONCD (‘Convergence pour la Conservation et le 
Developpement’), and in Garamba through the ongoing ‘Programme de Conservation 
Communautaire’. Monitoring of the Social Management Plan and the Process Framework 
willtake place in the framework of the multistakeholders ‘Comites Locaux de Suivi des 
Sites’ where the project will promote the participation of local associationsand traditional 
authorities.  
 
Indigenous Batwa communities around Mikeno are also key stakeholders of the project. 
As part of the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan, the project will support a specific 
Batwa program which represents about 20% of the funds allocated to Mikeno, and will be 
implemented by three local NGOs (PIDP, CIDOPY, ECOACTION) currently operating 
with Batwa communities in the field. These NGOs participated in the design of the 
project and will conduct intensive consultations with the beneficiaries on safeguards and 
project implementation progress. The project will also support Batwa’s participation 
and/or representation in the Mikeno ‘Comite Local de Suivi des Sites’. 
 
Historically and traditionally, indigenous peoples have not lived in the region inside or 
around the Garamba National Park, and today these regions are not inhabited by Twa, 
Mbuti, Aka or Cwa groups. 
 
Local communities and indigenous groups living in the vicinity of potential new 
protected areas across the country will be key stakeholders of Component 3. In 
identifying possible new protected areas, this component will conduct socio-economic 
surveys and support free, prior and informed consultations emphasizing the protection of 
traditional users’ rights and local livelihoods.  
 
Local and traditional authorities have an important role to play in terms of public 
awareness and outreach. They will be involved through the ‘Comites Locaux de Suivi des 
Sites’ in Garamba and Mikeno (component 2) and will also be involvedin local 
consultations on potential new protected areas as part of component 3. Their buy-in is 
critical for success of these components.  
 
Local NGO’s and community-based organizations will be actively involved in 
implementing community conservation programs in Garamba and Mikeno under 
Page  7
component 2 and in local consultations and socio-economic surveys under component 3 
through partnerships with ICCN.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/14/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/11/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/11/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Page  8
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
09/08/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
09/08/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
09/08/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
09/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
09/19/2008 
Comments:   
