Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3164
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P101745 
Project Name:  CONGO DRC - Pro-Routes Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alain L. Labeau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  72.62
72.62 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project’s development objective is to re-establish lasting access between 
provincial capitals and districts and territories in three provinces in a way that is 
sustainable for people and the natural environment in the area of influence of the 
operation.  
 
The specific objectives are to: (i) re-open about 1,800km of the high priority road 
network and maintain them thereafter; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the ministry and 
agencies involved in the road sector including in strategy and policy formulation; and (iii) 
help the country combine post-conflict infrastructure recovery with the protection of 
environment and indigenous communities such as the pygmies.   
 
3. Project Description 
Pro-routes project comprises of four components:  
 
Component 1 will help reestablish land connection between the provinces of Sud-Kivu 
and Katanga, and within the Province Orientale. This component will focus on 1,800 km 
of high priority national roads serving highly populated regions, namely Kisangani–Buta-
Page  2
Bondo-Bunduki (RN6) which is 620 km long, within the ProvinceOrientale and 
connecting to Province de l’Equateur, and Uvira – Kasomeno, whichis 1180 km long and 
crosses the provinces of Sud Kivu and Katanga..  
 
Component 2 includes all activities related to capacity building, institutional 
strengthening, and project implementation.  This component covers the updating of the 
road sector strategy, the provision of technical assistance to enhance capacity of the CI, 
the OdR and the Road Fund, the fees and operating costs of the CI and the support 
program to develop the construction industry in the road sector.  
 
Component 3 covers environmental and social protection activities.  This component 
will support public institutions such as ICCN (Congolese Institute of Nature 
Conservation) and the MECNT in protecting natural habitats, biodiversity and forests and 
enforcing the pertaining laws.  MECNT and ICCN with support of the international NGO 
will carry out two main programs that correspond to their regular mandates:  
 
a
forest protection program and a commercial poaching control program  – MECNT  
 
b
protected areas program – ICCN  
 
In implementing these programs, the component will support partnerships with national 
and international NGOs to assist with a package of support including technical assistance, 
third-party monitoring, piloting participatory approaches with local communities, and 
public information and awareness raising.  In particular, an experienced and specialized 
international NGO will be recruited to provide MECNT, ICCN and other stakeholders 
with:  
 
-
technical assistance, training and equipment for field offices of MECNT and 
ICCN to help them protect forests, biodiversity and natural habitats and enforce 
pertaining laws;  
 
-
third-party monitoring in support of law enforcement, especially with regard to 
illegal logging, commercial poaching, encroachment on protected areas and public 
information on findings of mission controls and on penalties;  
 
-
partnerships with local NGOs and associations to lead information campaigns and 
local consultations, develop participatory land use planning, and pilot alternative income-
generating activities; a participatory community based natural resources management 
subcomponent will bring all stakeholders together and reach agreements on land use 
zoning, management and control mechanisms of natural resources in 5 pilot areas 
containing sensitive ecologically resources and carrying out pilots to intensify agriculture 
and, to limit the usual shifting cultivation practices with the objective to reduce impacts 
on forests;  
 
-
information, outreach, and awareness raising with concerned stakeholders 
including local communities and authorities, professional associations, and civil society 
organizations  
 
Component 4 covers monitoring and evaluation including the development of a road 
data collection system and the environmental and social program.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The road segment Kisangani
–Buta-Bunduki (RN6) is located in the province Orientale 
and is 620 km long. This zone is mostly a rainforest area. This road segment is located in 
an ecologically very sensitive area and passes through or is located in the zone of 
influence of the rainforest belt of DRC. Over large stretches the forest is still in a decent 
state and ecological degradation is still minimal.  It still contains a vast area still free of 
human activities and low population density. The Rubi-Tele Hunting Reserve (between 
Banalia and Buta in province Orientale) is the only protected area of great importance to 
biodiversity directly traversed by the road. It is currently being invaded by diamond-
diggers and poachers. The Bili Uere Reserve is located in the influence zone of the road, 
180 miles northeast of Buta. The rehabilitation of the road will considerably increase the 
pressure on these areas, which are badly, if not at all, managed from ill-equipped outposts 
of ICCN (Congolese Institute of Nature Conservation). In Rubi-Tele, hunting takes place 
in the heart of the reserve, to the detriment of the most sensitive species such as elephant, 
okapi, chimpanzees and other primates.  
 
The road segment Uvira - Kasomeno crosses the Provinces Sud-Kivu, Maniema, and 
Katanga, over a length of 1180 km. This zone is mostly a savanna area and cuts across a 
number of protected areas, namely the Mount Katobo Reserve (the road passes some 
kilometers to the west of the reserve) and the proposed Mount Itombwe Reserves (the 
road passes through this reserve) in Sud-Kivu, South and North Luama Hunting Reserves 
in the provinces of Maniema and Katanga are located in the zone of influence of the road, 
and the Kundelungu National Park (road passes 7 km of park boundary) and Moliro 
Hunting Reserve (in the process of creation; road passes through this reserve) in the 
province of Katanga. The total area of these is almost 3 million ha. The management 
capacity for these protected areas is particularly weak. Hunting for bushmeat is intense. 
Hunting and fishing are practiced everywhere without rules, without mercy and without a 
thought to the species’reproductive capacity.  In the savanna areas, wildlife has all but 
disappeared. Available knowledge about flora and fauna and the conservation status in 
these protected areas is poor to non-existent within the protected areas, non-existent 
outside them. A large part of this road segment is located in the Albertine Rift Valley, 
which is known for its very high biodiversity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTEG) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The reopening Kisangani-Buta-Bunduki segment will open greater economic 
opportunities and attract all kinds of individuals striving for quick and substantial profits 
as well as economically disadvantaged people in need of better ways to sustain a living.  
The number of legal and illegal logging activities, charcoal production and poaching, 
encroachment on protected areas by agriculturalists, miners (mostly gold and diamonds) 
and others will increase, endangering the protected areas and animal species which have 
been protected because of inaccessibility. The existing protected areas, such as the Rubi 
Tele Hunting Reserve in the province Orientale, will be crossed by the road, while the 
Bili Uere Reserve remains in the area of influence.  The reopening of the road could lead 
to the development of agricultural, livestock and mining (diamonds, gold) activities on 
the one hand, with poaching, legal and illegal logging on the other hand.  
 
The reopening of the Uvira
–Kasomeno road will increase access to a number of 
protected areas crossed by the road or located in the periphery of the road. This improved 
access will expose the protected areas to increased poaching pressure and charcoal 
producers. This improved access will also facilitate the influx of new-comers such as 
miners and agriculturalists.  
 
The environmental and nature conservation services are not represented in the field. The 
laws and regulations that apply to natural resource management in DRC (agriculture, 
forestry, hunting and fishing) are not adequately enforced. Commercial forestry, as 
practiced along the road in the province Orientale, destroys the protected species with 
impunity and gives little or nothing in return to local communities or local authorities 
(equipment, employment or tax revenues).  
 
If the road rehabilitation program financed under the Pro Routes project is not supported 
by adequate, well monitored and enforced mitigation measures, the expected positive 
impacts of the road will more likely be offset by the negative impacts described above. 
Page  5
The impacts on the rainforests, on biodiversity and on protected areas would be 
irreversible.  
 
There is a possibility that the indigenous people (Pygmies) along the axis Uvira - 
Kalemie could be displaced with other negative consequences such as loss of their 
traditional territories and resources.  If unmitigated, this could potentially lead to further 
impoverishment and incremental loss of their cultural identity and ways.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential long term indirect and cumulative impacts of road reopening would be the slow 
disappearance of the rainforests in the area of influence of the Kisangani-Buta-Bunduki 
segment, decimation of biodiversity through commercial poaching and irreversible 
impacts on the protected areas in the vicinity of two road segments (Kisangani-Buta-
Bunduki and Uvira-Kasomeno) through commercial poaching and encroachment by 
artisanal miners and agriculturalists.  
 
Other significant negative impacts include (i) increased rate of accidents due to 
increased motorized traffic; and (ii) increased respiratory health hazard for the population 
living along the roads due to dust in the air generated by fast moving vehicles during the 
dry season.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only project alternative available, except for minor modifications in the alignment of 
the roads, would be not to reopen the roads. This alternative has been rejected because 
these roads are the only land communication that can lift highly populated areas out of 
isolation and provide them with opportunities for improved living condition.  It is 
expected that if the environmental and social program component is adequately 
implemented, the impacts of the project will be approximately neutral from an 
environmental point of view. It is also expected that strengthening of law enforcement 
would have positive impacts on protected areas, biodiversity and forests   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Measures to address safeguard policy issues  
 
The loss of rainforests areas, biodiversity and protected areas would be irreversible.  To 
avoid such consequences to take place, an environmental and social component has been 
developed as part of project .  The borrower prepared an initial ESMF (Environmental 
and Social Management Framework), which was approved and disclosed 120 days before 
the planned Board date on September 21, 2007. For each road segment a separate 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared and disclosed at 
least 3 months before any physical works start in order to address specific environmental 
and social issues related to the road segment. At present an ESIA for the Kisangani
–
Bunduki segment has been prepared andwill be disclosed before negotiations.  These 
Page  6
road specific EAs will contain EMPs, which will be included in contracts to ensure 
adequate implementation.  
 
In order to mitigate the non-construction related environmental impacts and to 
strengthen the enforcement of the pertaining laws, an environmental and social 
component has been developed for the project. The main subcomponents of the 
environmental and social component (component 3) are: i) a comprehensive 
environmental capacity building subcomponent for the responsible institutions (ICCN, 
MECNEF, OdR); ii) a participatory natural resources management which will bring all 
stakeholders together and reach agreements on land use zoning, management and control 
mechanisms of natural resources in 5 pilot areas containing sensitive ecologically 
resources and carrying out pilots to intensify agriculture and, to limit the usual shifting 
cultivation practices; and iii) a rigorous environmental monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
plan.  The environmental M&E subcomponent will be undertaken by the responsible 
institutions in close collaboration with an independent international NGO (third party), 
which will publish independent monitoring reports.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed on September 21, 
2007 for the project.  An RPF was prepared as technical studies have not yet been 
completed, accessibility of the roads is very difficult and security was not consistently 
assured.  However, provisions have been made to complete a socio-economic study with 
a
detailed census for each axis.  These studies will be used for the preparation of 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) if and where needed. The two RAPs will be approved, 
disclosed and implemented at least 3 months before the launching of any 
construction/rehabilitation works  
 
For the axis Uvira-Kasomeno, preliminary studies indicate that there are several 
Pygmies camps established between Uvira and Kalemie and up to Moba.  At this stage of 
preparation, detailed information cannot be obtained to prepare an Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan (IPDP).  Instead, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) 
was prepared, approved and disclosed on September 21, 2007. During the first year of 
project implementation, when accessibility and security are restored to an acceptable 
level, a detailed Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) will be prepared and 
disclosed at least 3 months before the start of any physical works.  
 
Along the axis Kisangani-Buta-Bunduki and in its area of influence, it has been 
determined with the participation of several stakeholders, including NGOs, that there are 
no Pygmies camps. This finding is consigned in a project document titled “Etude 
d’Impact Socio-Environnemental du Projet Pro-Routes – Cadre stratÃƒÂ©gique 
(ESMF), Juillet 2007.  Hence no mitigation measures for indigenous people are needed 
for this axis. During project implementation, should we discover that pygmy groups are 
present in the area of influence of this road segment, an Indigenous Peoples Development 
Plan (IPDP) will be prepared, including comprehensive consultation, and disclosed.  
 
Page  7
If ESIAs (Environmental and Social Impact Assessments) recommend the development 
of new protected areas, or limit access to existing protected areas as environmental 
mitigation measures, a Process Framework (PF) will be developed for those protected 
areas.  
 
The ESMF, RPF and the IPPF were disclosed on September 21, 2007 in Kinshasa, Buta, 
Bukavu, Pweto, Kalemie, and Lubumbashi and in the World Bank Infoshop.  
 
Assessment of borrower capacity  
 
Since borrower capacity to adequately implement the safeguard measures is still weak 
the environmental component will comprehensively support capacity building for the 
public institutions such as ICCN and the MECNEF in order to protect natural habitats, 
biodiversity and forests and enforcing the pertaining laws. It will also foster partnerships 
with national and international NGOs to assist with a package of support.  An 
independent internationally recognized NGO in close collaboration with concerned 
Ministries and local NGOs will have the overall responsibility for the implementation of 
the EMPs, RAPs, IPDPs and Component 3.  The environmental monitoring and 
evaluation will be undertaken by the responsible institutions (MECNEF, ICCN, and CI) 
in collaboration with the specialized NGO.  This NGO will publish independent 
monitoring reports. This NGO will be recruited three months after project effectiveness.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation will also be executed by the Cellule Infrastructure (CI) in 
charge of overall project implementation. Within the CI, an Environmental/ Social 
Specialist will be recruited to lead the implementation and the monitoring of the EMPs, 
RAPs, IPDPs.  He/she will be trained in the areas of participatory development and social 
assessment and environmental assessment. During the project life span, he/she will be 
assisted by an internationally recruited environmental / social expert who will also 
provide training as needed to the staff of the Ministries and local NGOs involved in the 
implementation of the mitigation measures. These environmental / social specialists will 
be recruited before the start of any physical works.  A budget has been allocated for 
safeguard training.  
 
Additionally, an experienced independent international NGO will assist the World Bank 
in supervising the execution of the Environmental and Social Program (Component 3, 
EMPs, RAPs and IPDPs). This international independent NGO will act as an independent 
environmental auditor. The reports of this independent NGO will be public documents. 
The biodiversity specialist retained for project preparation and the international 
independent NGO for project implementation will constitute the Environmental and 
Social Advisory Panel (ESAP) required for environmentally sensitive category A 
projects, as described in the World Bank Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01).  The Panel will carry out bi-annual surveys and convene specifics experts 
when and as required.   
 
Page  8
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include, the concerned communities, including the Pygmies, specialized 
NGOs, the district authorities, the Ministry of Infrastructure, Public Works and 
Reconstruction (MIPWR), the Cellule Infrastructures (CI), the Office des Routes (OdR), 
MECNT (Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism), ICCN 
(Congolese Institute of Nature Conservation), and the Provincial Authorities. The CI, 
acting as the project implementation unit, will be responsible for managing the 
interactions with the OdR, MECNEF, ICCN and NGO partners.  
 
Consultation with the communities and key stakeholders such as the local authorities 
and the NGOs is considered as a process that has already started during project 
preparation and will continue throughout implementation. Extensive public consultation 
has taken place during the preparation of the ESMF (Environmental and Social 
Management Framework) and the ESIA (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment) 
for the Kisangani-Buta-Bunduki segment.  Consultation will also play an important role 
in the process of monitoring of project impact. Priority will be given to focus groups, 
village meetings and periodic, but regular data collection through open-ended 
questionnaires.  Information sharing workshops will be organized several times during 
the life span of the project, to collect view points and share information.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/20/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/21/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
12/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
12/19/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
12/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
12/19/2007 
Comments:   
