Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3489
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Republic of 
Project ID:  P106851 
Project Name:  CONGO HEALTH SECTOR SERVICES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Khama Odera Rogo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Child health 
(S);Population and reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to support the strengthening of the health 
system in order to effectively combat the major communicable diseases and improve 
access to quality services for women, children and other vulnerable groups.  
 
Key indicators: The principal outputs expected are: a) Enhanced capacity of the 
Ministry of Health, Social Services and Family Welfare(MSASF)for policy development 
and stewardship; b) Strengthened capacity for planning, health financing, procurement 
and effective monitoring and evaluation leading to rational and equitable use of 
resources, reliable pharmaceutical and supplies logistics and effective monitoring and 
evaluation; c) Strengthened Departmental Health Management systems for planning, 
budgeting and delivery of  quality health services; d) Improved management of human 
resources to address training, recruitment, motivation and retention of skilled personnel, 
working closely with other ministries; e) Improved access to quality health care and a 
package of essential services for the poor and vulnerable populations; and f) Active 
community participation in prevention and the delivery of essential health interventions.  
 
It is expected that improvement on the Project Outcome Indicators will contribute to 
reduced child mortality (Millenium Development Goals (MDG4), reduced maternal 
Page  2
mortality (MDG5) and expanded malaria control (MDG6).  Progress on these indicators 
will reflect improved provision of curative, preventive and promotive services and tools 
(e.g. ITNs), community participation and effective communication for behavior change.  
Lack of progress will trigger an assessment of which of the underlying system elements 
(leadership, human resources, supply chain management, community participation, etc.) 
is or are lagging to permit strategic re-direction of activities as needed.  
 
Higher level objectives to which the project contributes:  
 
Accelerating progress towards the MDGs: At the current pace of change and social 
development, Congo is unlikely to meet the health-related MDGs or any other 
international targets relating to health. The project therefore deliberately focuses on 
strengthening delivery of maternal and child services and combating malnutrition and 
communicable diseases, especially Malaria. In addition, the project will build on the 
achievements of the HIV/AIDS program to reinforce and integrate health sector, 
recognizing that multi-sectoral actions are needed to accelerate progress towards 
attainment of MDGs 1 (eradicate extreme poverty and hunger), 4 (reduce child 
mortality), 5 (improve maternal health) and 6 (combat HIV/AIDS malaria and other 
diseases).  
 
Good governance and equity: Stronger health systems should result in better 
stewardship and improved governance of the sector and beyond. The health sector SWAp 
is the first attempt at streamlining sector governance and accountability in Congo and 
should provide a template for the country, working closely with the Bank supported 
Governance Project. The focus on PHC and the design of the Package of Essential 
Services (PES) as both a rationing and targeting strategy for health interventions provides 
an opportunity for the efficient and equitable utilization of health resources  
 
Poverty alleviation: Ill health and poverty are closely intertwined. As observed in the 
Interim I-PRSP, poverty creates ill-health because it forces people to live in environments 
that make them sick, without decent shelter, clean water or adequate sanitation. Ill health 
creates poverty by reducing peopleís capacity to createwealth, while spending meager 
earnings on treatment and care. Strengthening PHC and ensuring access to the PES to 
every Congolese is at the core of the PNDS and therefore of the SWAp. The PES 
deliberately targets the most important health problems in Congo that disproportionately 
afflict the poor and should reduce the disease burden.  
 
Relevance to the Interim Strategy Note and Interim -PRSP objectives: The Interim 
Strategy Note (ISN, 2007) has two major themes ñ improving governance and 
strengthening access to service delivery for the poor. Together with the I-PRSP, the ISN 
identified the need for increased attention to and investment in the health sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has four components:  
 
Page  3
Component 1: Strengthening leadership capacities in managing a functioning and 
decentralized health system.  
 
Component 2: Institution of an efficient and effective system for managing health sector 
human resources (HRH).  
 
Component 3: Rehabilitation and equipment of health facilities.  
 
Component 4: Promote equitable access to quality health services for all.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The risk to communities for rehabilitation and of medical supplies is Moderate. A 
comprehensive environmental and social assessment has been completed. Medical Waste 
Management plan under HIV/AIDS project has been updated and will be ready with clear 
indicators before project launch.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The projects comprise activities (building, rehabilitation and utilization of health 
facilities) which may have adverse impacts on the environment if there are not well 
managed. The negative impact on the environment will result mostly from (i) 
Construction and renovation of health facilities and (ii) bad management of medical 
wastes at the level of health care infrastructures. In addition to this, potential quarry 
exploitation for building materials may cause negative impacts on the environment.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Construction and renovation of health infrastructures can generate biophysical 
environmental impacts such as erosion, soil and flora degradation and pollution by solid 
and liquid wastes. These negative impacts occur mainly during the setting of these 
infrastructures, the implantation in building sites and exploitation of quarries for building 
materials. Construction and renovation of medical infrastructures might have negative 
effects on employment of local manpower, purchase and occupation of private lands. The 
risks for populations health arise from various pollutions and harm linked with works 
(dust, noise, traffic accidents, etc.)  
 
Utilization of health facilities can generate different sorts of medical waste and present 
tremendous environmental problems.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the HIV/AIDS & 
Health Project and the National Health Plan will guide environmental and social 
management of project activities and compliance with national legislation and the World 
Bank Safeguard Policies.The ESMF includes (i) an analysis of national institutional and 
legal framework within which the project will be implemented; and (ii) an analysis of the 
pertinence of all World Bank Safeguard Policies for the Project, with special focus on 
two policies: OP4.01 - Environmental assessment and OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. 
The analysis of institutional and legal framework indicates that environmental procedures 
exclude selection process for small size investments.  
 
An essential component of the ESMF is the Screening Process of sub-projects which 
underlines the environmental norms and standards that will be applied in the sub-projects 
and the environmental evaluation procedures that may be needed, with special emphasis 
given to measures addressing the requirements of the Safeguard Policies. The ESMF will 
allow the project implementers and to local communities, to monitor in a comprehensive 
and progressive manner, the environmental and social impacts, based on monitoring 
check-list, and to develop mitigation or compensation measures, on the basis of clear, 
precise and operational indicators.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is presented in tabular form 
outlining the main categories of sub-projects, their potential impacts and proposed 
mitigation measures. It includes institutional, monitoring, and budgetary responsibility. 
The final table also includes the cost of the institutional, technical, training, information 
and monitoring measures.  
 
The costs of implementing the ESMP of the Project are estimated as follows:  
 
Measures, Actions, Responsable 
Co√ªts (FCFA),  Technical measures,Development 
ofmaintenance book 5 000 000 CFA  
Page  5
Monitoring and Evaluation of the ESMF  
 
(Permanent monitoring, middle and final monitoring) 
Supervision:  
 
PFE/DGH  
 
DGE  
 
SEP/CNLS  
 
DGS  
 
10
000 000  
 
Suivi :  
 
CHG, DRC, DRE  
 
Municipal Services  
 
COSA  
 
50
000 000 CFA  
 
Evaluation :  
 
Consultants 
20 000 000  
 
Provision for conduction of 20 EIA  DGH and DGE 50 000 000 CFA  
 
Training of actors involved in PVLSS and PSDSS  Training in environmental and social 
management project; Norms of hygiene and security; medical waste management.  
 
PFE/DGH 
25 000 000  
 
Population awareness 
IEC and awareness on environmental issues during health 
projects activities  
PFE/DGH  
 
CHG 40 000 000  
 
TOTAL 
 
200 000 000 fcfa  
 
To ensure effective application of the ESMF, it is recommended that chapters on 
screening, capacity building, environmental and social action plan and budget be 
included in the PVLSS and PSDSS Implementation Manuals.  
 
Situation analysis  
 
The biomedical waste management in the health facilities shows some deficiencies, 
despite the efforts noticed (incinerators). The major constraints are  (i) the  lack of plans 
and/or internal management procedures (technical guidelines); (ii) the inadequacy of 
collection, storage and sorting (mixing with the household waste) of biomedical waste ; 
and (iii) the lack of individual protection equipments and the inadequacy of skills and 
behaviours in the biomedical waste management (nursing and support staff pay little 
attention to waste handling; which often leads to accidents).  
 
The biomedical waste management Plan  
 
Objective 1: To reinforce institutional and legal framework  
 
Objective 2: To inform and increase awareness of the populations  
 
Objective 3: To train health staff and to build their capacities  
 
Objective 4: To supply private initiatives and in biomedical waste management  
 
Objective 5: To improve waste management in the health facilities  
 
Objective 6: To support the implementation of the biomedical waste management Plan   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Pygmies are identified as part of the vulnerable groups to be targeted by the project. 
This is in line with the Government of Congo policy to integrate the Pygmies in the 
Congolese society. A draft law for Pygmy protection and integration is under discussion 
in Parliament. The Project Development Objectives specifically targets vulnerable groups 
and takes this to the next steps in Sub- Component 4.4 whose objective is to ensure 
equitable access to services to vulnerable and undeserved groups, especially the Pygmies, 
women and children. As part of the project,  a needs  assessment study is planned during 
implementation to identify barriers to service delivery, participation and equity for these 
groups, including the Pygmies. The findings will strengthen delivery of effective 
interventions for the Pygmies. Sub-Component 4.3 aims to build local ownership and 
community participation in delivery of services. The needs assessment study, with the 
support of a local NGO, will actively seek input from the pygmies and ensure that they 
are able to participate and articulate their special needs. The rehabilitation of health 
facilities, establishment of outreach services and strengthening of health education and 
behavior change communication will be based on the needs identified by the pygmies in 
the needs assessment study. This study, in the first year of implementation will also 
identify specific indicators in a results framework that will be monitored on a continuous 
basis to inform on progress among the Pygmies and other vulnerable groups.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/12/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/11/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/11/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project does not triggers Pest Management and cultural Property issues. A draft 
Environmental and social Management Plan has been completed and submitted to 
ASPEN for approval.  The document will be disclosed in the Country and at Infoshop 
pending ASPEN review and approval of the Social Assessment Part of the report.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Khama Odera Rogo 
04/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
02/21/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
03/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
04/04/2008 
Comments:   
