Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC3574
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P100620 
Project Name:  Forest and Environment Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Giuseppe Topa 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P111621 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Biodiversity 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Indigenous peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
64.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.00
17.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project’s Development Objective will be to increase the capacity of the Ministry of 
Forests and Nature Conservation and the collaboration among government institutions, 
civil society and other stakeholders to manage forests sustainably and equitably for 
multiple uses in selected pilot areas of DRC.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project supports a broader multi-donor government-led national forest and nature 
conservation program called PNFOCO. The project will help establish essential 
capabilities to secure law enforcement in the forest sector and test community-based 
approaches to manage forests holistically to the benefit of forest and indigenous 
populations, the local and national economy, and the global environment. Capacity 
building will be strengthened at the head offices of the Ministry of Environment, Nature 
Conservation and Tourism (MECNT) and the Congolese Institute for Nature 
Conservation (ICCN) in Kinshasa and field operations and management approaches will 
be carried out and tested in 3 pilot Provinces (Bandundu, Equateur, and Orientale), 11 
Page  2
Districts, and 51 Sub-Districts (Territoires). The rehabilitation of the Maiko Park part of 
which extends from the Orientale province to Maniema and North Kivu, will also be 
supported by the project.  
 
The scope and size of the project have been deliberately kept below national coverage 
and limited to activities that are absolutely essential to law enforcement and community 
support. The vastness of the country and the immense sector’s needs exceed both the 
reach of IDA and GEF resources, and the current absorptive capacity of national 
institutions. The program may be scaled up once a stronger institutional capacity is 
established and proposed approaches have yielded positive results.  
 
The Project’s provinces, districts and sub-districts feature the highest concentration of 
forests in the country as well as the widest possible range of issues and challenges related 
to the forest degradation and deforestation, the management of production and 
conservation forests, the participation of rural and indigenous communities in resource 
management decisions and benefit sharing. These areas harbor the vast majority of 
logging contracts currently being reviewed and offer opportunities to address and help 
conflicts that may arise between the private companies, the State and local Communities 
following the review. Finally these areas host a wide range of forest and wildlife 
management projects, community participation efforts, and participatory zoning 
initiatives which this project can help improve and consolidate in view of possible scale 
up to the national level; and afford minimum security conditions to allow operations. The 
present project does not focus on the dry land and mountain forests of the North East, or 
the forests of Southern Congo. The different and still very important challenges these 
forests present would be addressed by other PNFOCO Donors and, possibly, by the Bank 
in the future  
 
The project is divided into three components:  
 
Component 1:  Institutional strengthening of MECNT, (US$ 37.2 million)  
 
Component 2:  Community participation in forest management, (US$20.8 million)  
 
Component 3:  Management of protected areas, (US$4.1 million)  
 
(the cost of above components does not include US$ 7.9 million allocated for 
contingencies and social and environmental safeguard measures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a pilot project. The geographic coverage of the project includes the head offices of 
the Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism(MECNT) and the 
Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation (ICCN) in Kinshasa, selected districts and 
sub-districts the three Provinces of Bandundu, Equateur, and Orientale and the Maiko 
national park part of which extends from the Orientale province to Maniema and North 
Kivu.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Page  3
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Rainforests with a high biodiversity, highlands and protected areas Forests are the natural 
environment in which the proposed project will be carried out, with a variety of 
ecosystems.  Many of these areas are subject to significant human pressure, such as slash-
and-burn agriculture, poaching, legal and illegal logging, charcoal production and 
mining, with little enforcement of national laws and regulations and little respect from the 
public for these provisions. Forests provide resources that are critical to the livelihood of 
local and indigenous populations. Given the project’s potential to impact sensitive natural 
and social environments, a thorough Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) was 
conducted as project design was being developed. The SEA covers the entire PNFOCO 
and its recommendations apply to the activities covered under this project. The SEA has 
significantly influenced project design which now incorporates many of the features 
recommended by the extensive safeguard work and consultations that were conducted.  
 
From a social perspective, the Project is not expected to have any negative impact on the 
communities. To the contrary, it will initiate important actions that have been missing up 
to now, and which will help to protect the livelihood of communities living in and around 
forests, including the Pygmies. These measures, defined on the basis of a wide 
consultation with various stakeholders, include adequate zoning, compliance with forest 
and environmental laws, development of forestry-based community income generating 
activities as well as other development activities.  
 
From an environmental perspective, the project will contribute to better protect the 
country’s resources and improve the ability of the government to appropriately manage 
natural forests, protect critical natural habitats and preserve biodiversity. In the most 
unlikely event that involuntary displacement should take place, appropriate mitigation 
measures have been identified and adequate precautions have been taken to ensure their 
Page  4
implementation as needed, including references to the mitigation plan in the Financing 
Agreement of the project, and suspension of disbursement in case of non-compliance.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The SEA analysis revealed that several negative indirect and long term impacts are likely 
to occur in the non project scenario, (i.e. if the project were not implemented). They 
include the following among others:  
 
The protected area network may exclude biodiversity important habitats and species 
which may be lost, in the absence of scientific and regulatory work leading to adjustment 
and expansion of protected area network  
 
•
Local populations would be unable to draw adequate benefits from forest 
landsand would lack information and capacity to defend they legal rights vis-Ã  vis 
stronger or better organized forest users such as industrial forest and mining companies  
 
•
Threats to biodiversity would increase due to increasingly easier access to 
currently remote forest zones and population pressure  
 
•
Forest would continue to be subject to illegal, illegitimate and unregulated 
logging and commercial trade of protected animal species depriving the state and local 
communities from income and degrading the forest  
 
•
Conflicts among local populations, forest industry, mining companies and 
conservation constituencies claiming use rights to the same forest land would increase  
 
The SEA helped identify these potential negative impacts and propose countering 
measures that have been integrated into the project.  
 
Negative impacts may nevertheless materialize also in the with-project scenario. These 
may be caused by inadequate project execution, unexpected developments, and changes 
in sector policies. While the project is designed in ways that explicitly avoid involuntary 
resettlement, instances of physical or economic displacement cannot be categorically 
excluded. The Government may in fact propose restricting access or use of legally 
protected areas if species or biomes of exceptional value were found and some level of 
displacement proved essential to secure protection.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As mentioned earlier the SEA considered a no-project alternative. Another alternative 
considered and then discarded was that the project would support the entire range of 
functions under responsibility of the Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and 
Tourism (MECNT).  In addition to forests, wildlife, and the green environment, the 
MECNT is responsible for other important areas such as water, the urban and brown 
environment and tourism, and wished that all its areas of responsibility be covered under 
Page  5
the project. While a support program that goes beyond forestry and nature conservation 
would have suited the institutional setup of the Ministry, it was felt that a more modest 
approach was needed to make sure that sufficient attention could be paid to social and 
environmental impacts in the green environment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has undertaken a comprehensive Social and Environmental Assessment 
and adopted a set of safeguards related documents including and ESMF, an RPF, a PF, an 
IPPF and CRMF. In addition, The Government is in the process of completing a 
comprehensive body of forest, environment, and nature protection legislation. Production 
of regulation is taking place at an accelerated pace. Capacity to enforce and monitor these 
new instruments is however extremely weak.  Specific design features have been 
introduced to address this weakness at the central and field level. These include: (a) 
providing environmental TA to a relatively small number of motivated staff with 
managerial skills and adequate authority level; (b) introducing environmental measures 
and funding their implementation into delegated management contracts entrusted to 
consortia of NGOs working under the leadership of reputable international NGOs; and (c) 
providing training on environmental legislation as well as forests and conservation 
safeguards to MECNT and ICCN staff.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
This pilot project covers 51 sub-districts located in 11 districts in the provinces of 
Equateur, Orientale and Bandundu. The rural population of the sub districts totals about 8 
million, of whom 2.8 million live within the landscapes where th
e
project’s local 
development activities will concentrate. The main ethnic group is the Bantou. The 
Pygmies represent a small percentage of the population but are an important target group 
for this project. Their number is not exactly known: a census of the Pygmy populations 
living in the project area will be conducted as part of the project. Key sources of living 
are agriculture, fishing, hunting, gathering, and employment in the forest industry. The 
project also includes activities for the rehabilitation of the Maiko national park, part of 
which extends from the Orientale province to Maniema and North Kivu. Population 
density in this area is very low.  
 
In compliance with OP 4.01, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12a broad and transparent process of 
public information and consultation was followed during the project preparation phase. 
Extensive consultation was conducted in languages spoken by the various stakeholders 
and groups throughout the country (detailed list of dates, sites and number of participants 
contained in PAD).  
 
Started in Kinshasa on November 22, the disclosure of the social environmental 
safeguard documentation extended to 17 locations throughout DRC with summaries of 
the documentation in Lingala, Swahili, Tshiluba and Kikongo, as well as in French and 
English presented and distributed to local and indigenous populations. National and local 
Page  6
radio stations were also being used for enhanced outreach (detailed information on 
disclosure is available in an Annex to the PAD).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/20/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/03/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
na   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Page  7
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Topa 
01/28/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
01/28/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
01/28/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
01/28/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
