Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1855 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P090872 
Project Name: Additional Financing for Private Sector Development and 
Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader: Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of this Additional Financing coincides with the objectives of the Private 
Sector Development and Competitiveness Project. The additional financing therefore aims at 
increasing the competitiveness of the economy and thereby contributes to economic growth 
through improving the investment climate and supporting public enterprise reforms in DRC.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This Additional Financing scales up selected components and sub-components of the existing 
Private Sector Development and Competitiveness Project, as detailed below.  
 
Component A: Improving the Investment Climate (US$ 42.2 million)  
 
Subcomponent “Strengthening the judiciary system and improving the legal and fiscal 
framework” (US$10.3 million). The project activities to be financed under this sub-component 
are: (a) the provision of technical advisory and training to the relevant ministries and authorities 
to support the adoption of the OHADA legal framework; (b) the provision of technical advisory, 
small refurbishment works and goods for the establishment of new commercial courts and the 
Page  2
modernization of the credit and commerce registries in Matadi, Goma, Bukavu, Mbuji Mayi and 
Kisangani; (c); technical assistance to support the promotion of arbitrage; (d) support to the 
Journal Officiel to pursue the on-line posting of laws and regulations; (e) technical assistance to 
simplify business registration and licensing; (f) technical advisory to help simplify the corporate 
tax regime; (g) technical advisory to simplify import and export procedures; (h) technical 
advisory to review land and labor laws; (i) technical advisory to strengthen the auditing and 
accounting framework; (j) technical advisory to analyze value chains in sectors with growth 
potential.  
 
Subcomponent “Facilitating financing intermediation” (US$28.4 million). The project activities 
to be financed under this subcomponent include: (a) contribution to the PASMIF Microfinance 
Fund to finance technical advisory, small works, goods and lines of credit to selected 
Microfinance Institutions on a competitive basis; (b) technical advisory and training to selected 
Congolese commercial banks; (c) technical advisory and goods to the Banque Centrale du Congo 
to help strengthen its Financial Intermediary Supervision Department (DSIF), including its 
microfinance division; modernize the payment system; prepare new laws and regulations in the 
financial sector; (d) technical advisory, goods, small refurbishment works and operating 
expenses to help set up a credit bureau.  
 
Subcomponent “Facilitating the dialogue between the private and public sector” (US$ 3.5 
million). The project activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (a) technical 
advisory and goods to help strengthen the capacity of business associations and of their 
respective ministries; (b) technical advisory, goods and small refurbishment works to support 
investment promotion activities.  
 
Component B: Reforming public enterprises (US$ 15 million)  
 
Subcomponent “Support to divestiture from public enterprises” (US$ 15 million).The project 
will finance management contracts within the three transport state owned enterprises (RVA, 
SNCC and ONATRA).  
 
In addition, the project will finance the implementation of this additional financing through 
COPIREP (the implementing agency of the Private Sector Development and Competitiveness 
project) [US$0.8 million], the re-imbursement of the Project Preparation Facility [US$ 1 
million]. The unallocated budget is US$ 1 million.  
 
The Additional Financing does not trigger safeguard policies and falls under a Category “C” 
project.  
 
Around 80% of the Additional Financing is for Technical Assistance. The rest is for equipment 
(in particular the new payment system for the Central Bank), for refurbishment*  of commercial 
courts (around US$ 2 million) and for lines of credit to microfinance institutions (around US$ 4 
million, an OP 8.30 review is underway).  
 
*
Refurbishment refers to activities such as painting, installing air conditioner, fixing roofs, etc. 
No civil works will be undertaken.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kinshasa and other main urban centers (including Matadi, Goma, Bukavu, Lubumbashi, 
Kisangani, Mbuji Mayi).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/20/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
01/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/11/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
