Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC2890
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P090872 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Private Sector Development and 
Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of this Additional Financing coincides with the objectives of the 
Private Sector Development and Competitiveness Project. The additional financing 
therefore aims at increasing the competitiveness of the economy and thereby contributes 
to economic growth through improving the investment climate and supporting public 
enterprise reforms in DRC.   
 
3. Project Description 
This Additional Financing scales up selected components and sub-components of the 
existing Private Sector Development and Competitiveness Project, as detailed below.  
 
-
Component A: Improving the Investment Climate (US$35.2 million)  
 
Subcomponent “Strengthening the judiciary system and improving the legal and fiscal 
framework” (US$8.5 million). The project activities to be financed under this sub-
component are: (a) the provision of technical advisory and training to the relevant 
ministries and authorities to support the adoption of the OHADA legal framework; (b) 
the provision of technical advisory, small refurbishment works and goods for the 
establishment of new commercial courts and the modernization of the credit and 
commerce registries in Matadi, Goma, Bukavu, Mbuji Mayi and Kisangani; (c); technical 
Page  2
assistance to support the promotion of arbitrage; (d) support to the Journal Officiel to 
pursue the on-line posting of laws and regulations; (e) technical assistance to simplify 
business registration and licensing; (f) technical advisory to help simplify the corporate 
tax regime; (g) technical advisory to simplify import and export procedures; (h) technical 
advisory to review land and labor laws; (i) technical advisory to strengthen the auditing 
and accounting framework; (j) technical advisory to analyze value chains in sectors with 
growth potential.  
 
Subcompo
nent “Facilitating financing intermediation” (US$23.2 million). Theproject 
activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (a) contribution to the 
PASMIF Microfinance Strengthening program to finance technical advisory, small 
rehabilitation works, goods and lines of credit to selected Microfinance Institutions on a 
competitive basis; (b) technical advisory and goods to the Banque Centrale du Congo to 
help strengthen its Financial Intermediary Supervision Department (DSIF), including its 
microfinance division; modernize the payment system; prepare new laws and regulations 
in the financial sector; (d) technical advisory, goods, small refurbishment works and 
operating expenses to help set up a credit bureau.  
 
Subcomponent “Facilitating the dialogue between the private and public sector” 
(US$3.5 million). The project activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: 
(a) technical advisory and goods to help strengthen the capacity of business associations 
and of their respective ministries; (b) technical advisory, goods and small refurbishment 
works to support investment promotion activities.  
 
-
Component B: Reforming public enterprises (US$22 million)  
 
Subcomponent “Support to divestiture from public enterprises” (US$10 million).The 
project will finance a management contract at SNCC and technical assistance to prepare 
the restructuring strategies of other transport SOEs.  
 
Subcomponent “support to social cost of reforms” (US$12 million). The additional 
financing will provide co-financing for a retrenchment plan at SNCC (the requested 
additional US$9 million will come from the existing Private Sector Development and 
Competitiveness Project).  
 
In addition, the project will finance the implementation of this additional financing 
through COPIREP (the implementing agency of the Private Sector Development and 
Competitiveness project) [US$0.8 million], the re-imbursement of the Project Preparation 
Facility [US$ 1 million]. The unallocated budget is US$ 1 million.  
 
The Additional Financing does not trigger safeguard policies and falls under a Category 
“C” project.  
 
Around 60% of the Additional Financing is for Technical Assistance. The rest is for 
equipment (in particular the new payment system for the Central Bank), for 
refurbishment*  of commercial courts (around US$ 2 million) and for lines of credit to 
microfinance institutions (around US$ 4 million, an OP 8.30 review is underway). In 
Page  3
addition, US$ 11 million are affected to the payment of retrenchment package for SNCC 
employees.  
 
*
Refurbishment refers to activities such as painting, installing air conditioner, fixing 
roofs, etc. No civil works will be undertaken.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kinshasa and other main urban centers (Matadi, Goma, Bukavu, Lubumbashi, Kisangani, 
Mbuji Mayi).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing is only for C environmental category components.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
Page  5
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
02/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
02/29/2008 
Comments:   
