Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3341 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P105729 
Project Name: DRC: Emergency Demobilization & Reintegration - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Alexander A. McPhail 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (95%);Health (5%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Other social protection and risk management (S);HIV/AIDS (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This ISDS is for an Additional Financing operation of US$50 million equivalent that will be 
added to the on-going Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project (the Project) that 
was Effective in November 2004.  The original Project (P078658, H-089) was financed with 
US$100 million equivalent from IDA and US$100 million from the Multi-country 
Demobilization and Reintegration Program  Trust Fund (MDRP).  The MDRP is a regional, 
multi-donor, multi-partner framework that supports national programs, regional activities and 
special projects related to demobilization and reintegration.  It is financed through IDA and a 
multi-donor trust fund.  
 
The new Additional Financing operation is parallel financed by US$22 million equivalent from 
the African development Bank.  The African Development Bank Project “Projet d’Appui a la 
Reinsertion Socio-economique Post-conflit” was approved by its Board of Directors in August 
2007.  
 
Page  2
The general objective of the Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Program (EDRP) is 
to help consolidate peace and promote economic stability and sustainable development in the 
DRC and in the greater Great Lakes region. The specific objectives of the Project are:  
 
(i)to demobilize up to an estimated 150,000 ex-combatants and to help support their return to 
civilian life; and  
 
(ii)to promote  the reallocation of Government expenditure from military to social and 
economic sectors.  
 
The main expected outcomes from the Additional Financing would be:  
 
(i) demobilization and reintegration support for an additional 23,000 combatants over the 
already 102,000 that have been demobilized;  
 
(ii) reinsertion support for an estimated 12,700 armed group members in the country’s troubled 
Great Lakes region;  
 
reintegration support for 40,000 ex-combatants already demobilized and awaiting assistance;  
 
(iii) support for approximately 9,000 children released from armed forces; and  
 
(iv) support for about 10,500 disabled ex-combatants.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
An SDR68.1 million (estimated US$100 million) IDA grant (H-089) in support of the 
Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project was approved by the Board on May 25, 
2004, and became effective on November 9, 2004.  A parallel MDRP Trust Fund grant 
(TF054242) for US$100 million became effective at the same time.  Both grants are expected to 
close on March 31, 2008.  As of October 2007, the Project has disbursed 97 percent on the IDA 
grant and 90 percent on the MDRP Trust Fund grant.  
 
The World Bank is now processing an Additional Financing operation of US$50 million 
equivalent. The African Development Bank has already approved parallel funding in the amount 
of US$22 million equivalent that will have cross-conditions with IDA’s project.  
 
The EDRP consists of: (i) demobilization; (ii) reinsertion support; (iii) and reintegration 
support.  Disarmament occurs outside of the MDRP framework, by UNDP.  
 
Demobilization activities include: (i) the verification of ex-combatant status; (ii) the provision 
of an identity card; (iii) the collection of socio-economic data; (iv) medical screening (including 
HIV/AIDS counseling and voluntary testing); (v) transport; and (vii) pre-discharge orientations 
about civilian life and program benefits.  Women will be housed in separate sections of camps 
and all protection rules followed to ensure safety, and kits have been adapted for their specific 
needs.  Children released from armed groups will be treated in separate centers run by child-
focused implementation partners, receive appropriate specialized care and are assisted with 
family tracing and reunification.  
 
Reinsertion comprises a reinsertion kit containing basic subsistence items for all ex-combatants 
upon completion of demobilization. This will accompanied by a transitional safety allowance 
totaling around $400.  Under the initial Project, these payments are funded through the MDRP 
multi-donor trust fund and not through IDA.  However, these costs are included in the proposed 
Additional Financing operation. Children do not receive cash payments.  
Page  3
Reintegration support has endeavored to provide economic and social reintegration assistance 
to help ex-combatants establish sustainable livelihoods.  Reintegration comprises placing ex-
combatants in on-going activities carried out by selected agencies (e.g., FAO, UN Habitat, 
NGOs) covering agricultural, and non-farm income-generating activities, vocational and 
apprenticeship training, local employment opportunities.  Tools, education and scholarships can 
also be provided.  Children receive education and other appropriate support.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scope and covers every province in the Democratic Republic of Congo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower capacity for environmental and social management capacity is weak.  As this Project is 
rated “C” and is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts, it does not address 
building up the Borrower’s capacity for Safeguard policies. However, the World Bank has an 
extensive portfolio of projects in the country.  In this context, other IDA Projects will seek to 
address this capacity concern through: environmental and social management components; the 
employment of experts on environmental and social development; the strengthening of the social 
and environmental unit within executing agencies, and the forming of partnerships with NGOs 
and civil society organizations to enhance environmental and social management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project is rated "C".  However, a specific EA will be required if civil works are undertaken.  
See comments under "Safeguard Preparation Plan".   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/16/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No civil works are currently planned under the proposed Additional Financing operation.  
However, if during implementation any works are undertaken, then an environmental 
assessment shall be carried out for that activity and prior to the start of construction.  This 
requirement shall be covenanted in the Financing Agreement.  
 
During project supervision, and especially if the Project’s activities are revised, the World 
Bank and Government shall consider the potential environment and social impact of the 
Project’s implementation.  If it is determined that the Environmental Assessment Category 
will change, then appropriate action shall be taken, including the carrying out of an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework report.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander A. McPhail 
12/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
12/20/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
