Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3598 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P106982 
Project Name: DRC-Growth with Governance in the Mineral Sector 
Task Team Leader: Craig B. Andrews 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
49.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed operation has three principal objectives: i) increase minerals production and the 
value added from these operations, ii) strengthen government institutions and governance 
capacity to administer the sector transparently and fairly and, iii) enhance the ability of the 
government to channel the revenues and benefits streams from the sector for sustainable 
economic development. The project will capitalize on the strategic and operational synergies 
with Bank and other donor interventions in sectors such as transport, energy, education, 
governance and private sector development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is composed of five components.  Each contains specific actions and 
interventions to address the priority issues which have been identified as principal constraints to 
achieving the development objectives.  
 
1.  Maximizing the Contribution of Mineral Resources  
 
Page  2
The DRC is exceptionally well endowed with mineral resources.  In order to develop these 
resources and to maximize their contribution to economic development the project will assist the 
government to pursue three parallel activities.  
 
A) 
Put state owned mining enterprises onto a commercially viable and economically 
sustainable footing.  These enterprises , which had previously dominated DRC’s mineral 
production, are moribund and bankrupt. Yet, these enterprises have substantial (if dilapidated) 
plant, equipment and social assets.  Moreover, the enterprises hold significant mineral rights 
which could be the subject of existing or future partnership arrangements with private mining 
companies. The government has recently introduced laws which would open the shareholding 
structure and/or the mineral assets of the companies to private participation.  The proposed 
project will assist the government to prepare an overall strategy and action plan for doing so, 
building upon the options provided for in the new legislation.  Specifically, the project will 
conduct various diagnostic studies and baseline analyses with focus initially on state enterprises: 
GECAMINES (copper, cobalt, and zinc), MIBA (diamonds) and OKIMO (gold).  Depending on 
the recommendations of these diagnostic studies further technical, financial, legal due diligence 
reviews could be programmed with a view to introducing private sector participation.  Particular 
attention will be paid to the disposition of social and infrastructure support which the enterprises 
provide to the communities where they operate.  It is possible that the cross support of other 
Bank units such as FIAS, IFC investment advisory services, and MIGA could be enlisted to 
assist in this effort.  
 
B) Stimulate private sector investment through support to infrastructure required and 
improvements to the enabling environment. Private sector investors are already very active in 
key mineral producing areas.  Yet, they face critical infrastructure constraints such as inadequate 
power, transport and water availability, certain deficiencies in the laws and regulations, and the 
“hassle factor” which govern their operations.  The proposed project will not be the lead Bank 
intervention to up-grade transport and power infrastructure.  It will, however, liaise closely and 
provide support to the interventions in the transport and power sectors because of the integral 
importance of infrastructure for mining sector development.   For instance, the project will 
support a baseline study of power needs, sources, pricing, and contractual arrangements in 
Katanga for the mines in operation or which will come on-stream in the near future.  
Additionally, the project will support initiatives of the infrastructure department of the IFC to 
identify specific requirements and development of possible public-private partnerships.  Finally, 
the project will retain close contacts with the Bank teams and government agencies involved in 
helping plan the infrastructure development proposals of the Chinese, who have committed over 
US$7 billion to transport infrastructure in the country.  
 
C) Capitalize on the presence of large and small mining operations to stimulate overall 
provincial economic development.  The state owned enterprises and private sector companies 
(large and small) present in Katanga, the two Kasais, and Ituri provide the bases upon which to 
establish strong economic linkages within the province and beyond.  Mining in these areas is the 
largest economic sector in terms of formal and informal employment (outside of subsistence 
agriculture), value added, export potential, and stimulus for add-on industries.  The proposed 
project will assist the government, private companies, and civil society to assess the overall 
development impacts of mining operations in these areas together with an action plan to establish 
Page  3
the economic linkages within the provinces and local communities as well as to assist the various 
stakeholders to ensure that maximum benefits are derived. To do this, the project will conduct, 
among other activities, a baseline and regional economic development study as well as to support 
the activities of IFC/MIGA and other donors to support community development based on the 
benefits streams derived from the mining operations.  Based on the recommendations of the 
diagnostic and baseline studies a series of actions in support of the objectives may be funded by 
the proposed project.  In this respect, the co-financing which is proposed by DFID will be of 
significant assistance.  The project would also work to carry out geological mapping of the 
country’s mineral endowment (at 1:250,000 scale of 50% of the country). Because of the high 
associated costs, the operation would seek assistance from other donors to co-finance this 
activity.  The project would work with other donors (DFID/USAID) on the creation and 
implementation of a mining company association forum in Katanga, based on the South African 
model.  Finally, the project, under the second component would conduct a regional mineral 
resources assessment of 1-2 key selected mining areas which would construct a holistic land-use 
planning and regional economic development model, integrating geological, water, forestry and 
other resources potential.  
 
2.  Improving Governance, Building Capacity, and Respecting the Environment  
 
Lack of appropriate governance procedures and dysfunctional government administration of the 
sector are the two principal constraints to ensure that benefits streams are used for economic 
development and improvement of the well being of the Congolese population.  The government 
is committed to improving governance in general, and the mining sector specifically, as 
evidenced by the Governance Contract adopted in February, 2007.  A subsidiary, but important 
issue, is to improve environmental protection and to remediate legacy mining sites.  The project 
will aim to improve governance and to build capacity at the central and provincial levels for 
administration of the sector in association with other donor initiatives.  
 
A)  The project will assist the government to urgently undertake steps to improve governance of 
the sector. This includes adjusting the enabling legislation and fiscal regime, adopting standards 
of corporate financial reporting, improving supervision of partnership agreements, requiring full 
disclosure of contract terms and corporate organization, prohibiting of conflicts of interest, 
clarifying the terms of anticipated government equity participation and management thereof in 
joint ventures, tracking of financial and mineral flows (coordinating with the EITI) and awarding 
of mineral properties through tender procedures in accordance with the mine law, where 
warranted.  A special initiative is to create an independent panel of experts to “validate” certain 
re-negotiated mining contracts in respect of their conformance to the legislation and “fairness” to 
both parties.  This will help to re-establish the credibility of DRC on international financial 
markets which has been degraded due to uncertainties over the re-reading of some mining 
contracts. A particularly important aspect is to reinforce the governance capabilities in the 
provinces.  Full cooperation will be ensured with the separate initiatives within the Bank 
programs (e.g., the governance project) and IFC and MIGA interventions. As well, the project 
will assist the activities of other donors, principally the Germans and Belgians, who are working 
to strengthen of government institutions as well as certification and traceability systems.  
 
Page  4
B)  Build Capacity in Key Government Oversight Institutions  
 
Government administration of the sector is dysfunctional and is a major impediment to better 
governance of the sector and proper use of benefits streams.  The need to reform outdated 
institutions, install proper internal procedures, and build capacity is evident at the central as well 
as the provincial level.  In fact, the challenges posed by decentralization and/or duplication of 
many central government functions and the roles to be played by these provincial institutions are 
a
key “choke-points” in government-company relations.  As in other heavy industrial sectors 
(railways, power), the mining industry in general, and government departments particularly, 
many employees are over 50 years of age.  Not only do they lack the physical stamina for much 
of the work but also lack appropriate new skills required for the modern mining sector, be it 
operating an advanced piece of equipment or administering the mine title system.  All of the 
government departments need to have adequate logistical and funding support to exercise their 
functions.  The proposed project will assist the government to remedy these institutional 
deficiencies through operational studies of the government departments, skills and needs surveys 
of current and future employees, support for training and logistics, up-grading of the mines 
inspection services as well as other government agencies involved in occupational health, safety 
and labor relations, and increase capacity to evaluate environmental impact assessments, 
management plans, and monitoring and evaluation.  Significant scope exists to capitalize through 
the project on the initiatives of other departments of the Bank group (for instance, IFC and 
MIGA work on training programs at the University of Lubumbashi) as well as the work of other 
donors (Germans, Belgians and others) to strengthen key government departments such as 
CAMI, CEEC, and SAESSCAM, and OFIDA (customs services).  The Bank will take the lead in 
providing assistance to CAMI.  
 
C)  Improve Environmental and Social Performance  
 
In the main mineral producing regions (principally Katanga) the environmental legacy of past 
mining operations is severe.  The legacy includes improperly closed mining operations and 
facilities, soil pollution, eroding tailings impoundments, and other remnants of past mining 
exploitation.  Audits and records do not exist of past and current environmental liabilities making 
it impossible to determine who is responsible for pollution flows.  Few government services or 
companies have the ability to prepare let alone properly assess environmental impact studies and 
management plans. Community consultation procedures are not clear and, in any event, not 
really effective carried out by companies on a consistent basis.  The proposed project will 
provide funding to carry out environmental baseline studies, risk assessment of legacy sites, 
support to site remediation, regulatory and legislative reforms, and setting up of procedures for 
community consultation.  This work will be coordinated with and, if required, support the work 
of other Bank groups (IFC/Comdev on company governance and community relations) as well as 
other donors working on enhancing corporate governance (USAID/DFID).   An inventory of 
mining legacy sites will be conducted in Katanga.   Depending on available funding, the project 
will engage in remediation of several mining sites in the Katanga area.  
 
3. Increasing Fiscal Receipts  
 
The “gap” between the taxes the government should be receiving from the sector and what it 
actually receives is estimated conservatively at US$150 million per annum.  The reasons for the 
“tax gap” are many, including fraudulent practices on the part of companies and government 
Page  5
services and tax assessment and collection agencies, under valuation of mineral product, 
clandestine exports and smuggling.  While the IMF has primacy in the area of taxation, the 
project will support studies and reforms within the agencies responsible for tax assessment and 
collections.  Included in these actions are audits of companies having revenues in excess of US$ 
10 million per annum, an “risk control and assurance audit” of government departments 
responsible for assessment and collection of taxes, logistical support and training to key 
government agencies, and possible out-sourcing of the revenues collection and reporting function 
as a means to rapidly build capacity.  
 
4.  Improving the Economic and Social Conditions of the Artisans  
 
There are an estimated 10 million Congolese who depend directly or indirectly on artisanal or 
small scale mining for their livelihood.  Artisanal miners at present produce 60 to 90 percent of 
the country’s minerals.  However, the sub-sector is dominated by a number of problem areas, 
including relations between artisans and large-scale mines; exploitation of vulnerable 
populations; extortion by government officials and criminal elements; lack of health, safety, or 
environment protection; and inadequate legal protection and government assistance for the 
miners. The proposed project will assist the government to improve the working and living 
conditions of the miners as well as to improve their productivity and access to terminal markets 
under fair and secure conditions.  It will conduct baseline studies of the problems of artisanal 
miners, support to government extension services, establish pilot schemes, conduct  sensitization 
campaigns and help establish miners’ cooperatives, work with private companies, and provide 
supportfor legal and regulatory reforms.  In addition, the co-financing provided by DFID will be 
of significant help in carrying out these activities.  As well, the project will coordinate with IFC 
and CommDev to: work with companies and artisanal mining communities.  
 
5.   Project Implementation  
 
The fifth component will focus on project implementation, setting up the project PIU, and 
fiduciary arrangements, including financial management, disbursement and procurement. It is 
proposed that the project set up an independent PIU within the Ministry of Mines in Kinshasa.  A 
key finding of the recent CPPR is that capacity to implement projects in DRC in accordance with 
Bank procedures and adequate “buy-in” from line ministries is a key constraint.  Establishing the 
PIU within the Ministry of Mines will ensure buy-in and a “hands-on” approach to project 
management.  Activities in the provinces will be supervised directly by this central PIU.  The 
project will place additional staff in key mineral producing areas to assist in project 
implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kinshasa, Katanga, Kasai provinces   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies is extremely limited. Capacity 
building measures during preparation, appraisal and implementation of the project are proposed. 
An environmental and social management unit will be established in the Ministry of Mines in 
Page  6
Kinshasa and in the key mining provinces. The project team will include Environmental and 
Social specialists that will advise on specific measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No physical investments are planned for this project, however a SESA will be prepared for 
the mining sector and will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal and at least 120 days 
before Board. During project implementation a SESA will be prepared for the two holistic land 
use plans. Indigenous people’s and community concerns will be addressed in these holisticland 
use plans. During project implementation Environmental Audits will be carried out for the 
mining sites to be rehabilitated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
An assessment will be included as part of the SESA.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Whether this policy has been triggered will be determined during project preparation. If 
necessary, an assessment will be included as part of the EA, which will be completed and made 
public prior to appraisal, and at least 120 days before Board.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Whether this policy should be triggered will be determined during project preparation. If 
necessary, an assessment will be included as part of the SESA, which will be completed and 
made public prior to appraisal, and at least 120 days before Board.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal 
and made public 120 days before Board date.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal 
and made public 120 days before Board date.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Rehabilitation of legacy mines might need rehabilitation of dangerous tailing dams; this 
might trigger the Safety of Dams Policy. Whether this policy has been triggered will be 
determined during project preparation. If necessary, an assessment will be included as part of the 
SESA, which will be completed and made public prior to appraisal, and at least 120 days before 
Board.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The EIA will determine impacts, if any.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  7
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/30/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Strategic Environmental Sector Assessment (SESA) will be launched under PPF funds 
prior to Appraisal. SESA, IPF and RPF will be disclosed in the country and the WB Infoshop 
prior to Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Craig B. Andrews 
06/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
