Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3596
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P111133 
Project Name:  Support to the Social & Economic Reintegration of Demobilised CAFF 
and OVC in the DRC 
Task Team Leader:  Roisin Ellen Mary De Burca 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTCS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (60%);Vocational training (20%);Primary education (20%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Other social protection 
and risk management (S);Social risk mitigation (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to support the socio-economic reintegration of Children Formerly 
Associated with the Fighting Forces (CAFF) in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project components to be financed through the MDTF include:  
 
1. 
Social Reintegration: Save the Children UK (SCF UK) will support the 
reintegration of demobilized child soldiers back into their families through the provision 
of  transitional support, family tracing and reunification services, community 
–
based 
outreach and sensitization, and family based care and transitional independent living 
arrangements.  
 
2. 
Economic Reintegration: In parallel, the project will also support the child in 
developing a civilian livelihood through the provision of vocational training, accelerated 
learning programs, and opportunities for income generating activities.  
 
Page  2
3. 
Research and Advocacy: The project will add to the existing body of lessons 
learned and good practice in the field of CAFF reintegration through research on girls 
associated with the fighting forces, livelihood options, and community context. In 
addition, SCF UK will actively lobby national entities to adopt relevant legislations and 
monitoring systems to prevent or minimize child recruitment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
North Kivu and Orientale Province (Ituri, Beni and Goma Areas), Eastern Democratic of 
the Congo.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not finance any civil works and is not expected to have any significant 
impact on the area of operation's natural and social envionment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project focuses on individual reintegration opportunites. The scale of the selected 
activties is not expected to create any significant long-term impact on the region's natural 
or social environment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The implementing agency will be required to submit as part of its Project Implementation 
Manuel a screening check-list to be used for the selection and financing of all micro-
projects and sub-grants. Exclusionary criteria will include: negative environmental and 
social impacts. The PIM is a condition of effectivness of the project.   
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project triggers no safeguard policies   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Before returning an ex-child soldier to his community, the project will ensure support 
from the communtity through information and sensitzation efforts. Economic 
reintegration opportunites identified during these sessions as harmful to the community 
or with potential adverse side-affects will be excluded from the list of eligible micro-
projects and sub-grants.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Roisin Ellen Mary De Burca 
04/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
04/30/2008 
Comments:   
