Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3555 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P111150 
Project Name: Support to the Social and Economic Reintegration of Demobilized Ex-
combatants in the Provinces of North and South Kivu 
Task Team Leader: Roisin Ellen Mary De Burca 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTCS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%);Vocational training (20%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Social risk mitigation 
(S);Other social protection and risk management (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Low Income Countries Under Stress 
2.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
1.50
3.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to support the socio-economic reintegration of approximately 7000 ex-
combatants in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project components to be financed through the MDTF include:  
 
(i) Economic Reintegration:  The project will support the beneficiaries in developing a civilian 
livelihood through the provision of training in the production, distribution and organization of 
agricultural associations and products such as rice, beans and monioc.  
 
(ii) Social Reintegration: In parallel, the project will also support the social reintegration of ex-
combatants into their communities through community sensitization, conflict mitigation and 
resolution training, and HIV/AIDS sensitization, amongst other.  
Page  2
(iii) Coordination and Monitoring: Finally, the project will ensure beneficiary follow-up over a 
period of 12 months to monitor progress and provide complementary training and support. It will 
also ensure overall project coordination, and compliance with the national demobilization and 
reintegration framework.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Democratic Republic of the Congo(DRC); Provinces of North and South Kivu   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Implementing Agency (Caritas) has extensive experience in sustainable agriculture, and 
recently carried out a similar reintegration project for the DRC National demobilization and 
reintegration program funded by the World Bank. For the purpose of this project, Caritas is 
expected to hire 10 qualified technical specialists as well as 70 local supervisors. The technical 
specialists will be required to visit each of the provinces at least twice a month to ensure, 
amongst other, compliance with Safeguard requirements set out in the Project Implementation 
Manuel.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Agriculture activities will focus on small scale and subsistence farming and are expected to 
have no significant impact on the area's natural and social environment. No EA will be carried 
out per se. The Implementing Agency will however be required as a condition of effectivness to 
include in its Project Implementation Manuel a section discussing screening mechanisms for 
envisioned sub-projects, as well as way in which issues related to land use, pesticides use, and 
other environmental issues related to farming will be addressed, including vector born-diseases.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Agriculture training will take place on individual and communal fallow land either belonging 
to the beneficiaries or rented from the community. No land will be purchased by the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Implementing Agency will be required as a condition of effectivness to include in its 
Project Implementation Manuel a section discussing screening mechanisms for envisioned 
sub-projects, as well as way in which issues related to land use, pesticides use, and the 
incidence of malaria and other vector borne diseases in project intervention zone will be 
addressed.  Compliance with these measures will be closely monitored by the World Bank 
Task Team on the ground.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Roisin Ellen Mary De Burca 
05/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
05/02/2008 
Comments:  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities. 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
