Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3907
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P091092 
Project Name:  Urban Water Supply Project 
Task Team Leader:  Franck Bousquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (90%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Other urban 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s objective is to increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas 
and efficiency of REGIDESO.  The principal outcomes are as follows:(i) greater access 
to basic water supply services, mainly through household connections and standposts; (ii) 
reduced losses and higher productivity; and (iii) improvement of the financial status of 
REGIDESO.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A:  Improve and expand water supply services in major urban centers 
(estimated cost:  US$101.6 million).  
 
This component will be carried out through investment and rehabilitation programs 
specific to Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and Matadi.  The investment programs funded under 
the proposed Project will mainly rehabilitate, expand and improve water production, 
improve the distribution system (both secondary and tertiary networks), and finance 
individual connections and collective distribution systems (standposts).  
Page  2
Component B:  Support to sector reform, capacity building and improved governance 
(estimated cost:  US$88.4 million base cost).  
 
This component is designed to contribute to the sustainability of investments funded 
under Component A and will help achieve operational and financial viability of 
REGIDESO.  This component will also: (i) contribute to the sustainability of investments 
funded by other donors in the sector; and (ii) enable Regideso to start the rehabilitation in 
other centers across the country using cash generated in the profitable centers and 
therefore proceed to the extension of water provision in cities which are not benefiting 
from the investments under component A.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance investment and rehabilitation programs specific to each city 
targeted by the project(Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and Matadi). The programs will mainly 
rehabilitate, expand and improve water production, improve the distribution system (both 
secondary and tertiary networks), and finance individual connections and collective 
distribution systems (standposts).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible damage to the environment, or to 
forcibly displace beneficiaries from their land.  However, infrastructure upgrading and 
civil works like rehabilitating and constructing water treatment plants and improving 
distribution networks have the propensity to generate potential site specific 
environmental and social impacts.  
 
Page  3
The water infrastructure sub-projects to be supported by this project are not expected to 
lead to new land acquisition or significant restriction of access to sources of livelihood. 
Land acquisition is expected to be minimal since civil works will only involve 
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, and some extensions of treatment facilities within 
current plant boundaries, and of distribution networks alongside existing roads.  Civil 
works will be entirely rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and will involve only 
temporary inconvenience to adjacent properties and commercial activities, plus network 
extensions.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
During the operational phase of the investments to be supported by the project, the three 
forms of potential environmental impact expected are (i) sustainability of groundwater 
abstraction and impacts on other users of the same water sources, (ii) quality of water 
delivered, and (iii) drainage of effluent.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since the project is designed to rehabilitate existing infrastructure, and some extensions 
of treatment facilities within current plant boundaries, and of distribution networks 
alongside existing roads, no suitable alternatives have been considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Two Bank safeguard policies have been triggered during project preparation and the 
pertaining mitigation measures identified.  The triggered policies are: 4.01 
(Environmental Assessment) and 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  To meet the 
requirements of these policies, an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared by the borrower 
and disclosed in the selected urban areas an
d
the Bank’s Infoshop.  
 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity to manage these potential impacts, as well as the 
construction phase safeguards issues, was assessed during the preparation of the ESMF 
and RPF.  The Project will also provide resources to continue strengthening the capacity 
of REGIDESO for environmental and social management.  Implementation of the ESMF 
and the RPF will be ensured by an Implementation Unit (IU) that has already been 
established within REGIDESO.  This Unit will be supported by a consulting engineer, 
whose terms of reference will include oversight of the implementation of the ESMF and 
RPF, and execution of the associated environmental and social mitigation measures.  This 
will build on the assistance provided through the Bank-supported Emergency 
Rehabilitation and Recovery Project and the subsequent Emergency Urban and Social 
Rehabilitation Project, under which an environmental consulting firm (SOFRECO) has 
been engaged to manage and oversee environmental and social management aspects of 
project implementation, as well as to provide institutional strengthening and on-the-job 
training services to both the Ministry of Environment and staff to whom environmental 
and social management responsibilities have been designated in executing ministries and 
Page  4
agencies.Under this program, two staff within REGIDESO have received training in 
environmental and social management.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary targeted groups are urban residents including the poor who are currently not 
served by the national water utility and thus have no direct access to safe drinking water.  
Poor households will especially be targeted through the implementation of standpipes or 
neighborhood-based provisions.  The potentially project-affected people also include 
those residents of the three target cities who live in close proximity to the proposed 
rehabilitation and construction works.  
 
Public consultations on the ESMF and RPF were organized by REGIDESO in each of 
the three cities in which the Project will be active, in collaboration with the local 
administrations.  The ESMF stipulates that for each Environmental Assessment (EA) 
conducted through the Project, a summary in the local language will be made locally 
available, and public consultations will be held with projected-affected people before the 
EA report is finalized. The RFP will be used as a guide to prepare specific Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) if needed, as related compensation measures to minimize negative 
impacts on Project Affected People (PAPs). These consultations will be conducted by the 
Implementation Unit in coordination with Congolese Group for Environmental Studies 
(Groupe d’Etudes Environnementales au Congo, GEEC, part of the Ministry of 
Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism, MECNT).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Franck Bousquet 
09/22/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
10/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
09/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
11/17/2008 
Comments:   
