Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3233
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Costa Rica 
Project ID:  P085539 
Project Name:  Port-City of Limon Integrated Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Cecilia Claudia Corvalan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 29, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 8, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (60%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (30%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
72.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.20
7.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching purpose of the project is to revitalize the city of Limon in line with the 
Government Regional Development Strategy, and prepare the modernization of the port 
of Limon. More specifically, the project seeks to: (i) improve the protection and 
management of Limon?s cultural and natural heritage; (ii) increase access to the sewage 
system and reduce urban flooding in the area of Limoncito; (iii) create a more efficient, 
accountable and credible local government; (iv) create new employment opportunities 
through small and micro-enterprises; and (v) support the port modernization process and 
improve the railway access to the Moin port terminal.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Urban and Cultural Revitalization. Component 1 will invest in the urban 
upgrade, cultural heritage protection and revitalization and natural conservation of 
Limon, restoring its emblematic historical and cultural patrimony and providing basic 
services to one of its poorest neighborhoods. The aim is to rescue Limon?s unique 
cultural identity, while improving the city?s urban environment (livability) and 
Page  2
attractiveness to visitors. This component comprises two sub-components: (i) Limon?s 
Cultural, Natural, and Architectonic Revitalization and (ii) Provision of Sewerage and 
Drainage Services.  Component 1 will be implemented in close coordination with the 
activities foreseen in the other components particularly those related to the Strategic Plan 
of the City-Port of Limon and to Local Economic Development.  
 
Component 2: Local Economic Development. Component 2 will support the generation 
of new sources of employment, particularly among the young, through the development 
of micro and small businesses, training and technical assistance, seizing the opportunities 
presented by growing cruise tourism and the historical/ cultural richness of Limon. 
Specific activities include: (i)  the provision of seed capital, scholarships and access to 
non-financial support services (such as incubators and business support centers) for the 
promotion of new cultural businesses and small and micro enterprises run by youth and 
women through the establishment of a competitive fund and a development market-place 
type of activities to select the most promising business plans, as a means of triggering 
community driven economic development; (ii) capacity building to SME Unit of the 
Ministry of Economy to improve the coordination of training and technical assistance to 
Limon?s small and micro-businesses; and (iii) specific training activities to help existing 
cultural businesses improve the quality of their products. The project envisions to hire a 
technically sound firm or NGO specialized in the provision of non-financial services for 
the implementation of this component under the technical supervision of the Ministry of 
Economy. Within the framework of the recently approved Development Bank Law, state 
banks will expand SME financing opportunities through a new range of financial 
products, including individual and portfolio guaranty facilities.  
 
Component 3: Local Governance and City-Port Strategic Planning. Component 3 will 
provide technical assistance for the Municipality of Limon to improve its capacity to 
deliver and manage quality services while empowering it to take an active role in the 
city?s development. Activities include: (i) formulation and implementation of pilot 
investments prioritized by the participatory strategic plan for the City-Port in 
coordination with other key government agencies, private sector actors, and citizens; (ii) 
strengthening of the municipality?s management capacity by administrative restructuring, 
supporting the creation of an office for urban planning and monitoring, and a tourism 
promotion center; (iii) strengthening of the municipality?s financial management capacity 
by integrating its information systems, and updating cadastre and revenue collection 
mechanisms; and (iv) physical improvements in its administrative building and provision 
of adequate equipments.  
 
Component 4: Support for Improving Port Environment. This component will support: 
(i) improvement of the railway access to the Moin port terminal, which includes the 
repair of the bridge over the river Chirripo, the rehabilitation of a warehouse in Leesville, 
and the construction of a short section of track for direct access of rolling stock to the 
dock of Mo?n; and (ii) technical assistance to the Transport Ministry to support the 
concessions process of the terminals of Moin and Limon, including complementary 
analysis such conducting an environmental assessment of the proposed intervention, fine-
Page  3
tuning the Port Master Plan, developing a business plan for the port, and carrying out 
more detailed institutional analyses.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Limon?s metropolitan area. There are the following salient 
physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:  
 
?
Cariar? Park: is located in the coastline of Limon, 5 kilometers from the City of 
Limon. Both have been declared Protected Areas. The park has an immense tourism 
potential but the lack of investments in maintenance, services, and infrastructure have 
resulted in an important deterioration of its recreational area.  
 
?
Uvita or Quiribr? Island: its geographical location 1100 meters northeast of the 
City of Lim?n turns this island into an important natural element for the urban area. The 
island was declared National Monument by Congress in 1985. It has two paths; one 
around the island?s perimeter and a central one, which reaches a light house that serves 
the port of Limon. The island is formed by coral reefs, which were partially destroyed 
during an earthquake in 1991.  
 
?
El Limoncito Wildlife Refugee: also know has ?El Humedal? it is located in 
between the outfalls of the Limoncito and Banano Rivers. The Limoncito river provides 
the main source of water and drainage for the Refugee, flooding the area for more than 6 
months per year.  
 
?
Cultural and Arquitectonic Patrimony: the city of Limon has many buildings and 
sites that have been declared as Historic Patrimony by Costa Rica?s Ministry of Culture. 
The architectonic style shows distinctive Victorian-era accents mixed with a strong 
Caribbean influence.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Stefania Blotta Abakerli Baptista (LCSSO) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In general, the nature of the works envisaged will not have significant direct or indirect 
socio-environmental impacts that could endanger the natural or social environment in the 
area of influence where works will be carried out. Moreover, the measures or actions to 
prevent, mitigate, and/ or compensate the potential socio-environmental impacts are easy 
to identify and, with proper management, the environmental and social sustainability of 
subprojects can be assured. In this regard, the project as a whole has been classified by 
the Bank as a ?Category B?, in accordance with the Environmental Assessment Policy 
[OP 4.01].  
 
The project triggers the following Bank Safeguard Policies: Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12); and Cultural 
and Physical Property (OPN 11.03).  
 
The Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01) is triggered because, with the 
execution of works, although no significant socio-environmental impacts are expected, 
these must be prevented, mitigated, and/or compensated by means of adequate 
management. To comply with this policy, agreement was reached on developing the 
present the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the project, 
and a Quick Urban Environmental Assessment (QUEA).  
 
The Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), is triggered because the works proposed for the Cariari 
Recreational Park; Uvita Island and Limoncito Wetland, that potentially can affect these 
sensitive areas. In compliance with this policy, a Preliminary Environmental Assessment 
of the Cariari Park, Study of Capacity of Uvita Island and Update of the Environmental 
Management Plan for the El Limoncito Wildlife Refuge, was carried out during the 
preparation process.  
 
The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) is triggered because, with the execution 
of the sanitary sewage works, it is expected that at least seven houses will be affected; 
these are located where the initial works are slated to take place. In this regard, it was 
agreed that a Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPF) would be developed 
with the aim of having an instrument in place to properly deal with these cases, in 
accordance with Bank guidelines. An abbreviated Involuntary Resettlement Plan in 
accordance with Bank guidelines was done during the preparation process. The plan is 
based on the detailed identification of three viable resettlement alternatives and 
summarizes the resettlement priorities expressed by the affected families. The plan also 
details the socio-economic characteristics for affected families, specifies eligibility 
criteria and outlines institutional arrangements for implementation and grievances.  
 
Finally, with regard to Cultural and Physical Property (OPN 11.03), this Safeguard 
Policy would be triggered by the possible discovery of archeological sites or random 
findings during the execution of works, which would require special treatment. It should 
Page  5
be noted that in this regard Costa Rica has a good public policy; therefore it was not 
necessary to develop a Policy Framework for the Protection of Cultural and Physical 
Property. During project preparation, the cultural aspects of the project were extensively 
consulted with the authorities and experts of the Ministry of Culture, which 
commissioned a reconnaissance field visit of Limoncito in order to identify any potential 
archeological, paleontological or other remains that might be uncovered particularly 
during construction of the sewerage and drainage systems to be financed by the project. 
No significant impact is foreseen. Nevertheless, the bidding documents and contracts for 
all related civil works will specify chance finds procedures for all civil works financed by 
the project. Additionally, the Minister of Culture designated a focal person who will 
oversee all civil works activities to ensure compliance with national policies and avoid 
any potential adverse impact on Limon?s physical cultural resources. Finally, a well-
respected organization with extensive experience in cultural patrimony (ICOMOS) has 
produced a cultural inventory for Limon, providing the government and the project 
preparation team with detailed information of the status of its cultural patrimony as well 
as recommendations for its conservation and promotion at policy and investment levels. 
The Director of the National Museum has also designated a person to supervise the 
restoration of the physical cultural assets and buildings of Limon.  
 
Environmental Assessment of the subprojects. A preliminary environmental assessment 
(screening) was carried out for the subprojects identified in the project, applying the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework. The activities that may potentially 
have negative environmental and social impacts are mainly related to: the construction, 
expansion, and rehabilitation of drainage and sanitary sewer systems; the rehabilitation of 
railway sections, the construction of a railway bridge over the Chirrip? River, and the 
rehabilitation of warehouses on the route to Leesville; works to rehabilitate the historic 
center and work to improve the city?s urban environment; and rehabilitation of the 
Cariari Recreational Park and Isla Uvita.  
 
?
The drainage activities entail the rehabilitation and enlargement of an existing 
channel located in the area of direct influence of the wetland Limoncito, declared as a 
National Refuge of Wildlife. Since the works will be executed in an existing channel 
whose design will permit to evacuate the surplus water upstream of the wetland, it is 
expected that this work will not affect the current conditions of the ecosystem. 
Nevertheless the foreseen drainage activities were classified after the environmental 
screening as of MODERATE-HIGH environmental and social risk (Category B1), 
because it is located in a sensitive area as per the national environmental legislation and 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). This will require the 
preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to assure the environmental 
sustainability of these activities.  
 
?
The sanitary sewage activities in Limoncito and Los Ba?os, consist of expansions 
of the existing network and the construction of wells to interconnect the system where the 
water served will be conducted to a Treatment Plant and subsequently evacuee through 
an emissary submarine that has the capacity to increase this new volume.  In this sense, 
no significant environmental impacts are anticipated that could cause social and 
Page  6
environmental negative impacts. Nevertheless, given the category of the activities as of 
MODERATE-LOW environmental and social risk (Category B2), an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) will be completed to assure an adequate environmental 
management of the direct and indirect negative impacts that be produced with the 
execution and operation of the works.  
 
?
No significant environmental impacts are expected from the rehabilitation of the 
railway line and the construction of the bridge over the Chirrip? river. Nevertheless, 
complementary works related to the road safety and impacts of noise should be included 
in the technical feasibility design, since the railroad crosses some towns along the train 
line which population may be affected especially during the construction.  These 
activities were thus classified as of MODERATE-LOW environmental and social risk 
(Category B2), reason by which to comply with the national environmental legislation 
will require to develop the respective EMP for assure an adequate management of the 
potential social and environmental impacts that can be produced with the execution of the 
works and their subsequent operation.  
 
?
On the improvement of the Recreational Cariari Park, most of the infrastructure 
required already exist, but in abandonment. Investments in the construction of physical 
infrastructure will not affect the most sensitive areas of the Park. This activity has 
benefited from  INBIO advice, institution of recognized prestige at national and 
international level regarding  the sustainable management of biodiversity. Additionally, 
this activity will include as part of its attractions, the marine corridor between the Cariari 
Park and the Uvita Island, another marine ecosystem. Overall, this activity has been 
categorized as of MODERATE environmental and social risk (Category B1), which will 
require the preparation of the a EMP. During project preparation, a Preliminary 
Environmental Assessment of the Cariari Park was carried out and included a sampling 
of the fauna and flora of the zone, its respective ecological zoning and the pre-design of 
the intervention to show the social, environmental, technical, and economic viability of 
the subproject.  
 
?
Regarding the rehabilitation of the historic buildings and investments in urban 
recreational areas, given the characteristics of the foreseen works, no significant 
environmental impacts that could put in risk the natural and social environment are 
expected. On the contrary, the foreseen activities represent a HIGH POSITIVE impact for 
the population of Lim?n who will benefit directly from these new spaces and urban 
cultural renew, and for visitors from the cruisers and elsewhere.  These activities have 
been classified as of LOW environmental and social risk (Category C), and will be 
require a ?Declaraci?n Jurada of Environmental Impact? in accordance with the national 
environmental legislation and the ESMF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During the process of preparing and evaluating the project, a series of activities, studies, 
and instruments were developed for the purpose of ensuring the environmental and social 
sustainability of the project and of complying with national environmental legislation and 
the Bank?s Safeguard Policies. In addition, these studies are intended to be used as 
guidelines and management tools during project implementation by all the agencies 
concerned. These studies are: Conceptual Framework for the Environmental and Social 
Management (MCMAS) of the Project; Quick Urban Environmental Assessment 
(EAUR); study of tourism load capacity and identification of potential conservation 
and/or sustainable use activities in Quiribr? Park (Uvita Island); and updating of the 
Environmental Management Plan for the El Limoncito Wildlife Refuge. The GoCR has 
also prepared an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan for Limoncito and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework for the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As a basis for project preparation, a socio-economic diagnostic of project?s sphere of 
influence was carried out in order to define a poverty profile and broadly identify 
populations groups in particularly disadvantaged positions. This study indicated a direct 
relationship between poverty levels and the following variables: (i) gender of head of 
household (51 percent of female head of households fall below the poverty line); (ii) 
unemployment (89 percent of the unemployed live in poverty; 33 percent in extreme 
poverty); (iii) type of employment (private sector employees and temporal employees 
face higher levels of poverty than public employees); (iv) type of insurance (60 percent of 
pensioners are poor). Surprisingly, variables such as ethnicity and level of education, in 
isolation, proved to be non significant in terms of determining levels of poverty.  
 
The result of this study lead to the conclusion that the most effective way of combating 
poverty in the cit of Limon is through the generation of new sources of income and 
employment, particularly among the most vulnerable groups - Including women (20 
percent of the female EAP is unemployed) and the young (35 percent of the EAP 
between 12-25 is unemployed), particularly young males (51 percent of the male EAP 
between 12-25 is unemployed). The Local Governance component will also support the 
empowerment of the poor and vulnerable groups leaving in Limon, through the 
promotion of participatory process aiming at giving voice to citizens, and particularly to 
these groups, in local planning and monitoring access and quality to municipal services.  
 
The socio economic study does not sustain the generalized perception that Afro-
descendants face particular disadvantages in terms of socio economic opportunities 
within the city of Limon. Composing 46 percent of the total population, they present 
higher levels of education than other ethnic groups (except for Chinese); and, in general 
Page  8
terms, lower levels of poverty (except for Afro-descendant female headed households, 
which tend to present higher levels of extreme poverty than female-headed households 
pertaining to other ethnic groups). However, the design of promotion mechanisms to 
foster cultural micro enterprises, drawing on the cultural and historic identity of the city 
will be particularly beneficial for Afro-descendants.  
 
A
stakeholder analysis conducted as part of the preparation of the project yielded 
important guidance for designing and implementing a consultation and communication 
strategy through out the different stages of project preparation. Extensive consultations 
were held involving local elected authorities (including the major and municipal council), 
and civil society organizations, including trade unions, business chambers, community  
and cultural organizations, religious leaders and universities. At the national level, the 
national and Bank teams engaged in broad consultations and dialogues with the heads of 
key governmental agencies involved in project preparation and leaders of political parties 
represented in the National Congress.  
 
Extensive government-led and Bank consultations in San Jose and in Limon with local 
government, council members, community organizations, and regional and central 
representatives from key government agencies took place during the project preparation 
phase. More specifically, on July 23, 2007, a public consultation session organized by the 
Project Coordination Unit took place in Limon. The objective was to present the project, 
the Environmental Assessment, and the Resettlement Plan related to the sanitation works 
in the area of Limoncito. Multiple local stakeholders as well as Bank staff and local 
consultants attended the session.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/24/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/25/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/24/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/25/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  9
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cecilia Claudia Corvalan 
10/24/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez 
10/24/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Stefania Blotta Abakerli Baptista 
10/24/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr William Reuben 
10/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
