Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/14/2008 
Report No.:  AC3778
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Costa Rica 
Project ID:  P101718 
Project Name:  Costa Rica Telecom Sector Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Juan Navas-Sabater 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Other public sector 
governance (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
27.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.50
0.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to promote the universal accessibility of a wide 
range of quality modern telecommunications services provided by multiple service 
providers in a well-regulated competitive environment, contributing to economic growth, 
competitiveness and social cohesion. This will be achieved through: (i) modernization of 
the legal, regulatory and institutional framework; (ii)introduction of fair competition and 
private participation; (iii) modernization of the state's electricity and telecommunications 
company (ICE); and (iv) promotion of investment in service provision to rural and 
isolated poor areas and vulnerable groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have four main interrelated components aimed at achieving the project 
development objective.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Telecommunications Solidarity Program ($12.6 million). Implementation 
of subprojects aimed at fostering telecommunications service (mostly broadband) to rural 
areas and poor customers, through targeted universal service fund investments.  
 
Component 2: Institutional development of SUTEL to promote competition and market 
opening ($11.7 million). This is aimed at institutional development of the regulatory 
authority, including support to the modernization of the radio spectrum and numbering 
plan management function in Costa Rica, as well as the licensing of new operators.  
 
Component 3: Modernization of the policy and regulatory environment for the 
telecommunications sector ($2.2 million). This is aimed at supporting the Ministry in 
developing the legal and regulatory framework for a modern telecommunications sector, 
as well as the institutional development of the telecommunications policy function within 
the Ministry itself.  
 
Component 4: ICE modernization ($1 million). This will provide targeted capacity 
building support for the incumbent, ICE, to adapt to the new competitive environment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This nationwide project is expected to result in the construction of new wireless 
transmission towers and related telecommunications infrastructure, including probably 
some (relatively short) new access roads. These new telecommunications civil works 
would be financed indirectly under both (i) the National Telecommunications Fund 
(Component 1) to provide service to currently under-served rural and relatively poor 
areas (including especially within the provinces of Alajuela, Heredia, and Limon and the 
South Pacific Coast) and (ii) private capital (mobilized under Component 2) to respond to 
market demand for improved service throughout the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental impacts of transmission towers and related telecommunications 
facilities have been assessed in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), prepared by MINAET (with assistance from the international consulting firm 
Environmental Resources Management, ERM). The ESMF is detailed and 
comprehensive in scope, thereby serving as a strategic environmental assessment for the 
telecommunications sector throughout Costa Rica. Based on experience with existing 
telecommunications infrastructure in Costa Rica as well as internationally, the ESMF 
identifies a variety of potential adverse environmental impacts from the project-supported 
construction of new telecommunications facilities, particularly (i) clearing of (relatively 
small) areas of forest or other natural vegetation to accommodate new transmission 
towers and associated facilities, including access roads (possibly within protected areas); 
(ii) aesthetic impacts (of special concern in high-tourism areas); (iii) disposal of 
hazardous and other wastes, during construction and operation; (iv) certain risks to 
worker and public safety and health; and (v) mortality of migrating birds (which can 
collide with transmission towers while flying at night).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
(See above.)   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
(See below.)   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESMF provides specific recommendations for mitigating the adverse environmental 
and related social impacts of the new telecommunications infrastructure that is expected 
to be built under the project. These include, inter alia, (i) siting of new facilities to avoid 
or minimize damage to environmentally and socially sensitive areas; (ii) controlling 
public entry where needed to protect the forest along new access roads; (iii) 
environmental rules for contractors and workers, to ensure proper waste disposal and 
other good practices in the field (along with transparent penalties for non-compliance); 
(iv) bird-friendly tower specifications, particularly to avoid using guy wires and (where 
night lighting is required) to favor white strobe lights, rather than red or white continuous 
or slowly pulsating lights; and (v) where infrastructure needs to be within protected areas 
(for transmission efficiency reasons), to promote conservation-oriented payments by 
private subproject sponsors to offset the ecological footprint of the facilities. The ESMF 
also provides detailed criteria and procedures for the environmental review of proposed 
new telecommunications subprojects. The project (Component 3) will provide training 
and other assistance (as needed) for telecommunications staff within MINAET and other 
Government agencies to comply with environmental standards in the review, approval, 
Page  4
and field supervision of telecommunications subprojects. Also, the preparation of 
telecommunications regulations (under Component 3) will include specific provisions (as 
recommended by the ESMF and agreed by MINAET) for improved environmental 
management of telecommunications infrastructure.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Prior to appraisal, the ESMF will be disclosed to the World Bank InfoShop in 
Washington, and on MINAET’s Web page in Costa Rica. In accordance with OP 4.01, 
MINAET has initiated a public consultation process by soliciting written or phoned-in 
comments on the ESMF from a wide variety of NGOs and other Costa Rican stakeholder 
groups. Shortly after the Telecommunications Institutions Law will have received final 
passage (expected by around August 2008), MINAET will hold a public workshop, to 
which these stakeholder groups (as well as the news media) will be invited, to discuss in 
detail the environmental and other aspects of the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/14/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/18/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/14/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/18/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  6
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Navas-Sabater 
07/14/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
07/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
07/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Deepak T. Bhatia 
07/14/2008 
Comments:  Deepak Bhatia acting for Philippe Dongier, Manager, CITPO. 
