Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC3511
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cote d'Ivoire 
Project ID:  P110020 
Project Name:  RCI- Emergency Urban Infrastructure (FY08) 
Task Team Leader:  Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (30%);Roads and highways (30%);Solid waste management 
(15%);Sewerage (15%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
94.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to and improve the 
quality of urban infrastructure and services in the country’s two largest cities, Abidjan 
and Bouake.  The achievement of this objective would support GoCI’s efforts to 
demonstrate concrete improvements in the lives of its citizens, a critical step for 
sustaining social and political stability in the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component I:  Urban Water Supply - US$28 Million equivalent  
 
The backlog of investments in renewal and expansion of water facilities throughout the 
country, combined with the influx of displaced persons into Abidjan, has resulted in 
severe water shortages and the reduction of access to water services.  
 
The component aims at increasing access to water services and improve the availability 
and quality of water services, through (i) provision of subsidized service connections and 
standposts to selected urban areas in Abidjan and Bouake; including informal 
Page  2
neighborhoods, together with connections of schools and health centers (ii) expansion of 
water production capacity in Abidjan; (iii) reinforcement and expansion of water 
distribution networks in Abidjan and Bouake.  
 
The activities under this component include: (i) increasing the water production capacity 
in Abidjan by (at least) 4,000 m3/hour by drilling and equipping production boreholes 
and expanding the capacity of some treatment plants; (ii) reinforcing primary distribution 
networks in selected areas of Abidjan (Djibi and Petit Bassam); (iii) expanding 
distribution networks in Bouake; (iv) connecting some neighborhoods in Abidjan to the 
distribution system; (v) increasing access by installing 20,000 subsidized service 
connections, 65 standposts in Abidjan and 33 standposts in Bouake; and (vi) providing 
water to 38 primary schools and 8 health centers in Abidjan that lack access to potable 
water services.  
 
Component II:  Urban Sanitation (Sewerage) - US$15.2 Million equivalent  
 
The lack of maintenance and timely renewal of pumping and treatment facilities 
combined with the backlog of investments in connecting neighborhood sewers to the 
main interceptor resulted in the continuous discharge of most of the uncollected 
wastewater (from about 600,000 people) in the Abidjan lagoon.  
 
The objective of this component will be to increase access to the sewer network and 
limit the discharge of raw wastewater in the Abidjan lagoon.  This will happen by 
improving the functioning of sewerage services, through the: (i) rehabilitation of main 
pumping stations and treatment plant feeding the ocean outfall; (ii) rehabilitation of 
neighborhood pumping stations, and (iii) connecting secondary sewers to the main 
interceptor.  This component aims at limiting this continuous flow of discharged 
wastewater in the lagoon, reducing its pollution by organic wastes by connecting some 
secondary networks to the main interceptor and the ocean outfall.  Activities under this 
component include: (i) rehabilitating two main pumping stations in Abobo and Marcory 
and the pumping station and pre-treatment plant at Koumassi-digue; (ii) rehabilitating 
five secondary pumping stations in Cocody, Koumassi, Marcory and Treichville; and (iii) 
connecting secondary sewers in Abobo, Adjame and Treichville to the main interceptor.  
 
Component III:  Solid Waste Management - US$12 Million equivalent  
 
The activities under this component include: (i) A Clean City Program with the aim to 
remove all unsanitary/informal solid waste disposal sites in the city of Abidjan and 
provide a clean start for private operators’ future interventions; (ii) Rehabilitation of the 
Williamsville transfer station with the aim to make the station operational and enable 
solid waste storage and transportation to the landfill site with appropriate means; (iii) 
Mass Media Campaign with the aim to sensitize communities about health and 
environmental risks associated with inappropriate management of solid waste.  The 
campaign will focus on hygiene, but will also include a component on HIV-AIDS under 
the leadership of the HIV-AIDS focal point of the Ministry of Urban Affairs and 
Sanitation; (iv) Institutional support with the aim to improve the institutional 
environment and  capacity of all stakeholders, including local governments, for the 
supervision of service performance in their respective jurisdictions; (v) Improvement of 
Page  3
living conditions of neighboring communities living in the vicinity of the disposal site of 
AKOUEDO. The disposal site does not comply with sanitary landfill norms and odors, 
released gas, lixiviats and other nuisances have negative impacts on the health and the 
well-being of the neighboring communities. The project includes the construction of a 
health center and an extension to an existing school (6 additional classrooms) to improve 
the living conditions of the neighboring communities.  
 
Component IV:  Urban Roads Rehabilitation - US$28 Million equivalent  
 
The activities under this component include: (i) Rehabilitation of roads bearing public 
transport services. The project will finance road surface refurbishment and drainage 
networks on seven roads on which transportation lines have ceased operation due to their 
poor condition. In addition, appropriate treatment will be given to two particularly critical 
areas routinely flooded during the rainy seasons and inaccessible to vehicles for 
prolonged periods; (ii) Works improvement including (a) construction of a footbridge 
extending pedestrian walkways in two underserved neighborhoods, to ensure safe 
crossing over an expressway for numerous pedestrians in a location with a high rate of 
fatal accidents, (b) construction of a 120-meter bridge and a road to improve accessibility 
of new residential areas, thereby addressing congestion problems at intersections, (c) the 
conversion of one of the worst trouble spots into an interchange; (iii) Horizontal and 
vertical signage (the current absence of horizontal and vertical signage on roads is 
considered a major factor in traffic disruptions and traffic accidents). The project will 
finance the provision and installation of standing road signs and the painting of road-
surface markings on as many roads as possible and; (iv) Roads in Bouake. The project 
will rehabilitate six heavily degraded roads totaling 7 kilometers in the City of Bouake, 
supplementing the 5-road, 11-kilometer rehabilitation program already funded by the 
European Commission.  
 
Component V:  Municipal Contracts - US$7 Million equivalent  
 
This component will address the medium- and long-term problems of cities and re-
energize some municipal functions that have largely been taken over by the central 
Government during the crisis. The following cities have been selected: in Abidjan, the 
municipalities of Port Bouet, Yopougon, Koumassi, Adjame and Abobo, and in the 
interior of the country, the towns of Divo, Daloa, Korhogo, San Pedro and Bouake. This 
first group of cities was chosen according to the following criteria: (a) an explicit desire 
on the part of the mayor to comply with the principles and rules of the Municipal 
Contract; (b) a more or less functional municipal team that is ready to work; (c) a 
population size and investment requirements that would yield a visible impact on as 
many people as possible; (d) the existence of planning tools and data that could be used 
as a basis for the audits; (e) consolidation of EC interventions.  The activities under this 
component include: (i) Urban, organizational, and financial audits of the 10 selected 
municipalities with the aim to carry out a needs assessment in terms of services, 
infrastructure, management, organization and finances and determine, through a 
participatory process, a Priority Investment Program (PIP), a Priority Maintenance 
Program (PMP) and a Municipal Adjustment Program (MAP); (ii) Accompanying 
Page  4
measures which will identified during the audits and will serve to support and motivate 
local governments, as an adjunct to the preparation of the audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location will be in Abidjan and Bouake for the investments part (component 1 to 
4) and Port Bouet, Yopougon, Koumassi, Adjame, Abobo, Divo, Daloa, Korhogo, San 
Pedro and Bouake for the municipal contract component (component 5).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is classified as environmental category B because no activity funded under 
the Project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact.  The 
Project triggers two safeguards policies: OP4.01 on environmental assessment and 
OP4.12 on involuntary resettlement.  Activities under the project are not expected to 
generate any adverse environmental or social effects, as a large part of the project is 
geared towards sustainable urban development.  Two safeguards instruments associated 
with the proposed project are the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and these will be prepared 
within six months of project effectiveness.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site 
specific, thus easily remediable.  No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during 
project implementation.   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None under environmental safeguards.  Under social safeguards, following a site visit 
[for the water supply, sanitation (sewerage), solid waste management and urban roads 
rehabilitation components] carried out by the Social Development Specialist during the 
appraisal mission (January-February, 2008), the team decide that all activities to be 
financed will not require relocation or resettlement.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The approach to safeguards will be to develop an ESMF and RPF to cover all activities to 
be financed under the project.  The coordination unit will recruit a Safeguards Consultant 
within three months after grant effectiveness to manage safeguards aspects under the 
project.  The consultant will work to strengthen the ESMF and RPF procedures that will 
improve component project quality and sustainability through compliance with 
safeguards.  He/She will also work with the technical departments responsible for 
implementing the components and ensure that environment and social concerns are 
mainstreamed into project implementation especially at the component level.  For works 
that require Environmental Assessments (EAs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), 
a
sequenced approach will be adopted so that necessary assessments and Actions are 
undertaken to address the high risk issues.  
 
It is pertinent to note that, due to the emergency nature of the operation, disclosures of 
these instruments will not be a condition of appraisal, rather they will need to be prepared 
and disclosed within six month after effectiveness.  Before then, the Safeguards 
Consultant attached to the team will undertake four activities: (i) assess the institutional 
arrangement for environmental and social safeguards within the coordination unit and the 
technical departments; (ii) assess the Government environmental disclosure requirements 
and EA consultation process and ascertain if there is an Environmental impact 
Assessment (EIA) law in place;  and (iii) provide ASPEN Toolkit for ESMFs for small-
scale projects and run a two-day workshop on how to apply the guidelines to screen 
subprojects; and (iv) screen all investments in the first year and determine which require 
EMP and RAPs. On this, the consultant will receive guidance from the Bank’s 
environmental safeguards specialist based in the Abidjan office. He will also facilitate a 
discussion on how to use and apply the environmental management clauses for 
construction contracts. This is critical, as civil works may start right after grant 
effectiveness, and there is need to equip the implementing entities with the tools to screen 
the subprojects, including mitigation measures to be adopted.  
 
The Safeguards Consultant will provide environmental and social management 
oversight in the design and execution of component activities and proposed investments, 
screening them for potential impacts and risks, planning mitigation measures, including 
consultation and disclosure requirements, to ensure due diligence, and facilitate 
consistent treatment of environmental and social issues by the implementing agencies and 
contractor.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
-
Ministry of Economic Infrastructure  
 
-
Macom  
 
-
AGEROUTE  
 
-
Ministry of Urban Affairs and Sanitation  
 
-
Sanitation department of Ministry of Construction and Urban Planning  
 
-
Public debt department of Ministry of Economy and Finance  
 
-
Department of Local Governments  
 
-
Association of mayors  
 
All stakeholders are being consulted regularly.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in conformance with OP/BP 8.00, the 
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required 
as a condition for appraisal of the project.  However, these instruments: the ESMF and 
RPF will be completed and disclosed in-country and at the Info shop within six months of 
project effectiveness.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
04/18/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
04/18/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
04/18/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
04/18/2008 
Comments:   
