Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/23/2008 
Report No.: 43879
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Côte d’Ivoire 
Project ID:  P001177 
Project Name:  Côte d’Ivoire – Transport Sector Adjustment Credit - (restructured):
 
Task Team Leader:  Siélé Silué 
Appraisal Date: March 20, 1997 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Adjustment 
Loan
 
Sector:  Roads (85%); Road safety (15%). 
Theme:  Reestablish and improve road access (P); Road safety (S).  
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
24.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source: N/A 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reestablish and improve road access and 
safeguard road infrastructure assets across the country by rehabilitating/reconstructing the 
bridges along the main roads, notably in Northern Western and Regions where the road 
maintenance activities were suspended since the beginning of the war. 
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project comprises two main components.  
The first component includes: (a) construction of about 90 bridges across the country to 
ensure accessibility of people to basic services (schools, medical centers, markets, 
production areas, etc.) and connection with neighboring countries; (b) implementation of 
engineering detailed studies for ten bridges in the Northern and Western Regions; (c) 
implementation of works supervision for construction of bridges; (d) provision of 
technical advisory services and acquisition of equipment for the Borrower’s agencies 
responsible for road sector management and maintenance operations; and (e) 
development and strengthening of the capacity of small local contractors. 
The second component includes: (a) rehabilitation of the road safety training center; (b) 
rehabilitation of Grand Bassam bus station; (c) creation of road accident database; and (d) 
capacity building of OSER. 
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will intervene nationwide along the road network, notably in Northern and 
Western Regions where the road maintenance activities were suspended since the 
beginning of the war and in the city of Grand Bassam where the bus station will be 
rehabilitated. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts: 
 
The Project is classified as environmental category B because no activity funded under 
the Project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact. An 
environment assessment has been done during the detailed studies of the bridges before 
the crisis. The EIA revealed that, the construction of the bridges will not have significant 
impact on soil, water, flora and fauna. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) on 
maintenance and rehabilitation of roads project has been prepared by the project. This 
will be disclosed in-country and the Infoshop before the re-activation of this restructured 
project. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area
:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site-
specific; and thus easily remediable. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen 
during project implementation 
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impac
ts. 
 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. 
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described
.
The project prepared an EMP on maintenance and rehabilitation of roads project. This 
document prepared by the project team outlined specific environmental mitigation 
measures commensurate to identified impacts and the institutional arrangements to 
implement and monitor those measures. In addition, it outlines provisions for 
implementing and monitoring recommended measures. Specific clauses for 
environmental risk mitigations applicable to road maintenance and rehabilitation have 
been approved by the National Assembly
1
and will be applied for this project. 
 
Also the CI-PAST was implemented by experienced staff before the crisis and as such 
there are reasonable capacity and experience within the project and among the various 
stakeholders involved to follow-up potential environmental and social issues as they arise 
during project implementation. In addition, the process to recruit an environmentalist 
within the Project Coordination Unit is ongoing. The recruited environmentalist will 
oversee the implementation of environmental and social impact mitigation measures and 
ensure that the project is in compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies. 
Furthermore, he/she will work in close collaboration with AGEROUTE and the Ministry 
in charge of environment to systematically monitor the implementation of project 
mitigation measures. 
 
5. 
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The main project stakeholders include users of the roads across the country. They were 
consulted during the preparation of the project. The project team will make arrangements 
to renew these consultations during the implementation of the project restructured, 
notably with the Transport Unions of Grand Bassam through the Mayor. Other 
stakeholders include the Ministry of Infrastructure and Equipment, the Road Agency 
(AGEROUTE), the Road Safety Agency (OSER) and the Road Fund involved in road 
infrastructure construction and maintenance. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank
2
05/16/08 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
05/23/08 
1
Law 
n° 96-766 on October 3, 1996 and decree n° 96-894 on 8 November 1996
 
2
The original EA was received and disclosed in 1998 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
05/23/08 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 N/A 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
N/A 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
N/A 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
N/A 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
N/A 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  5
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Siélé Silué 
05/23/08 
Environmental Specialist: 
Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
05/23/08 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
05/23/08 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development 
Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/23/08 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
05/23/08 
Comments:   
