Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3910 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cote d'Ivoire 
Project ID: P112573 
Project Name: Urgent Electricity Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Sunil W. Mathrani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
25.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the availability, reliability, efficiency and 
financial viability of electricity supply in Cote d’Ivoire.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project (as currently configured) will finance:  
 
Component 1:  Distribution and HV/MV substation materials such as transformers, cables, 
poles and meters.  This equipment will be used to upgrade, expand and restructure the 
distribution network in the Abidjan area to reduce the losses and increase availability and 
security of power supply. ($25m)  
 
Component 2:  Preparatory studies for priority generation and transmission projects as well as 
energy efficiency projects in order to bring them to a ‘bankable’ stage of preparation.  This will 
allow GoCI to be ready to move forward after the crisis and catch up with the demand growth 
Page  2
and the needed upgrading of power infrastructure located in the formerly ‘occupied’ zones. 
($5m)  
 
Component 3:  Institutional studies and capacity building to improve sector organization, 
regulation and management.  These would (i) enhance capability of the GoCI agencies to 
coordinate and implement the project activities and (ii) design and implement the needed policy 
and institutional adjustments in the sector.  ($3-5m)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mainly peri-urban areas around Abidjan, but may also extend to other urban centers   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further assessed, and 
the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank’s Safeguards specialists on 
the project team However, it is pertinent to note that an environmental and social specialist will 
be part of the project management unit and will be responsible for following up the 
recommendations of the prepared instruments.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible damage to the environment, or to 
forcibly displace beneficiaries from their land. However, civil works associated with upgrading 
and expansion/restructuring of distribution networks has the propensity to generate potential site 
specific environmental and social impacts. To this end, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will have to be prepared by the borrower. The ESMF will be 
disclosed in-country and the Bank’s Info shop prior to appraisal. The project also triggers the 
involuntary resettlement policy. Thus, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared 
as due diligence. This, like the ESMF, will be disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although the project is not expected to have a large scale irreversible impact on potential 
affected populations, its execution may entail the extension of existing lines and may involve 
construction of new infrastructure as well as a new routing of power lines to reach those areas. 
Given that the specific sites or impacts will not be known until during project execution, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be prepared. The RPF will 
be used as a guide to prepare specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) if needed, as they relate 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
compensation measures to minimize negative impacts on any Project Affected People (PAPs).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard instrument (The ESMF and the RPF)) will be prepared, reviewed, approved 
and disclosed in-
country and at the Bank’s Info shop prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sunil W. Mathrani 
10/27/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/27/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
10/27/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
