Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4235 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/23/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cote d'Ivoire 
Project ID: P115398 
Project Name: Cote d'Ivoire - Emergency SME Revitalization+Governance 
Task Team Leader: Djibrilla Adamou Issa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to help revitalize the private sector, notably SMEs and contribute 
to job creation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project aims to contribute to an improved investment climate for SMEs, enhanced 
governance, higher capacity utilization of existing, and the establishment of new SMEs and 
employment generation through the following key components:  
 
Component A: Improved investment climate and Governance (US$4.5 million)  
 
This would cover:  
 
(i) 
The doing business reforms which can be quickly implemented and have high return, and  
 
(ii) 
The establishment of a pilot commercial court in Abidjan and publication of judgments. 
This would demonstrate government commitment and the private sector in its entirety would 
benefit from this component.  
Page  2
(iii) 
Support the Public-Private sector dialogue initiated by the authorities with the creation of 
the Cadre de Concertation Secteur Public Secteur Prive. In this the project will support the 
organization of the thematic and working group meetings as planned by the CCCP.  
 
Component B: Direct support to SME (US$7.0 million)  
 
This would involve:  
 
(i) 
Capitalizing of the existing cooperative fund for SMEs managed by their association with 
resources owed to them by Government; Recapitalization would mainly involve repayment of 
arrears and the refinancing of bonds issued by government to SMEs which would be used to fund 
the cooperative and the matching grant (which would be refinanced in part or fully by IDA 
resources and,  
 
(ii) 
Providing them with advisory services for capacity enhancement through a matching-
grant facility continuing the successful matching grant which functioned prior to the crisis.  
 
Component C: (US1.5million) Support to key Institutions and Project Implementation  
 
This component would fund critical short term Technical Assistance (TA) requested by the 
Ministries of Infrastructure and Ministry of Industry and Private Sector Development to define 
the Government’s private sector development strategy and a regulatory framework for Public 
Private Partnership. It would also fund the export promotion association (APEX-CI), the 
proposed implementation agency that implemented with success the previous IDA funded 
Private Sector Capacity Building Project, closed in 2005 because of the crisis and its matching 
grant.  
 
Eligibility under O.P.8.0  
 
The use of OP 8.0 is justified for two principal reasons. First, the project addresses two of the 
objectives highlighted in the OP, namely (i) restoring the means of production and economic 
activities by addressing major adverse economic and/or social impacts particularly on SME’s; 
and (ii) establishing and/or preserving institutional and/or human capital. Second, the application 
of streamlined procedures would allow expedited project processing in direct response to the 
urgent needs of the Government to tackle one of the underlying causes and effects of the crisis 
i.e. joblessness created by the disruption of economic activity, as it was also part of the roots of 
crisis in the 1990’s.  
 
To accelerate implementation and reduce fiduciary risks, IDA funding would be disbursed 
through an existing institution, the Agence de Promotion des Exportations de Cote d’Ivoire 
(APEX-CI), which, implemented with success the IDA PSD operation from 1999 to 2005 and 
possesses relevant experience.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Agence de Promotion des Exportations - APEX CI  
 
01.
BP 3485 Abidjan 01, Cote d'Ivoire  
 
Tel +225 20 31 57 00  
Page  3
Fax. +225 20 21 75 75  
 
Web. www.apexci.org  
 
Email: marketing@apexci.ci   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed operation is a Technical Assistance operation and should not trigger any safeguard 
policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/16/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable. Category C Project   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Djibrilla Adamou Issa 
02/23/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/23/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
02/23/2009 
Comments:   
