Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3719 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P109603 
Project Name: Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project 
Task Team Leader: Alison C. N. Cave 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project for Croatia is to 
reduce the vulnerability of the country to natural hazards and reduce human, economic and 
financial losses due to catastrophic events.  This objective will be achieved through: (i) 
strengthening disaster risk management capacities; (ii) increased preparedness and response 
capabilities; (iii) enhancement of the country’s capacity to lead regional coordination in the area 
of wild fires hazard risk reduction and response; (iv) catastrophic risk insurance; and (v) prompt 
access to financing of relief and recovery efforts following a major disaster.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is proposed that the project include the components and activities described below.  
 
-- Component A: Disaster Risk Management and Preparedness.  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of government institutions to 
manage hazard risks and respond to disasters.  The proposed activities include:  
 
Page  2
1.  Development of the National Disaster Risk Management Strategy and Investment Program;  
 
2.
Emergency Response Improvement:  
 
-
Emergency response equipment and relief supplies;  
 
-
First Responder training;  
 
-
Development of disaster-related information databases and disaster simulation programs;  
 
-
Enhancement of 112 System;  
 
-
Upgrade of First Responder communications system; and  
 
-
Public awareness, communication and information on disaster preparedness.  
 
3.
Establishment of a Regional Coordination Center for Wildfires  
 
-- Component B:  Strengthening of Hydro-meteorological Services.  
 
The objective of the component is to address gaps in capacity to mitigate weather damage.  The 
key issues to be addressed are: marine forecasting in the Adriatic, forecasting and nowcasting of 
severe weather events, and management of the Sava River to enable flood management and safe 
navigation over the medium term.  Specific activities include: (1) update of the hydromet 
monitoring network; and (2) update of forecasting center capacity.  
 
-- Component C: Catastrophic Risk Insurance.  
 
The component has a three-fold objective: (i) to provide Croatian homeowners and Small and 
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) with access to affordable and reliable catastrophe insurance 
products; (ii) to enable the government of Croatia to reduce its fiscal exposure to natural 
disasters by transferring its implicit financial responsibility for private losses to the private 
insurance market; (iii) to support diversification of the Croatian insurance market.  
 
South Eastern and Central Europe Regional Catastrophe Insurance Facility. The Catastrophe 
Insurance component of the project entails Croatia joining, as a founding shareholder and 
member, the South Eastern and Central Europe Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (SECE 
CRIF), which is being established under the South Eastern Europe Disaster Risk Mitigation and 
Adaptation Program. The facility will offer innovative low cost catastrophe insurance products to 
homeowners and SMEs, which currently do not exist in the traditional insurance market.  
 
The Catastrophic Risk Insurance component would finance (1) a public information and 
awareness campaign; and (2) Government membership equity contribution to the Regional 
Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility.  
 
-- Component D: Deferred Drawdown Option.  
 
The component would provide the government with access to contingency funding in a form of 
the Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO), a newly introduced Bank instrument.  
The Cat DDO will address the country’s immediate liquidity needs in the aftermath of natural 
catastrophes. The Government will be able to access funds from the facility upon the declaration 
of a state of emergency as a result of a natural disaster.  
 
Page  3
The maximum amount of Cat DDO funding is 0.25 percent of the national GDP which, in 
Croatia’s case, will be about US$90 million. The funds may be drawn downover a three-year 
period, which may be renewed up to four times for a total of 15 years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented country-wide but with majority of activities to be carried out in 
Zagreb.  The Regional Coordination Center for Wildfires is located near Split.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity for implementation of safeguard policies will be assessed 
during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 will apply as the project will include small scale 
limited civil works related to the renovations and possible reconstruction of selected facilities. 
The proposed environmental category is B.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
A
site assessment will be conducted to verify whether there are any squatters or 
encumbrances on the property intended for construction of a new building. If present, an 
abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared.  If there is additional new construction 
for which the locations are not known, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/05/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
In the course of project preparation, the government, through involvement of key 
stakeholders and public consultations, will develop the Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP), which will provide key elements to meet the World Bank Environmental 
Assessments requirements under OP 4.01.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Alison C. N. Cave 
07/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
08/04/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
