Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/20/2008 
Report No.:  AC3754
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P102365 
Project Name:  Rijeka Gateway II 
Task Team Leader:  Gerald Paul Ollivier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (90%);Other domestic and international trade 
(10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other urban 
development (S);Corporate governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
131.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.30
6.30 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to develop the capacity, financial 
performance, and quality of services in the port of Rijeka to meet growing demand for 
container flows, through public-private partnerships, while facilitating urban renewal by 
enabling the relocation of port activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will build on the partnerships and achievements of the first Rijeka Gateway 
(RGI) Project, engaging a broad spectrum of stakeholders. The RGII will finance the 
following components:  
 
Component 1: (total cost with contingencies - EUR67.8 million).  The Port Terminal 
Development component includes the following subcomponents: (i) extension of the 
existing Brajdica Container Terminal by about 330 m, increasing its capacity by 200 
kTEU, with a draft of 14.5 m, to be constructed from 2009 to end 2011; (ii) Construction 
of infrastructure for a 400 meter long (see NOTE below) Zagreb Container terminal able 
Page  2
to accommodate fifth generation container vessels, with a capacity of about 225 kTEU to 
be constructed from 2010 to 2014.  This component will enable the conversion of the 
Delta and port of Baross areas, by making alternative port space available.  
 
Component 2: (total cost with contingencies - EUR6.4 million).  The Port Service 
Enhancement component includes the following subcomponents:  (i) support in 
concessioning  selected terminals; (ii) equipment and technical services for information 
flow integration and secured port access; (iii) enhanced environmental response with the 
development of a comprehensive port environment protection plan and purchase of waste 
collection vessel to address traffic increase in line with Croatian and Marpol 
requirements; (iv) technical studies to prepare for the Masterplan implementation.  
 
Component 3: (total cost with contingencies - EUR5.8 million).  The Project 
Implementation component includes the following subcomponents:  (i) supervision of 
civil works activities; (ii) audit services for the project; and (iii) support in procurement 
and project management.  
 
NOTE: The Rijeka Gateway II provides financing for an additional 100 meters 
compared to what is covered under the existing Rijeka Gateway and Rijeka Gateway 
Additional Financing.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed port expansion investments are limited to the immediate basin of Rijeka, 
situated in the northern part of the Bay of Kvarner, where the Adriatic Sea retracts mostly 
into the European continent. The activities in the port of Rijeka characterize it as a multi-
purpose port with a total surface area of about 200 ha, a total pier length of about 7,100 
m, and an average depth of about 17 m. Overall port main commodities include dry bulk 
(e.g., coal and iron ore, and cereals), liquid bulk, general cargo, and timber.  
 
From the analyses performed during the EIA process, the following characterization 
describes the baseline situation surrounding the two terminals:  
 
•
the air quality was considered mildly polluted based on results that showed 
concentrations of SO2, NO2, PAHs and H2S as well as smoke and particulate matter 
higher than the permissible limits in the center of the city and around the existing oil 
refinery;  
 
•
Main sources of pollution from the existing oil refinery are liquid waste andthe 
outflow of hydrocarbons into the sea from the polluted seabed in the refinery area. 
Harbor activities including mooring and trans-shipment of goods contribute more 
modestly to the marine pollution in the project area. Sea water quality samples collected 
around the Brajdica terminal at different depths in four different locations showed results 
for bacteriological characteristics in compliance with the national standards;  
 
•
heavy metals analysis in sediment samples collected in three locations aroundthe 
Rijeka port (Brajdica terminal, Port of Baross, and Zagreb terminal) showed mercury, 
lead, copper and zinc concentrations higher than the standard levels for the marine 
sediments quality. However, due to lack of regular sediment monitoring program in the 
Page  3
Rijeka bay it is difficult to correctly evaluate the source of these sediments pollution as 
the oil refining activities could be a cause of historical environmental pollution in the 
area;  
 
•
Containers-reloading activities generate a certain level of noise for the residential 
area situated north of project area. However, the noise originating from city traffic and 
nearby railway (located between the port and residential area) is stronger than the noise 
produced around the two terminal areas;  
 
•
hazardous waste (e.g., waste motor oils, hydraulic and oils originating from 
transformation substations, oil packaging, as well as sludge from the oil/water separators 
at the refinery) and non-hazardous waste from cleaning of the terminal area, maintenance 
of the sewerage systems, are common waste occurring due to the regular port activities. 
PRA is implementing a PWMP that regulates procedures for management of ship-
generated waste and cargo residues in the port area, the marine environment protection 
and against discharging, and the protection of the onshore area against pollution.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bank's safeguard policies and procedures (OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment) the RGII Project has been classified as an environmental 
Category “A” project due to the two port terminals’ expansion investments (project 
Component 1).  
 
OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment: PRA prepared baseline studies, 
geotechnical investigations and EIA reports for the proposed port infrastructure 
investments in accordance with the local environmental laws and the World Bank 
policies.  
 
Page  4
The EIA studies emphasized that predicted environmental impacts of the chosen 
activities are related mostly to civil works performed during the construction and 
extension of the two terminals. Such environmental issues common in the port 
rehabilitation/construction and operation primarily include the following: air emissions, 
dredged material management, general waste reception, waste water and solid waste 
management, hazardous materials management, noise and dust, water quality, 
biodiversity.  
 
OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources: Direct impacts on cultural heritage are not 
expected during project implementation. The proposed construction of terminals does not 
entail activities in any protected buildings within the port area. However, the policy is 
triggered because of two protected warehouses (based on a decision made by the Ministry 
of Culture) located in proximity of the Zagreb terminal. The EMP prepared by PRA also 
provides for screening for physical cultural resources and includes instructions for 
dealing with archaeological chance finds.  
 
OP 7.50 on International Waterways: The works funded under the Project are primarily 
extension of the existing port operations (an ongoing scheme as per the OP).  Based on 
the EA, these extensions are not going to lead to any adverse change in the quality or 
quantity of waters of the Bay of Kvarner for riparian states. Accordingly, the project falls 
under the exception to the notification requirement to other riparian countries. This 
exception was authorized on May 18, 2008, as per the OP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect impacts on the environment from the proposed activities anticipated in 
the port area during operation will be noise and waste generation. Normal noise sources 
in ports include cargo handling, vehicular traffic, and loading/offloading containers and 
ships. Usual port activities generate both hazardous and non hazardous waste while the 
extension of the terminals may increase potential pollution of sea from ships either from 
regular operations (management of ballast waters and oil sludge) or through increase in 
potential accidents involving dangerous cargo during docking, handling and storage. 
However, incremental impacts are minor compared with pollution from other nearby 
sources such as the refineries.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The decision by the Port Authority to proceed with the proposed construction of the 
Zagreb terminal and expansion of the Brajdica terminal in the Port of Rijeka is based on 
international, regional, national and local considerations. As part of the Master plan 
updated in April 2008, the Rijeka Port Authority reviewed a number of alternatives to 
develop further container traffic in the Kvarner Bay.  There were two main alternatives to 
the proposed expansion of the Zagreb Pier and the Brajdica Pier included under the RGII: 
(i) development of Prasko Pier; and (ii) development of a complete new terminal on the 
Island of Krk. The first alternative was found inappropriate since the Prasko Pier would 
be insufficiently wide for modern container terminal operations, given the proximity of 
Page  5
existing protected warehouses. Also, its expansion would create a discontinuity of 
alignment between the Zagreb terminal and this terminal, making vessel operation 
problematic.  
 
The latter alternative considering the development of a completely new site on the 
island of Krk was dropped since road and rail connections are insufficient to support such 
a
terminal at this location and upgrades are not planned at this stage. Also, no technical 
study exists and the proposal was not included in the physical planning of the 
corresponding area. Furthermore, no local consultation process took place related to such 
development.  
 
Other relevant project alternatives considered referred to the design for the Zagreb 
terminal originally foreseen as a concrete pile based structure. Various options were 
reviewed as part of an optimization process that led to the selection of a caisson based 
structure, which has proven complex, costly and time consuming to carry out. At this 
stage, Port Authority decided to move forward with a design-build (DB) approach, which 
will allow a range of solutions to be evaluated as part of the tender process, considering 
the potential environmental impacts, within parameters defined in the applicable national 
and international legal framework.  
 
The construction of the Brajdica terminal could have used a pile based structure, 
concrete or steel pile or other technologies. However, a major consideration was to build 
on existing experience of the current Brajdica terminal allowing the Port Authority to 
keep technological risk to a minimum, having learned from the first phase of 
construction.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The environmental assessment documents covering the proposed RGII investments were 
prepared by PRA in accordance with the Croatian Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) law as follows:  
 
(i) an Environmental Impact Study (EIS) covering the construction of the Zagreb 
container terminal was prepared in 2002. This EIS included the environmental 
assessment of the construction works proposed for the entire Zagreb terminal with a total 
planned length of 1,200 m as envisaged in its 2003 Master Plan and was also used as the 
base for the 2003 RGI EA. The 2002 EIS and 2003 EA also covered the section which is 
proposed to be financed under RG II. Thus, a new EA/EMP is not required for the Zagreb 
Terminal but the preparation of an updated environmental assessment study will be 
required if the design-build approach selected by PRA will trigger additional 
environmental impacts than those already covered;  
 
(ii) the proposed extension of the Brajdica terminal under the RG II project was covered 
under an EIS report prepared and publicly disclosed by PRA in 2005. However, this EIS 
was missing a separate EMP and proper executive summary.  
 
Page  6
Given the preparation that took place in accordance with the Croatian EIA legislation 
for project components under the proposed RGII project, and following their thorough 
review by the Bank project team in relation to the applicability of OP/BP 4.01, the Bank 
and PRA agreed that PRA would take the following steps prior to the RGII project 
appraisal to meet the World Bank safeguard requirements: (1) preparation and disclosure 
of an RGII project Over-arching EA Executive Summary including a brief assessment of 
the proposed expansion works for the two container terminals as prepared in the originals 
EIS; and (2) preparation and disclosure of an EMP for the Brajdica terminal extension 
works together with the disclosure of an updated English Executive Summary of the 
Brajdica Component EA document. These documents were disclosed on the PRA website 
on May 7, 2008 and discussed in a public consultation organized by PRA on May 19, 
2008.  
 
PRA undertook to implement a proper monitoring program on the quality of marine 
sediments during the construction phase of the terminals financed under RGI and II. The 
results of this monitoring describe the baseline conditions presented in section II.A.1 
above.  
 
Regarding operations, PRA is actively working at three levels: (i) traffic management in 
and out of the terminal; (ii) waste management plan; (iii) operating emergency plan.  
 
PRA is implementing a Port Waste Management Plan (PWMP) that regulates reception 
and handling of ship-generated waste and cargo residues on the entire area under PRA 
jurisdiction. Currently, PRA is employing four local companies for collecting the ship-
generated oil waste and one company for collecting the port related solid waste. PRA 
intends to purchase (with funds provided by RGII) its own ship for collecting oil and 
solid waste generated by the port activities and by the vessels arriving in the Rijeka bay 
area. The main concessionaire “Luka Rijeka” also has its own Waste Management Plan 
(May, 2006) for separately collecting waste from port activity for all terminals, with 
designated responsible persons.  
 
PRA prepared a Maritime Study for Calling and Leaving the Container Terminal, which 
allows proper management of ships traffic in and out of the terminal. PRA will extend its 
current spill prevention, control and countermeasures plan to include areas within the port 
that are sensitive to spills and releases from hazardous material, locations of any water 
intakes (e.g. cooling water), and training of response personnel in deployment of 
equipments during emergencies. PRA is also implementing an Operating Emergency 
Plan, and has an agreement with a specialized firm equipped with emergency response 
equipment (vessels, skimmers, oil booms, and dispersants).  
 
Regarding the temporary excessive noise generated in the port due to ships, cranes, 
relocation of containers and other activities in the port, PRA started the preparation of 
Strategic Port Area Noise mapping and Management that will allow monitoring of noise 
levels in selected spot areas.  
 
Page  7
The PRA Control Division and the Supervising Engineers will monitor the 
implementation of the EMP. Port Authority already has an environmental unit and is 
familiar with the monitoring of the EMP enforcement since Rijeka Gateway I. 
Specifically, PRA successfully dealt with proper transport and disposal of asbestos waste 
generated during construction works performed at the port’s passenger terminal. 
Furthermore, PRA is working on establishing its own Environmental Management 
System according to European best practices based on which a Port Environmental 
Review System will be adopted. This will facilitate general environmental performance 
of the Port, which includes mitigation measures and monitoring stipulated in the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the Rijeka Port Authority, Ministry of Environmental 
Protection, Physical Planning and Construction, Rijeka population, local or international 
consulting and constructing firms that will participate in the project implementation, 
NGOs and local environmental institutes involved in project monitoring.  
 
The EIA for the overall extension and rehabilitation of Brajdica container terminal was 
publicly disclosed in Croatian at the exhibition place of the Rijeka Municipality during 
September 14-27, 2005. The availability of the report at this location was advertised in 
the local newspaper on September 6, 2005. According to the Croatian EIA legislation, the 
report was publicly discussed on September 20, 2005 at the Rijeka municipality premises. 
A
summary of the EIA document was also disclosed on the website of the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection, Physical Planning and Construction in Croatian language. The 
public debate was attended by 16 persons including representatives of local county, 
Faculty of Science, Society of Historians, NGOs, Civil Society for Maritime Activities 
Improvement, local governmental authorities, etc. Comments were raised on the future 
economic growth of the port, technical aspects related to terminal construction design, 
concerns of air and noise pollution during future works. Minutes of the meeting were 
recorded and incorporated in the project documentation.  
 
The terms of reference for the Brajdica EIS were not disclosed to the public for 
consultation, but two consultations took place, one in September 2005 when the EIS was 
first disclosed according to Croatian procedures, and on May 19, 2008, when the present 
project was discussed in a public meeting in Opatija together with an updated Executive 
Summary of the Brajdica EIS and related EMP.  
 
The EIA for the overall extension of the Zagreb pier has also been disclosed and 
discussed in 2002 in accordance with the Croatian legislation. An overall public 
consultation for the whole project RGI took place on January 15, 2003, and the project 
EA, EA-Summary, and the EMP were made available to the public for comments. The 
documents were then made available for further comments during an additional seven 
days, but no comments were received during this time.  
 
The Overarching Executive Summary of the RGII project, the updated Executive 
Summary for Brajdica Terminal and a related EMP were disclosed in Croatian on the 
Page  8
PRA website on May 7, 2008 and discussed during a public meeting held on May 19, 
2008. Participants raised questions related to the oversight and handling of ship ballast 
waters in the port of Rijeka, future plans for development of the bulk cargo in the Bakar 
port, and the environmental assessment process for the Zagreb per extension from the 
initial 250 m to the planned 680 m. Public was invited to provide more comments in 
writing on the disclosed drafts until May 27, 2008. Concerns were raised by one citizen 
regarding the noise generated by ships, crenels and relocation of containers activities and 
the quality of the filling materials used in the sea for the future expansion of the 
terminals. PRA responded promptly to these concerns in a follow-up letter dated May 28, 
2008. As per OP/BP 4.01, the documents were also disclosed in English at the Bank’s 
Infoshop in Washington DC on May 8, 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/08/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerald Paul Ollivier 
06/26/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
06/26/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
06/26/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
06/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
08/19/2008 
Comments:  Approved as acting Sector Manager, Transport. 
