Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3273
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P086669 
Project Name:  Development of Emergency Medical Services and Investment Planning 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Daniel Dulitzky 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
26.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
91.99 
 
Municipalities of Borrowing Country 
14.28
106.27 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project objective is to improve the efficiency and outcomes of the Emergency 
Medical Services system and to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Health and 
Social Welfare to develop and implement strategic EU-oriented projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1.  Development of Emergency Medical Services (est. EUR 90.5 million total 
costs, of which EUR 15.6 million IBRD financing) will finance goods, services and 
training to support: (a) the establishment of a National Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS); (b) re-organization of pre-hospital EMS; (iii) integration of in-hospital 
EMS; and (iv) the use of telemedicine technology to improve EMS in remote locations.  
 
Component 2.  Institutional Support for EU-Oriented Strategic Planning (est. EUR 1.9 
million total costs, of which EUR 1.6 million IBRD financing) will finance goods, 
services and training to support:  (a) the development of priority programs, such as a 
hospital masterplan, a human resources strategy and investment plan, and e-health project 
Page  2
plans; (b) the building of capacity in the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare for 
accessing and managing EU funds; and (c) the administrative management of the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project location will be in each of the counties of Croatia.  The project beneficiaries 
will be located in Clinical and County Hospitals, a few remote Health Centers, 
ambulance and dispatch centers. The proposed upgrades will be carried on, on already 
existing buildings and will not require acquisition of new land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project may have a potential and limited environmental impact as it will support the 
establishment of integrated emergency departments, including the partial rehabilitation of 
the space for those departments, in up to 3 Clinical Hospitals and 13 County Hospitals 
(the list of facilities is known). The environmental risks associated with any construction 
and associated medical waste in heath facilities would then need to have an appropriate 
mitigation strategy. These impacts are predictable, temporary, and can be mitigated 
through application of standard measures in engineering designs, procurement 
construction, operation and maintenance. An Environmental Management Plan was 
prepared to guide mitigation and monitoring of potential noise, dust, waste, or other 
impacts on landscape and urban areas as well as to ensure that the civil works 
implementation are carried-out in accordance with the existing Croatian construction and 
environmental legislation as well as with the Bank operational policies applicable to the 
project.No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are foreseen.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental issues are related to (i) the possible construction of the 
integrated emergency departments, including the dust and noise occurring during 
demolition and construction; (ii) the disposal of construction and medical waste; and (iii) 
risk associated with handling of wastes during operation (municipal and hazardous).  The 
risk and potential negative impact is minimal and can be effectively managed taking into 
consideration these issues in the pre-design phase.  The EMP has taken into account local 
Croatian laws and practices related to environmental and construction permitting as well 
as the Bank Operational policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. No 
significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives were considered for the purposes of avoiding or minimizing adverse 
impacts as the potential adverse impacts are minimal.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has an Environmental Management Plan for the purposes of assessing the 
environmental risks and for planning the appropriate mitigation measures.  The proposed 
mitigation measures are in line with current the current laws and regulations of Croatia.  
The executing agency of the Borrower is experienced with these requirements and has 
sufficient capacity for their implementation. Monitoring will focus on measuring 
compliance with pollution standards, requirements for waste management and accidents 
preparedness.  
 
Some institutions responsible for project implementation (MoF, Ministry of 
Environment, Physical Planning and Construction Office) have been already involved 
with the implementation of World Bank projects and therefore have institutional capacity 
to apply the Bank’s operational policies. Representatives of MoHSW and building 
designers will ensure that the EMP measures related to the environment are included in 
the design stage of the new building financed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The potential stakeholders affected by the possible rehabilitation activities and the 
medical waste management of the medical facilities are the communities in which the 
hospitals are located, the users of the health facilities, and the staff members of those 
facilities. In addition, the stakeholders for the project are as well Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and Ministry of Environmental Protection, 
Physical Planning and Construction. The Environmental Management Plan has been 
made public to all stakeholders through its publication on the external website of the 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare on November 16, 2007.  Any received comments 
will be incorporated into EMP.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel Dulitzky 
11/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
11/21/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
01/30/2008 
Comments:  I approve based on the current information available. 
