Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/18/2009 
Report No.:  47944
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P109603 
Project Name:  Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jolanta Kryspin-Watson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.76
2.76 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the proposed Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project for 
Croatia is to enhance country’s preparedness, response to disasters, and monitoring of 
weather-related hazards in order to reduce disaster risk.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises two main components and a small component to support project 
management.  DRMAP will be implemented by National Rescue and Protection 
Directorate (NRPD) and Meteorological and Hydrological Service (DHMZ).  
 
-- Component A: Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Response  
 
The objective of component A is to strengthen capacity of the Government of Croatia to 
manage natural and man-made disasters and to effectively respond to emergencies.  This 
objective will be achieved through the support to the following activities:  
 
(A.1) Enhancement of 112 Emergency Call System;  
 
(A.2) Enhancement of National and Regional Fire Fighting Capacities; and  
 
(A.3) Enhancement of Public Awareness and Emergency Preparedness.  
Page  2
-- Component B:  Strengthening Weather Forecasting  
 
The objective of Component B is to strengthen the capacity of the Government of 
Croatia to deliver severe weather forecasts in support of disaster risk mitigation.   This 
objective will be achieved through support to the following activities:  
 
(B.1) Integrated Nowcasting System; and  
 
(B.2) Designing DHMZ Facility.  
 
-- Component C: Project Management  
 
The component will provide support to the implementation of the DRMAP.  It will 
consist of the technical assistance and training to the NPRD and DMHZ project staff.  In 
particular, the support will enhance the financial management and procurement functions, 
monitoring and evaluation as well as, if necessary, the technical aspects of project 
implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented country-wide but with majority of project coordination 
activities to be carried out in Zagreb.  The civil works are related to A2, A3 and B1 
components.  More specifically, the civil works will include: (i) refurbishment, 
modernization and reconstruction of Regional Fire Fighting Coordination Center in 
Divulje and polygon in Prgomet (near Split), (ii) refurbishment and reconstruction of 
civil protection warehouse in Horvati, (iii) construction of training polygon in Ivanic 
Grad, and (iv) site preparation works for radar installation in three locations (possible 
locations are: Monte Kope near Pula, island Dugi Otok (RP Grpascak), island Zirje, Kriz 
near Zadar and island Vis (or alternate islad Losovo).  Component A1 will include 
establishment and integration of information and communication system with no civil 
works involved, while component B2 will include financing of the design for a new 
DHMZ building whose construction will not be financed under this particular loan. The 
sites where civil works will take place on public land, do not require any land 
expropriation, are free of encroachments, squatters and there is no legal or illegal private 
use of these properties.  The same applies to the planned site for the proposed DHMZ 
building, design and feasibility study for which will be supported by the project (under 
sub-component B.2). Therefore, Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 will not 
be triggered. It should be noted that the five proposed sites for installation of DHMZ 
weather radars (of which three sites will be selected based on further technical reviews), 
currently belong to the Ministry of Defense and could not be visited by the Bank team 
during project preparation due to their “restricted military” status.  The team was 
informed by DMHZ that the considered land is guarded and free of encroachments or 
squatters, and there is no private legal or illegal use of these properties.  As soon as the 
sites are selected and the right of use transferred from the Ministry of Defense, but prior 
to installation of the new radars, the Borrower will provide to the Bank a written 
attestation and the Bank team will visit the sites to ascertain that no resettlement will 
arise as a consequence of the installation of the radars.  The Loan Agreement includes 
Page  3
stipulations to this effect, with disbursement condition related to the investments in new 
radars.  
 
The Government of Republic of Croatia issued a decision on transferring right of use of 
former military sites of Ivanic Grad, Horvati and Divulje to NPRD which is now awaiting 
such a transfer for the Prgomet site from the Ministry of Regional Development, Forestry 
and Water Management.  The former military sites consist of barracks, warehouses and 
polygons.  The proposed civil works will not require any land expropriation as the 
identified sites are under the Government / municipal ownership. The three sites (to be 
selected out of above five) will be transferred from the Ministry of Defense upon 
completion of technical evaluation of their suitability for weather radars.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bekim Imeri (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project triggers OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and was determined to be 
World Bank environmental assessment category “B.”  The physical investments under 
the project will include renovations and small-scale construction of selected facilities and 
installation of weather radars, and required preparation by the Croatian counterparts of an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The civil works are of limited scope, therefore, 
the impacts are temporary, easily foreseen and mitigated.  The environmental impacts 
during construction phase are related to the typical building construction, such as air 
pollution, waste generation, noise, soil and water pollution and potential safety hazards.  
 
The impacts during operation are mainly related to waste management. The radars size 
is relatively small (radome sphere - 2.5 m radius) and will be installed on ex-military sites 
with the existing infrastructure.  The radars will not have any significant environmental 
impact, including the impact on migratory or local bird species. However, in Ivanic Grad 
Page  4
and to the certain extend in Divulje and Prgomet, due to the training to be conducted, 
after completion of the investments, with potentially hazardous materials (fire 
extinguishers, etc.) a certain impact to the environment may potentially occur. To address 
it, the operator will prepare, in the early phase of project implementation, the standard 
operational procedures which will provide procedures for handling the equipment and 
residues after trainings to prevent /minimize damage to the environment. The operating 
procedures will be developed prior to launching any training with use of extinguishing 
materials in project-supported facilities.  
 
The project includes renovations, reconstruction and construction of new facilities.  The 
sites for the proposed works are under the Government / municipal ownership 
(transferred from the Ministry of Defense or Municipality to the NPRD and to be 
transferred to DHMZ) and there is no legal or illegal private use of these properties.  
According to the NPRD, these military sites are not contaminated since the land was used 
as stationeries, accommodation facilities and “physical fitness” training of solders.  
 
The sites where civil works will take place on public land, do not require any land 
expropriation, are free of encroachments, squatters and there is no legal or illegal private 
use of these properties.  The same applies to the planned site for the proposed DHMZ 
building, design and feasibility study for which will be supported by the project (under 
sub-component B.2). Therefore, Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 will not 
be triggered. The proposed five sites for installation of three weather radars (the three 
sites will be selected based on further technical reviews), currently belong to the Military 
and could not be visited by the Bank team due to their “military secret” status.  The team 
was assured by the DHMZ that the considered land is free of encroachments or squatter 
and there is no private legal or illegal use of these properties.  As soon as the sites are 
selected and the right of use transferred to DMHZ the team will visit them.  
 
The project also triggers the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) due to possible 
chance finds at the project sites.  The appropriate provisions compliant with the OP/BP 
4.11 have been included in the EMP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to provide positive social impacts by decreasing the vulnerability 
of the population that is at risk to natural disasters.  This will be achieved through 
strengthening of the institutional and technical capacity of public institutions in managing 
and effectively responding to disasters; in providing people with more precise hydro-
meteorological forecasts; thus, informing communities at risk of imminent hazards; and 
facilitating preparedness measures.People in the coastal areas will particularly benefit 
from the activities related to wild fires hazard risk reduction and responses as wild fires 
are frequent along the coast. The public awareness campaign program under the project 
will be an important element in making the general public and media aware of the risks 
associated with natural hazards and in promoting individual preparedness.  The multi-
media program will be designed for adults and school children alike.  Evidence from 
natural disasters throughout the world clearly demonstrates the importance of having a 
Page  5
knowledgeable public, often acting in emergencies as "first responders", who understand 
actions to be taken before, during and after an emergency.  The social assessment carried 
out during project preparation concluded that no indirect long-term negative social 
impacts are anticipated due to project-supported activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternatives considered were related to the choice of locations for the above 
mentioned structures. The locations for construction works were considered based on the 
strategic relevance for reaching the project objectives (for example: regional fire fighting 
center to be positioned in Dalmatia which is the area most affected by fires) and 
availability of unused military sites. The selection of sites for radars installation will be 
made based on technical criteria which will determine the most suitable location.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which focuses on 
the physical interventions mentioned above. The EMP identifies mitigation measures 
typical for the refurbishment and construction of buildings. These include measures for 
dust minimization, construction waste management, site organization, temporary storage 
of the material, chance finds, working hours, etc. For the operation phase the mitigation 
measures include good maintenance practices, waste management and operation 
emergency plans.  
 
Update to ISDS as of March 1, 2009  
 
The EMP also mentions future sites for the radars, which are not of the significant size 
(2.5 m radius) and which will be located in coastal zone as they need to cover north, 
middle and southern Adriatic. The publically disclosed EMP included three potential sites 
for the radars. During the appraisal the DMHZ informed Bank mission that the Ministry 
of Defense has offered additional sites for DMHZ consideration. Currently, the DHMZ is 
assessing the five sites form the technical point of view and will decide soon on the three 
most suitable ones. Consequently, the new potential sites have been added to the updated 
EMP and disclosed. During the process of selection of the sites for the purpose of radar 
installation, environmental conditions will be also taken into account. If any of the 
chosen sites will be in the vicinity of protected areas or raise any other environmental 
concerns, additional environmental assessment for the radar sites will be carried out. Due 
to the updates, the revised EMP was again disclosed. In addition, the client will share the 
EMP with the Directorate for Nature Protection to make sure that from the nature 
protection point of view the sites are acceptable for radar installation. All received 
comments will be addressed in the further revised version of the EMP.  
 
The borrower will assign one person within the Implementation Team to be in charge of 
the coordination of the implementation of the EMP. The person will participate in Bank 
training on environmental safeguards. The EMP will be part of the bidding documents for 
contractors who will implement the measures as well as part of the bidding document for 
supervising engineer who will be in charge for monitoring of the civil works. The 
Page  6
supervising engineer will be required to submit biannual reports on the implementation of 
the EMP. During the operation phase the maintenance of the facilities will be required to 
follow up and monitor implementation of the EMP as it will be part of the regular good 
maintenance practice.  The monitoring of the whole construction process will also be 
supported by random inspections from the Ministry of Environmental Protection, 
Physical Planning and Construction.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are: NRPD and all members in the vertical and horizontal structure, 
DHMZ, Ministry of Finance, citizens of the municipalities involved, local NGOs and 
Ministry of Defense who provided the land.  
 
The EMP was disclosed in Croatian and English on the websites of the NRPD and 
DHMZ. At the same time, the hard copies were disclosed in project 
municipalities’announcement boards so the main stakeholders can have an access to it. 
After about two weeks of disclosure (which included announcement of public 
consultation) a public consultations on the EMP were held in Zagreb. The public was 
able also to send the comments by email or regular mail. The Implementation Team 
responded to all comments and updated the draft version accordingly.  As the EMP was 
disclosed again due to the fact that it had to be updated to reflect additional potential sites 
for radar installation, the received comments will be addressed in the revised EMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jolanta Kryspin-Watson 
03/05/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
03/05/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bekim Imeri 
03/05/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
