Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3877 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P111205 
Project Name: Nature Protection Investment Project 
Task Team Leader: Karin Shepardson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 1, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (70%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (10%);Forestry (10%);Solid waste management (5%);Sewerage (5%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Land administration 
and management (S);Participation and civic engagement (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to help establish and implement an integrated 
ecological network which advances EU harmonization and integration under the Bird and 
Habitat Directives, and generates local and national benefits.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Nature Protection Investments. The project will support TA, training and capacity building for 
preparation of Management Plans and elaboration of Action Plans for National Parks and Nature 
Parks and, to a more limited extent, for the county level Public Institutions responsible for 
Nature Protection.  Support for planning will include inventory and data collection, assistance 
with problem analysis, business planning and document preparation, and workshops and other 
activities to ensure effective stakeholder participation in the planning process. A special effort 
will be placed on helping to establish one or more Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), as this has 
been identified as both a national and EU priority (e.g. Marine Directive).  The project will also 
finance investments (TA, equipment and works) to support implementation of priority Action 
Plans, including: expanded and improved visitor service infrastructure to enhance safety and 
Page  2
accessibility (including for visitors with special needs) and encourage increased visitation in 
under-utilized areas; strengthened management and supervision services; improved interpretation 
and education facilities and programs; equipment and facilities for research and monitoring in 
support of  PA management objectives; development of cultural heritage resources within and 
around PAs; and marketing and promotion of PAs as tourism destinations.  Action plan 
investments will mainly target National Parks and Nature Parks, but may be extended to other 
sites within the wider NEN with completed Management Plans, where this is a priority for 
achieving national and local conservation objectives.  
 
The project would also help accelerate efforts to establish a GIS-format management system 
integrated across the ecological network as required for allocation and management of Natura 
2000 payments.  Specific investments include digitization and conversion of research and field 
data into electronic formats, field surveys, and legal support on more difficult park boundary 
conflicts, development of communication protocols across existing systems to enable sharing of 
data, development of user guidelines and training, provision of geo-referencing field equipment 
for data collection (e.g.GPS, specialized marine equipment) and computer workstations and 
training.  This work will build from and help accelerate several donor driven efforts lead by the 
State Institute for Nature Protection in close cooperation with the State Geodetic Administration 
(SGA).  
 
The project will help strengthen fire prevention, monitoring, and control efforts lead by parks in 
their role as first responders and as a vehicle for public education.  It will help finance specific 
priority infrastructure improvements such as reconstruction of firebreak roads, automated 
telemetry equipment for early detection and warning, fire fighting equipment adapted to park 
vehicles, and training and public awareness.  Priority will be placed on most vulnerable coastal 
and island protected areas.  While most fire related investments will be part of agreed actions 
plans, these investments will not be required to stem from management plan action plans where 
this process is not completed.  
 
Community Driven Conservation and Rural Revitalization Investments. The project will 
support capacity building and a menu of small community grants to help simultaneously meet 
nature protection and rural development objectives, while promoting local benefits to 
populations surrounding or living within protected areas.  Grants would be administered across 
the three main eco-regions of Croatia with the assistance of decentralized grant facilitation 
teams. Specifically, this component would support three different types of grants:  
 
Individual Conservation and Rural Revitalization Grants (up to Euro 25,000) to local 
stakeholders to develop or expand economic activities, education, or research programs 
compatible with nearby PA management objectives.  These grants would encourage win-win 
investments, both profitable for the local recipient and important to the associated protected area 
management plan objectives.  
 
LEADER model Integrated Community and Business Grants (up to Euro 100,000) will support 
a
coherent package of small scale public and/or private investments.  These integrated 
investments would be identified as an outcome of training as EU LEADER compatible Local 
Action Groups (LAG) to develop an area or geographic based vision for local economic 
Page  3
development linked with surrounding protected areas management objectives.  A menu of 
complementary investments in support of their local vision would be identified and prioritized 
through a participatory process involving a wide range of regional stakeholders across a clearly 
defined geographic area with populations exceeding 10,000 people (in most cases several 
communities must join efforts).  
 
Pilots of incentive payments for conservation-oriented land use. These grant payments will help 
secure implementation of activities that are important for PA management but that are not 
profitable for local populations (win-lose activities). The project would collaborate with the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Rural Development, which is already planning to pilot the 
implementation of agri-environmental programs in several areas.  Unlike grants for enterprise 
development, such incentive payments need to be maintained over the long-term and require a 
sustained source of funding.  The project would support the development of procedures for 
making payments compatible with future EU funding, and provide initial funding to pilot 
payments which test the procedures and raise awareness about the approach among local 
stakeholders.  
 
Institutional Capacity Building for Nature Protection.  The project will promote institutional 
capacity building and training to help promote exchange and collaboration across a wide range of 
government stakeholders in support of the ecological network system. Targeted support will be 
provided to the Ministry of Culture Directorate for Nature Protection, the State Institute for 
Nature Protection, county institutions, and protected areas staff at both the national and county 
levels.  Special focus will be placed on strengthening management capacity, sustainable finance, 
monitoring and evaluation, career development, and interpretation. The project will support 
mainstreaming of nature protection into the education system. Support for nature inspectors 
would be provided to help complement and integrate with an EU PHARE program in support of 
environment inspectors.  The loan will also support outreach and capacity strengthening to other 
Ministries and sectors where mandates converge on issues of importance to nature protection.  
Some joint investment actions would be financed which require intra-ministry cooperation to 
provide tangible opportunities for collaboration under the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project investments are primarily located in protected areas with agreed management plans 
across the country and at administrative facilities in Zagreb.  Smaller community grant 
investments would be located in neighboring properties and buffer zones of protected areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has a good capacity for environmental safeguard policies, as was demonstrated in 
the preceeding project.  The Ministry of Culture team has experience with World Bank 
safeguards review and implementation including their application to small grants. The client is 
also experienced with the Bank's social safeguard policies as it applies to resource restriction in 
protected areas, chance finds, and cultural monuments. Croatia's EIA and Strategic EIA 
legislation has been harmonized with the EU, and preparations are underway for introduction of 
EU Natura 2000 permits, which would be required for any proposed construction in protected 
areas.   
 
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment policy is applicable.  EA will address both comprehensive 
project issues and specific arrangements for small grants, including site-specific criteria for 
specific EA development as detailed in the POM.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Natural Habitats Policy is applicable because the project would support investments 
within protected areas, including but not limited to visitor center and sanitation facilities.  All 
infrastructure investments within protected areas will be done in accordance with the park and 
environmental management plans.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
This policy may be applicable because considerable areas of Croatia parks are the property of 
and are managed by Croatian Forests (Hrvatske Sume).  Therefore special attention to forest 
issues will be included in EIA.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
This policy is not applicable as the project will not support pest management and possible 
pest management activities related to this project will be included in the negative list of the 
POM.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The policy is applicable because the project will support re-furbishment of cultural 
monuments identified as priorty to protected areas.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Not applicable.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will not finance and land acquisition; and activities carried out under the project 
will not require or entail any land acquisition and/or physical relocation of people.  However, the 
project may require involuntary restriction of access to natural resources in legally designated 
protected areas. A Resource Access Restriction Process Framework for the project will be 
developed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Not applicable.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project does not trigger the formal notification requirement of this policy because it will 
not support any infrastructure involved in abstraction of water.  The project will support data 
collection and planning for marine protected areas in Croatian waters of the Adriatic Sea, which 
could involve water resource surveys, which are eligible for exemption from the notification 
requirement.  The team will consultan with LEGEN if an exemption approval is required in this 
case.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Not applicable.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/18/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Early Feb. 2009 - Launch (PPA financed)  
 
March 2009 - Complete   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
10/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
10/06/2008 
Comments:  Acting Safeguard Coordinator as Agi is part of task team. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
10/07/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
