Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/22/2009 
Report No.:  AC4450
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P116080 
Project Name:  Export Finance Intermediation Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 19, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (40%);General finance sector (30%);Other 
industry (25%);Agro-industry (5%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project's primary objective is to support export growth by providing 
medium and long-term working capital and investment finance to exporters and FX 
earning enterprises (e.g. Tourism, Logistics).The outcomes of the project will be 
measured by the export and investment performance of the sub-borrowers, the amount of 
medium and long-term lending extended to exporters in Croatia, the payment 
performance of the sub-borrowers in the project, and assessments of HBOR#s 
development as a market based lending institution   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Euro 100mn Croatia Export Finance Intermediation Project (CEFIP) is a 
single-component project consisting of a credit line to Croatian Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (HBOR) as the borrower and implementing agency. HBOR will 
intermediate the funds through Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs), which in 
turn will on-lend to eligible private exporters and quasi-exporters such as the tourism 
sector. The envisaged project is to be implemented through HBOR#s funding department. 
Its responsibilities will include: (i) on-lending to PFIs for final lending to sub-borrowers 
(ii) ensure effective functioning of the on-lending facility to final borrowers through 
Page  2
PFIs; (iii) on-going monitoring of the PFIs to ensure compliance with project criteria; (iv) 
responsibility for adherence to all fiduciary and safeguard requirements of the World 
Bank for final borrowers; and (v) monitoring and evaluation based on key project 
development indicators.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Sub-projects will be all over Croatia.  
 
HBOR will be an implementing agency. PFIs will however carry of an individual sub 
projects screening and will inform HBOR on the outcome. HBOR will review and 
approve the EA documents. During sub project implementation, PFI will be expected to 
monitor sub-borrower#s compliance with EMPs and report to the HBOR on the 
environmental performance of their clients as an integral part of their regular reporting on 
the status of portfolio.  The HBOR will inform the IBRD on the environmental due 
diligence applied through the general reporting on the project progress.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment Policies will apply to the proposed project.  
 
The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The design of the project 
calls for FI environmental category, as HBOR (borrower) will intermediate the funds 
through PFIs, which in turn will on-lend to eligible private and quasi exporters.  
 
Environmental due diligence will be applied through the procedures for the selection 
and implementation of investments agreed between the Bank, the Borrower and PFIs. An 
environmental management framework (EMF) document was prepared to outline the 
guiding principles of environmental screening, assessment, review, management, and 
monitoring of sub-loans as well as to describe roles and responsibilities in carrying out 
the environmental work in the course of the project implementation.  
Page  3
Only EA Category B and C sub-projects will be eligible, therefore projects having large 
scale impacts are excluded.  The environmental due diligence procedures identified in 
EMF will comply with both Croatian national and WB environmental safeguards 
procedures.  
 
Pest Management policy for the project is triggered as some sub projects if potential 
subprojects are in the export-oriented food production and processing sector. If eligible 
sub-projects will include financing for purchase of pesticides (including post-harvest 
treatment) or investments which are likely to increase or expand the use of pesticides in 
such operations, the EMF sets out requirements for applicants to prepare a simple Pest 
(and Pesticide) Management Plan consistent with OP 4.09 requirements.   
 
Given the rich cultural heritage of Croatia the policy of physical cultural resources 
OP/BP 4.11 is to be triggered in view of expectations that some operations will likely 
have a direct impact on historical structures or sites (e.g. in tourism sector) and the  
possible chance finds in sub projects as well as.  The EMF indicates that sub-projects will 
comply with local legislation on chance finds as well as including advance consultation 
with the Ministry of Culture through local permitting process in case of potential impact 
on historical sites or structures.  
 
The EMF states that no potential beneficiaries can participate in the project if they 
would need land acquisition for the activities to be supported under this project. Re-
habilitation and reconstruction (which could involve demolition of no longer suitable 
structure and erection of a new one) of existing buildings within the roughly same 
footprint would be permissible. Investments will only be accepted if they involve 
unencumbered land or property (i.e. no squatters or encroachers or not requiring the 
eviction of anyone resident in such property). The PFI#s should verify for each sub 
project the unencumbered status of the property prior to approving any sub-project which 
could raise such issues. Under these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP / 
BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the project will support medium and long-term working capital and investment 
finance to exporters and FX earning enterprises (e.g. Tourism, Logistics), it is not 
expected that any proposed activities will cause multiple, significant, and irreversible 
adverse environmental and/or health impacts. The screening procedures specified in the 
EMF are designed to eliminate any subprojects where these aspects may pose any risk.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Despite a low likelihood of occurrence, sub-projects which would qualify for Category A 
for environmental assessment purposes are excluded from the activities eligible for the 
project support. Approval of higher risk Category B sub-projects (B+) will require prior 
review by HBOR and IBRD. HBOR will work closely with PFIs to assist them with 
environmental work to ensure that PFIs are adequately applying environmental screening, 
Page  4
review, approval, and monitoring procedures. The status of environmental compliance 
will be reported by each PFIs to HBOR on regular basis and the HBOR will provide this 
information to the Bank as a part of general progress reporting.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of the project Operational Manual the Borrower-HBOR has prepared an 
environment section which serves as the Environmental Management Framework and 
defines the environmental screening and assessment procedures for the project and sub 
projects.  
 
Environmental screening of sub-project proposals will be essential to ensure that they 
are properly categorized and respective environmental review is carried out for them.  
 
This mechanism of environmental screening, review, approval, and supervision of 
subprojects, including roles and responsibilities of all agencies involved in it, is described 
in the environmental framework document and included in the Operations Manual of the 
project. According to the established environmental framework, sub-loan applicants will 
be required to carry out adequate type of environmental assessment of the proposed 
subprojects and to obtain environmental permits as prescribed by the national legislation.   
 
PFIs will be responsible for environmental screening of sub-loan applications, attaching 
relevant environmental categories to them, reviewing environmental assessment reports 
submitted by sub-loan applicants, approving them, and carrying out environmental 
monitoring in the course of sub-project implementation. HBOR will assist PFIs and prior- 
review more complexes project that fall under B+ category.  
 
Depending on the assigned environmental category, the sub project application package 
would include one of the following: a) a full scale Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), b) Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP), c) a simplified environmental assessment, so called EMP checklist, or d) a 
justified statement that no EA are required.  
 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will be developed to provide guidance on the 
application of mitigation measures and a system of monitoring will be introduced to 
ensure compliance of sub-project implementation with EMPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(HBOR), the Ministry of Finance, selected PFIs and exporters and FX earning 
enterprises. The implementation agency is HBOR, however the environmental screening 
will fall under PFIs responsibility. HBOR has acted as implementing agency for several 
WB loans and GEF grant (Municipal Environmental Infrastructure Project, Renewable 
Energy Resources Project), therefore the staff is familiar with the WB safeguards 
procedures. Nevertheless it will require enhancement. The environmental oversight 
practice is mostly limited to and it mainly relies on national EIA system.  
 
Therefore, HBOR capacity is to be strengthened through training in order to adequately 
handle its tasks.  
Page  5
Environmental good standards applied by potential PFIs are diverse. Due diligence of 
some commercial banks is limited to checking compliance of their borrowers with the 
national legislation. Others have their corporate environmental policies in place as well.  
 
Despite the current practice, all PFIs will require introduction to the main principles of 
the Bank#s environmental safeguards and to the project OM through a start-up workshop 
or a similar short-term training. Bank task team will facilitate the training and will closely 
monitor the screening process to support HBOR.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
 
Comments:   
