Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3755
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P102732 
Project Name:  Coastal Cities Pollution Control 2 Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael John Webster 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P102395 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (70%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other environment and 
natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
94.24 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.40 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
94.24
94.24 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the provision of efficient and sustainable 
wastewater services in participating coastal municipalities, the nutrient load entering 
Croatia's coastal waters, and pilot innovative wastewater treatment solutions.  
 
The indicators to be used to assess progress are:  
 
-- % of households in participating cities able to connect to wastewater services;  
 
-- % of wastewater collected that is treated as per applicable legislation;  
 
-- performance of participating MWSCs as measured by operating ratio, collectionrate 
and debt service ratio is above a minimum threshold;  
 
-- reduction in nutrient load in cities with enhanced nutrient reduction facilities; and  
 
-- increased knowledge of alternative nutrient reduction wastewater treatment 
technologies.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Project is the second phase of the Adaptable Program Loan (APL),and will have the 
same three components as APL1: Wastewater Investments; Institutional Strengthening 
and Seawater Quality Monitoring.  
 
-- Component 1: Wastewater investments will finance investments and engineering 
design and construction supervision for the construction, expansion and rehabilitation of 
wastewater collection, treatment and disposal systems.  APL2 will scale-up the number of 
cities participating in the project from 11 to 30 using the same financing structure as 
APL1.  The list of sub-projects to be financed in the Project is in annex 4.  Sub-projects 
have been selected based on eligibility criteria detailed in annex 1. Hrvatske Vode 
(Croatian Waters-HV) is responsible for appraising each sub-project prior to signing the 
sub-loan agreement with the MWSC and municipality.  GEF resources will be used to 
finance enhanced nutrient reduction facilities in waste water treatment plants (WWTPs) 
to be financed out of the loan/government funds in areas of high nutrient load.  
 
The required level of treatment at this stage cannot be fully determined as it will depend 
on the sensitivity of the recipient, and Republic of Croatia still has not made a decision 
on the sensitivity of the Adriatic sea. Therefore, the projects start with the first step -- 
mechanical treatment in smaller cities.  Large cities like Zadar are introducing biological 
treatment as it will be required according to Urban Waste Directive due to the size of the 
plant. The phased program leaves space for the upgrade of the WWTP. While acquiring 
land for WWTP, the municipalities are choosing locations where they will have enough 
space for the upgrade of the system if necessary.  
 
-- Component 2: Institutional strengthening to finance equipment, technical assistance, 
training and studies in three sub-components: (i) sector development to assist the 
Ministry of Regional Development, Forestry and Water Management (MRDFWM) and 
HV implement the Water Management Strategy and further align the sector to EU 
accession priorities; (ii) institutional strengthening of MWSCs to improve their financial 
and operating efficiency; and (iii) project management to support the Implementing Unit, 
Hrvatske Vode Jadranski Projekt (HV Adriatic Project-HVJP), to implement the project.  
 
-- Component 3: Seawater quality monitoring to finance equipment, and technical 
assistance to strengthen the HV monitoring systems; and the seawater quality monitoring 
systems of the Ministry of Environmental Protection, Physical Planning and Construction 
(MEPPPC).  The component will have two sub-
components: (i) to strengthen HV’s 
monitoring of the effluent from WWTP to assess the impact of the program on the quality 
of coastal waters. Under this sub-component, the enhanced nutrient reduction WWTP 
(financed out of the GEF (Global Environment Facility) co-financing) will be monitored 
for their impact on the receiving waters, and the impact of each different treatment 
technology on nutrient reduction; and (ii) to strengthen MEPPPC’s monitoring activities 
to extend the monitoring activitiesfinanced in APL1 to all MWSCs in APL2, and increase 
the focus on EU compliance.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All project sites to be financed from IBRD have been identified and are currently in 
different stage of preparation. All the sites are located on the coast except Opuzen and 
Metkovic which are located on the river Neretva. The projects will mainly finance 21 
mechanical WWTP and 3 biological, and in some cases only sewerage systems.  The 
largest capacity WWTP (68,000 PE) will be constructed in Pula. Some sub project sites 
are the same as in APL1. In these sites the extension of the sewerage system or the 
additional level of treatment complementary to the APL1 will be financed (examples 
Pula, Rijeka, Zadar and Dugi Rat).  
 
A
supplemental GEF grant will finance the reduction of the nutrient load entering 
Croatia's coastal waters in the zones prone to eutrophication due to the high imission of 
nutrients from participating municipalities in APL2 and implement enhanced wastewater 
treatment solutions like membrane technologies, extended aerations, etc. The GEF will 
finance only the incremental cost for enhancing the systems financed by IBRD to remove 
nutrients to a larger extent. The GEF grant will co-finance investments under the project 
for enhanced nutrient reduction in four project sites.  Current candidates are: Cres, 
Opuzen, Metkovic and Porec.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental category of financial intermediary (FI) is applicable for the APL 2, as 
the APL 1 was FI as well. The sub projects as envisaged under the project will mainly be 
category B with the possibility that some are categorized as A depending on size of the 
WWTP, location and length of the outfall, level of treatment and sensitivity of the 
recipient.  
Page  4
The project triggers four safeguard policies: environmental assessment; projects in 
international waters, physical cultural resources and involuntary resettlement (land 
acquisition).  Issues that trigger these policies do not pose special risks, as they are, and 
will be, managed systematically, using local experience, local and EU standards and 
guidance from the Bank.  
 
All safeguard policies triggered by the project can be adequately dealt with given the 
good practice in Croatia,  the institutional capacity to enforce it, and the risk mitigation 
steps built into the project.  
 
-- OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment  
 
The project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits by improving 
wastewater collection, treatment and disposal systems for the municipalities participating 
in the project, including from seasonal tourists. By focusing on this region, the Project 
aims to have an important impact on preserving the environmental resources on which 
the growth of tourism and its capacity for employment generation is based.  Investing in 
wastewater treatment is expected to have a direct positive impact on improving and 
maintaining the quality of bathing and fishing waters in the Adriatic Sea.  The associated 
economic benefits are expected to be significant, and meeting the EU water quality 
requirements for accession is an articulated policy goal of the Government. Project-
financed activities will reduce environmental degradation related to inadequate 
wastewater management through the following:  (a) increased sewerage network for 
waste water collection will reduce the number of septic tanks, many of which leak into 
karst areas and are not properly managed; (b) improve the quality of the wastewater 
discharges by introducing primary and/or more advanced treatment; (c) reduce direct 
wastewater discharges into coastal waters, waterways and beaches (bathing waters) by 
constructing long outfalls from the waste water treatment plants, and (d)improve public 
health through better water quality of bathing and shellfish growing areas.  
 
As with the operation and construction of any wastewater treatment plant and 
accompanying sewer system, potential negative impacts include air, soil and water 
pollution associated with the following:  (a) construction/ rehabilitation; (b) treatment of 
wastewaters; (c) management of waste sludge from the treatment plants; (d) operations; 
and (e) decommissioning.  The following impacts are to be especially considered:  odors, 
noise, spreading of insects, and potential health hazards in the vicinity of discharge, 
exploitation of the sea and seacoast, potential changes in flora and fauna due to the 
discharge of treated waste waters, decline in land value, and disposal of sludge from the 
treatment plant.  
 
In APL1, an Operation Manual was prepared to address all environmental issues.For all 
11 projects in the APL1 EIAs were prepared according to guidelines in Operation 
Manual, of which six resulted in the decision on the EIA from the MEPPC.Triggers for 
APL2 are expected to be achieved by negotiations.  The triggers included:  (a) set 
baseline indicators for wastewater discharges for the 11 municipalities participating in 
Page  5
APL1 (not met); (b) determination of sensitive and less sensitive areas in the Adriatic Sea 
(met); and (c) a Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment (SEA) that deals with the 
regional effect of the wastewater discharges (in process of being met-see below). APL1 
will continue to be monitored under APL2.  
 
APL1 financed a study to consolidate effluent data from the wastewater treatment 
facilities in the 11 towns, and consolidate the seawater quality data in the same sites, 
through the three monitoring exercises in May, August and October.  The results were to 
be used as the baseline for the project; however, the team has only received 2 of the 11 
sites, as the others were unable to be sampled due to the weather conditions at the time.  
The team agreed with HV, that the remaining sites will be sampled by negotiations and 
results submitted to the Bank.   Full baseline data is expected by end of July 2008.  
Currently prepared SEA deals solely with the investments financed under APL1, without 
providing explicit opinion on the potential cumulative effect. The SEA consultant will 
update the study to reflect the cumulative effect of the whole program if possible or at 
least for APL1 and APL2 phases. The study will be completed before any construction 
contract for outfall under APL2 will be signed.  
 
To minimize and address safeguard-related impacts for APL2, HVJP updated the 
Operation Manual on Safeguards Policies, i.e. Environmental Framework (EF).  The EF 
is a tool used to ensure that the proposed investments implemented through the project 
comply with the existing environmental protection laws, regulations, and standards in 
Croatia, and with World Bank Operation Policies and Practices.  The EF calls for 
preparation and implementation of EIAs with an EMP for all wastewater treatment 
plants. The EF was updated to reflect the details of APL 2, to reflect changes in the 
legislation, and to strengthen reporting requirements.  The EF distinguishes three 
procedures and proposes the content of the EIA for the following: (a) for cities with over 
50,000 PE and systems 10,000
–50,000 PE for which the Ministry estimated that there is a 
need for EIA by the Ministry; (b) for investments that do not require EIA according to 
Croatian procedures; and (c) for subprojects that already went through Croatian EIA 
procedure and obtained a decision on acceptance by the MEPPPC.  
 
Before appraisal of the APL2, the borrower prepared a sample EIA for Vodice 
wastewater treatment plant together with the EMP and translated the executive summary 
in English.  The EIA for Vodice has already passed legal Croatian EIA procedure and 
was publicly disclosed and consulted on February 6, 2004.  The documents recommend 
preventive actions and mitigation measures to address possible environmental impacts. 
EIA Executive Summaries for Metkovic and Sukosan –- Bibinje werealso prepared.  
 
Preparation of mitigations plans are defined through the EF and, as such, will be part of 
EIAs and EMPs.  Each EIA and EMP will include a monitoring program for the 
individual sites.  In addition, the project will support a strong environmental monitoring 
program within HV and MEPPPC similarly as in APL1 which included:  rehabilitation 
and expansion of two water quality laboratories, one in Zagreb and one on the coast, a 
study to consolidate effluent data from the wastewater treatment facilities in the 11 
towns, and do three monitoring exercises in May, August and October.  In addition, under 
Page  6
the project financing, equipment has been purchased to improve the monitoring systems 
(lab equipment, sampling equipment etc.) and consulting services have financed a Joint 
Venture of four local institutes to improve their monitoring activities with a focus on the 
11 sites in the project. The MEPPC component financed the monitoring of the changes in 
the marine ecosystem brought about by the discharge of treated municipal faecal and 
industrial wastewater, but also by other planned human activities in the internal sea 
waters. These parameters are being used to establish a model of relatively proper quality 
of ecological state of the Adriatic Sea, which will enable insight into the present ecology 
state and model the potential future changes. The monitoring program for land-based 
pollution for the APL2 was prepared under APL1.  The implementation of the proposed 
monitoring program will be financed as part of the Component 3 of APL2 and will help 
Croatia to approximate its monitoring program to EU.  The scope of the monitoring, 
proposed in the monitoring program prepared under APL1 will be approved during 
project implementation.  The program focuses on the following:  wastewater discharged 
from public sewerage system; impact of wastewater discharged from public sewerage 
systems on sea quality; sea quality; sediment; biota; status of biological communities; 
industrial wastewater; and impact of industrial wastewater on the quality of the sea. The 
APL2 will also introduce easily monitorable indicators such as the amounts of the 
wastewater/effluent discharge, broken down by degree of treatment and compared with 
the estimated amounts of the like effluents that would be discharged in the absence of the 
project.  
 
-- OP/BP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources  
 
Direct impact on protected structures/buildings is not expected during project 
implementation as the locations selected for wastewater treatment plants are bare land in 
the vicinity of the cities, usually owned by the state or the municipality or already 
acquired for the purpose of constructing waste water treatment plant.  However, the 
policy is triggered because in Croatian coastal areas, experience has shown that chance 
finds are rather common in construction and excavation works.  County offices of the 
Ministry of Culture and local archaeological museums investigate and manage chance 
finds very professionally, as demonstrated by their response to discoveries in Pula that 
triggered the policy.  As in APL1, the Ministry of Culture identifies possible sites of 
historical value during the final design stage and oversees construction in those areas.  
APL2 will therefore continue the precedent of full compliance with Croatian laws and 
practices and the Bank’s Physical Cultural Resources policy during implementation.  
Procedure for chance finds are described in the Operation Manualâ
 ”Safeguards 
Policiesâ
 ”as well as in sample EIA and EMP. 
 
-- OP/BP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement  
 
The project triggers OP 4.12 because private land may be acquired for treatment 
facilities and pumping stations.  Experience from APL1 has shown that system designers, 
in consultation with local officials, make a great effort to use state or municipal land for 
facilities, rather than acquire private property.  Very little private property was affected in 
total so far.  Only one small plot was expropriated during APL1 and one has been the 
Page  7
subject of protracted negotiation.  All other transactions were concluded through mutual 
agreement or, in the case of rights-of-way, granted by household without compensation 
or in exchange for household connections.  Croatian legislation, which remained 
unchanged during APL1, adequately protects the interests of property owners. The laws 
are implemented transparently, with public announcements and consultations with 
affected persons in each stage, from site designation in the urban plan through the process 
of obtaining location and construction permits.  The land market is well established and 
officials have reasonable negotiation authority, which is reflected in the very high 
incidence of negotiated transactions and low incidence of appeals.  In practice, the most 
difficult land issues in APL1 were related to gaining access to maritime domain and 
transferring state land from one authority to another.  
 
Specific land acquisition requirements for APL2 will only be known at the time of final 
design, thus the client has prepared, updated and disclosed the Land Acquisition and 
Resettlement Framework for APL1.  The revised Operations Manual incorporates the 
updated policy framework.  Land acquisition and rights of way requirements are fully 
detailed in the final design.  Ownership must be transferred or a servitude agreement 
concluded before a construction permit is issued on any affected land.  When it is 
determined that a sub-project requires land acquisition, the municipality will notify the 
project management office and submit the information required to comply with OP 4.12.  
The project office retains the services of a lawyer to advise municipalities on land 
acquisition issues and to monitor and report land acquisition status for the project. Bank 
supervision missions will review status reports and visit municipalities with contentious 
issues, as well as those with the most numerous instances of the acquisition of land or 
rights of way.  
 
-- OP/BP 7.50, Projects on International Waterways  
 
The policy is triggered as the treated waste waters will be discharged into Adriatic Sea 
bordering Slovenia, Italy, Bosnia and Montenegro.  During preparation of the APL 
Program, in compliance with OP 7.5, all riparians were notified of the project (in January 
2004) and no objections were received.  The Program identified 47 sub-projects for total 
project cost of around Euro 280 million, and these numbers are mentioned in the 
notification letter.  APL1 (which is nearly completed) had investments in 11 cities.  APL2 
will expand the project to an additional 30 cities and the type of the investments remains 
unchanged.  As the activities under the APL2 fall under the overall activities stipulated 
under the notification for the Program, all notification requirements are considered met.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The investments supported are intended to improve waste water services in the Croatian 
Adriatic Sea area. No significant negative indirect or long term impacts are expected.  In 
addition to the positive impacts described above, the rehabilitation of the environmental 
infrastructure in the coastal area will ensure that Project benefits reach beyond 
participating municipalities. Improved environmental conditions will enhance prospects 
for the growth of tourist and fishing activities and improve prospects for the multiplier-
Page  8
effect growth and private sector investment, which are expected to accompany the 
internationally-recognized recovery in the tourism sector.  
 
The operation is expected to have important environmental and sector-wide benefits as 
the Project will assist Government authorities to consolidate their long-term vision for the 
rehabilitation and efficient provision of water services by sustainable local utilities.  The 
Project will enhance the capacity of local authorities to finance and manage water sector 
infrastructure during Project implementation and in the future.  The Project is expected to 
have a direct impact on the viability of local utilities in the water sector.  
 
Furthermore, the construction/expansion of sewerage networks in participating 
municipalities, along with the general improvement of environmental conditions in the 
coastal area, will have significant benefits on the municipalities themselves, since the 
opportunity to connect new areas to the sewerage network will facilitate municipal urban 
expansion, increase the land value of connectable areas and reinforce the potential for 
economic development of each municipality.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the preparation of this Program, two or more alternatives are to be analyzed for each 
public sewerage system.  In each case, the “construct nothing” alternative is considered in 
order to determine the environmental impact for a variant without the construction of a 
public sewerage system.  Furthermore, additional alternatives are analyzed with regard to 
the location of the system, particularly the plant and the length and location of the 
wastewater outfall, the selected technological process, construction method, construction 
phasing, as well as costs of construction, operation and maintenance.  
 
Within the feasibility studies and EIA, proposed variants were/should be evaluated 
according to the following criteria:  
 
-- environmental impact, ecological acceptability of the proposed solution,  
 
-- construction, operation and maintenance costs,  
 
-- adequateness of the system in relation to local circumstances, institutional and socio-
economic.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To better address the safeguard policy issues under APL2, the Bank team conducted an 
environmental mission on the implementation of the provisions of the Operation manual 
–
Safeguards Policies under APL1, to reflect the lessons and implement measures 
accordingly in APL2. The team visited Zadar and Rogoznica sites.  
 
Of the 11 sub projects seven included financing of the wastewater treatment plants with 
mainly mechanical treatment (one biological) and with long outfalls ranging from 1.5 km 
to 3.6 km. The majority of the sites are still under construction.   Only two WWTP are 
currently operational (Makarska and Opuzen), while an outfall constructed in Zadar 
serves as a temporary solution for the discharge of currently untreated wastewater. All 
Page  9
eleven EIAs were prepared and nine were publicly disclosed. According to Croatian 
legislation six EIAs for the WWTP with the capacity larger than 10.000 PE, resulted in 
the decision of the MEPPC on mandatory mitigation measures and monitoring. Although 
the content of the EIA is more comprehensive than the requirements for B category, the 
public consultation were not held for two subprojects (Opuzen WWTP 
–
9000 PE and 
Rogoznica sewerage system) according to the PIU.  
 
Several shortcomings of the OM and EIAs were observed. The OM did not call for the 
regular reporting on the implementation of the provisions of OM and EIAs. The Manual 
as well did not call for the preparation of the Environmental Management Plan as a 
separate document, but only listed the monitoring and mitigation measures. EMPs 
prepared in this way did not specifically address the issues on when to monitor the certain 
parameter, or who is responsible and how much are the monitoring costs during 
construction and during operation. For that reason monitoring has not commenced fully 
under APL1 and the companies are struggling with the unexpected costs for monitoring, 
as the costs for the monitoring were not quantified. The collection of the baseline data 
was delayed with the result that it will not be possible to obtain data on sea water quality 
prior to the beginning of operation of already commissioned sites like Makarska and 
Opuzen.  
 
These issues are being corrected in APL2, which introduces preparation of the EMP 
according to OP 4.01 and regular reporting on the compliance with the environmental 
provisions. In addition, the OM will call for the data to be reported on a regular basis and 
to include quantities of wastewater/effluent discharged in the current reporting period and 
cumulatively (e.g., in the current year to date) with a breakdown by the level of treatment 
(untreated effluent, primary treatment, etc.) and compared with the estimated amounts of 
the effluents that would be discharged in the absence of the project.   In addition, in 
APL2, the monitoring will start as early as possible in the project  implementation before 
the construction starts) and the data should be acquired latest before commissioning of 
the plant/outfall or any temporary solution.  
 
Based on the findings above and in agreement with HVJP, the updated OM calls for the 
preparation of the EIAs for all wastewater treatment plants regardless of capacity and 
EMP as a separate document with quantified costs where possible and identified time and 
place for the monitoring.  In addition the OM calls for the regular reporting on the 
implementation of the OM.  
 
The project implementation unit in Hrvatske Vode is responsible for overall 
environmental management and decision making in accordance with the EF during the 
preparation and implementation of subprojects.  A separate environmental unit for the 
project is not required, since the PIU will be staffed by qualified personnel and specialists 
to carry out environmental management with supporting assistance from the World Bank 
and independent experts/specialists.  Since the scope of the investment is larger than in 
the APL1 the PIU assigned staff in the PIU and in the regional offices for environmental 
issues.  Reporting on the implementation of the EMP is also introduced and will be done 
through regular project progress reports.  
Page  10
In addition to the PIU, the MEPPPC will, through its regular EIA procedure, screen the 
project and monitor the implementation of the mitigation measures and monitoring plan.  
To address land acquisition issues the borrower updated the Resettlement Policy 
Framework prepared for APL1.  The project retains the services of a lawyer to advise 
sub-borrowers on land issues, including acquiring State land, and report regularly to 
HVJPand World Bank on the status of land issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Regional Development and 
Water Management, Hrvatske Vode, participating MWSC and the municipalities, local 
NGOs, and the population that will benefit from the project, both directly and indirectly.  
 
The Operation Manual describes the disclosure procedure as well as Croatian EIA 
legislation.  In addition to one public consultation at least one public disclosure is 
required of the prepared EIAs.  In cases where the EIAs are required by the Croatian 
legislation, public consultation will be organized and overseen by the MEPPPC.  In the 
cases where EIAs are not required by Croatian legislation, the public disclosure and 
consultation will be organized by the MWSC in question with the help of the PIU, in 
compliance with Bank requirements.  
 
Updated Operation Manual, updated Resettlement Policy Framework, EIA, EMP and 
Executive summary for the Vodice waste water treatment plant were disclosed on the 
website of the HVJP on July 09, 2008. Two additional EIA Executive Summaries 
(Sukosan-Bibinje and Metkovic) were also disclosed.  
 
The Operation Manual was publicly disclosed and discussed during the preparation of 
APL1 and the updated version was publicly disclosed prior to the appraisal of the APL2 
(July 09, 2008) on the website of the HVJP.  In addition, the sample EIA was prepared 
for Vodice waste water treatment plant together with the EMP and executive summary in 
English.  The EIA went through the public consultation organized by the MEPPPC and 
was be disclosed on the website of the HVJP before the appraisal (July 09, 2008).  Two 
additional EIA Executive Summaries (Metkovic and Sukosan 
–
Bibinje) were disclosed 
as well. These documents identify environmental protection measures as well as the 
monitoring plan.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/14/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  11
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/10/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
N/A 
Page  12
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael John Webster 
07/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
07/28/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
07/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
07/29/2008 
Comments:   
