Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2909 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P104749 
Project Name: Judicial Reform 
Task Team Leader: Amitabha Mukherjee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (100%) 
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (50%);Legal institutions for a 
market economy (25%);Access to law and justice (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to facilitate Croatia's justice sector-related EU integration and, to that 
end, support the removal of key impediments to justice sector efficiency and access.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The tentative scope comprises (indicative cost for each component in brackets):  
 
A.  Improving the Efficiency of the Court System (US$22.58m).  This component will finance: 
(i) courthouse rehabilitation/ construction in three locations (Split, Karlovacs and Pula) to ensure 
efficiency gains from the rationalization of court jurisdictions; (ii) strengthening budgeting and 
financial resource management for courts; (iii) modernizing operational information systems for 
decision-making and performance monitoring in courts; and (iv) refining and supporting 
implementation of case management standards, guidelines and processes.  
 
B.  Improving the Efficiency of the State Attorney Office (US$11.25m).  This component will 
finance (i) the additions to and rehabilitation of the headquarters office premises of the SAO; (ii) 
strengthening SAO institutional capacity; and (iii) case management and tracking systems in the 
SAO in line with the new Criminal Procedure Code.  
Page  2
C.  Strengthening MOJ Management Functions (US$2.45m).  This component will finance (i) 
management of information systems and their use in decision-making; (ii) strengthening the 
management and implementation of legal aid; (iii) initial steps in the modernization of the inmate 
information system and its linkage with the rest of the justice sector information system and (iv) 
strengthening the efficiency of justice sector budgeting and performance management;  
 
D.  Project Governance and Implementation (US$1.8m). This component will finance (i) 
logistical and administrative support for implementation and incremental operating costs; (ii) 
change management and project results monitoring including periodic surveys of users of justice 
sector; (iii) other expert technical support for implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Within Croatia:  
 
Zagreb (for SAO headquarters rehabilitation and addition)  
 
Split (for Municipal Court and related elements)  
 
Karlovac (Municipal Court)  
 
Pula (Municipal and County Courts and SAO offices)   
 
E.  Borrowe
r’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be fully determined through an institutional assessment during project preparation. MOJ has 
cooperated with the Bank through two previous projects: Court and Bankruptcy Administration 
and Real Property Registration & Cadastre Project and from this point of view is familiarized / 
aware of  World Bank safeguards policies. The Ministry has a Sector for Investment and 
Procurement which is coordinating designs and permits. The staff working with the 
environmental issues will be provided relevant training. The EMP will address the training 
needs.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance rehabilitation of and additions to existing structures in Croatia. 
These works are common civil works contracts with localized impacts and which do not have 
long term negative impacts on the environment. Four sites are involved: (i) Pula: This involves 
the rehabilitation of an existing building within the old military site in Pula, which is not 
currently in use. In addition there may be some renovation/rehabilitation in the existing Court 
building, such as creating a secure passage from the outside to the criminal Court chambers (for 
entry of accused persons in criminal cases); (ii) Karlovac: This involves the rehabilitation/ 
reconstruction of the existing courthouse as well as the construction of an addition.  Extensive 
modernization of the heating and air conditioning systems is anticipated as well as probable 
window replacement to make the building energy-efficient; (iii) Split:  This involves the 
rehabilitation of an existing, in-use building; and (iv) Zagreb:  There would be both rehabilitation 
of the existing building as well as an addition/extension.  
 
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) is triggered.  Separate EAs/EMPs will be 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
prepared for the respective sites.  One concern to be covered in the EMPs relates to the impact on 
the immediate area during the construction phase, including such issues as noise, dust, and traffic 
control.  EMP for Pula site will put a special focus on dealing with the proximity to the learning 
and r
esidential facility for children suffering from Downs’ Syndrome.Separate Environmental 
Assessmentwith Environmental Management Plan for each site before appraisal will be 
disclosed.Public consultations will be held in each town.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The policy is triggered as the works are envisaged in historical urban areas and due to 
potential chance finds. Compliance with local legislation, including chance finds, will be handled 
through the local permitting process.  This is especially an issue in Zagreb since the existing 
State Attorney Office (SAO) headquarters building is historic and the addition to it will be in an 
historic area.  Requirements from location permits and those of the public will be included in the 
EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The Ministry of Justice and the State Attorney's Office have informed the World Bank team 
that the civil works will not require new land acquisition and will be carried out in structures that 
already exist.  It is understood that none of the sites/buildings are used or occupied by squatters/ 
encroachers. The EMP should entail the ownership deeds, etc. to confirm/clarify state ownership 
of the relevant land and buildings (as well as proof of clear and unencumbered title). For the site 
in Pula, a governmental decision will be required on the transfer of land, more specifically the 
right of use, from the Ministry of Defense to the Ministry of Justice.  On this basis, OP 4.12 is 
not triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/25/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/25/2009 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
separate Environmental Assessment with an Environmental Management Plan for each site 
is to be completed and disclosed by the authorities before appraisal.  At least one consultation 
on each of the project sites will need to be completed by the authorities before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amitabha Mukherjee 
05/04/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/04/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
05/26/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
