Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4329 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P116080 
Project Name: Export Finance Intermediation Loan 
Task Team Leader: Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 19, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (40%);General finance sector (30%);Other 
industry (25%);Agro-industry (5%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective is to support exports by providing medium and long term 
working capital and investment finance to exporters and foreign exchange earning enterprises.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be a single component targeting the Export and Quasi-Export (foreign exchange 
earners). HBOR has a number of programs within its portfolio that target various segments of the 
economy.  The financing will help exporters invest in export development projects and support 
the growth of Croatian exports. With this focus on firms that earn foreign exchange it will also 
help reduce Croatia#s current account deficit. The proposed Euro 100mn CEFIL is a single-
component project consisting of a credit line to HBOR as the borrower and implementing 
agency. HBOR will intermediate the funds through PFIs, which in turn will on-lend to eligible 
private exporters. The envisaged CEFIL project is to be implemented through HBOR#s funding 
department. The responsibilities will include: (i) on-lending to PFIs for final lending to sub-
borrowers (ii) ensure effective functioning of the on-lending facility to final borrowers through 
PFI (iii) on-going monitoring of the PFIs to ensure compliance with project criteria; (iv) 
Page  2
responsibility for adherence to all fiduciary and safeguard requirements of the World Bank for 
final borrower; and (v) monitoring and evaluation based on key project development indicators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Not specified, sub loans will be accessible to Exporters and foreign exchange earners all over 
Croatia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
HBOR has acted as implementing agency for several WB loans and GEF grant (Municipal 
Environmental Infrastructure Project, Renewable Energy Resources Project), therefore the staff 
is familiar with the WB safeguards procedures. Nevertheless the institutional capacity could be 
strengthened, especially for the PFI to which HBOR should on lend the funds. A special focus 
should be done on screening the investments and supervision of the same. The PFIs in Croatia 
usually have their environmental policies and are strictly confirming the compliance with the 
national legislation prior to the approval of the loan. The capacity of HBOR and especially 
participating PFI (related to WB safeguards policies) should be strengthen either through training 
of in house staff or thru hiring an environmental consultant.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The design of the project calls 
for FI environmental category, as HBOR (borrower) will intermediate the funds through PFIs, 
which in turn will on-lend to eligible private and quasi exporters.  
 
An overall EMF will be prepared, following World Bank policies on consultation and 
disclosure in advance of appraisal, and as such will be a part of Project Operational Manual. The 
project operation manual / EMF should define screening procedures for the sub projects, as part 
of the project eligibility. Only EA Category B and C sub-projects will be eligible. The 
environmental due diligence procedures identified in EMF should comply with both Croatian 
national and WB environmental safeguards procedures. An overall EMF will be prepared, 
following World Bank policies on consultation and disclosure, in advance of appraisal.  
 
In view of national circumstances special consideration is needed to the issue of landmines 
and demining.  The Operational Manual and EMF will specify that demining will not be 
supported under the project,  and that CROMAC certification that a site is free  of landmines will 
be required for any sub-project involving construction.  The EMF will also contain a "chance 
finds" provision setting out procedures should landmines unexpectedly be encountered despite 
these provisions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Pest Management may be triggered in view of potential subprojects in the export-oriented 
food production and processing sector, but this remains to be determined, when the borrower 
identifies negative list in the EMF.  If eligible sub
-
projects will include financing for purchase of 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
pesticides (including post-harvest treatment) or investments which are likely to increase or 
expand the use of pesticides in such operations, the EMF will set out requirements for applicants 
to prepare a simple Pest (and Pesticide) Management Plan consistent with OP 4.09 requirements.  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The policy is to be triggered due to expectations that some operations will likely have a direct 
impact on historical structures or sites (e.g. in tourism sector).   The EMF should indicate that 
sub-projects will comply with local legislation on chance finds as well as including advance 
consultation with the Ministry of Culture through local permitting process in case of potential 
impact on historical sites or structures. The chance finds provisions should as well describe the 
procedure for encountering landmines unexpectedly.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project would not trigger OP 4.12. The eligibility criteria that will be defined in 
Operational Manual would specify that no potential beneficiaries can participate in the project if 
they would need land acquisition for the activities to be supported under this project. Re-
habilitation and reconstruction (which could involve demolition of no longer suitable structure 
and erection of a new one) of existing buildings within the roughly same footprint would be 
permissible. Investments will only be accepted if they involve unencumbered land or property 
(i.e. no squatters or encroachers or not requiring the eviction of anyone resident in such 
property). The PFI#s should verify for each sub project the unencumbered status of the property 
prior to approving any sub-project which could raise such issues. The EMF should clearly state 
the above.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/10/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft EMF would be completed in the begining of June and disclosed and consulted by 
appraisal.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
05/27/2010 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
06/16/2009 
Comments:   
