                                                                                      48089

                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                      Report No.:



Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated:

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data


Country: Czech Republic                        Project ID: P114304

Project Name: Czech Republic Green             Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber
Investment Scheme

Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15,2009          Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2009

Managing Unit: ECSSD                           Lending Instrument: Carbon Financing

Sector: Renewable energy and energy            Theme: Climate change (P)
efficiency services

Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Arcadie Capcelea

Loan/Credit amount (EURO) approximately 20-30 million

Other financing amounts by source:                                             ($m)



B. Project Objective [from section 3 of PCN]

The main objective of the proposed project is to reduce C02 emissions and air pollutants, to
increase the use of renewable energy sources and to improve energy efficiency in the residential
sector of the Czech Republic. The objective will be monitored through the flow of funds to types
of activities which will be identified and agreed upon during project preparation and negotiation.

C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]

The proposed areas of support primarily include energy saving and energy efficiency
investments in the country's housing sector and are as follows: (a) heat insulation of family and
apartment buildings; (b) improving energy efficiency by replacing existing equipment with more
efficient equipment; (c) fuel switch to more environmentally friendly fuels (e.g., switch from
coal to renewable energy); (d) support for construction of new passive family houses and
apartment buildings; (e) installation of low-emission biomass sources; and, (f) installation of
solar thermal collectors in family houses and apartment buildings by providing subsidies to
residents for these purposes.

D. Project location (if known)


All of the projects to be supported by the GIS will be identified and analyzed during the
implementation stage. The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for
proposed activities. Projects will not be located in protected or culturally/socially sensitive areas.
Where potential projects are proposed in the vicinity of protected areas or critical habitat, a
specific environmental assessment will be required.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity [from PCN]

The State Environmental Fund of the Czech Republic (SEF) will be the implementing entity of
the GIS. It has significant experience with implementing various investment projects and some
emissions trading experience related to Joint Implementation (JI) projects. The SEF provides
direct and indirect financial support in the form of a subsidy, a loan or a contribution to partially
cover the payment of interest for the projects in different areas, including in the area of energy
efficiency and utilization of renewable sources of energy. While the SEF has a good track record
in implementing environmental projects, its EIA institutional capacity for implementing the
proposed activities within the GIS will be assessed during the design stage and relevant
recommendations will be formulated, if any.

Czech Republic as an ED country has in place its own well-developed EIA system. Based on the
national laws and Regulations, the SEF has developed its own EIA rules and procedures to be
applied for the project it supports.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


               Safeguard Policy
Applicable? If Applicable, How Might It Apply?

     [ X]      Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)
               An EA for the proposed project will be conducted and will cover: (a) analysis of
               the State Environmental Fund (SEF) EIA institutional capacity identifying what
               kind of TA might be required to adequately implement the EIA requirements for
               the projects to be supported; (b) an Environmental Management Framework
               (EMF) stipulating: (i) applicable laws, policies on environment procedures for
               environmental screening, EIA preparation and implementation as well as EIA
               institutions and responsibilities; (ii) Environmental Guidelines (EG) specifying
               potential    environmental and social impacts of the energy saving and energy
               efficiency in the residential sector activities as well as proposed mitigation and
               monitoring measures to be applied during the GIS implementation; (iii) biomass
               sourcing, describing the processes to ensure that the biomass will be sourced in an
               environmentally sustainable manner, and also air emissions standards for the
               proposed new biomass boilers are met; and (c) description of implementing
               arrangements, including supervision and monitoring, as well as reporting, and, if
               needed, capacity building activities.

      [ ]         Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)
                  It is expected there will be no important wildlife and wildlife habitats in the
                  vicinity ofthe GIS projects. If such cases occur, a full EIA will be required.
      [ ]         Pest Management (OP 4.09)

     [X]          Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)
                  As for the construction of new buildings land acquisition might be necessary, the
                  project beneficiary will prepare and disclose a special Resettlement Policy
                  Framework. The Framework will specify the following:(i) national policies and
                  regulation governing land expropriation, the range of adverse impacts and
                  entitlements; (ii) a framework for preparing and implementing Resettlement
                  Action Plans, consistent with the World Bank requirements, to ensure timely
                  acquisition of assets, payment of compensation and delivery of other benefits to
                  project affected persons; (iii) details on the public information, consultation and
                  participation, and grievance redress mechanisms in project planning, design and
                  implementation; (iv) identified sources and estimates of required resources for
                  implementation of the RAP; and (v) supervision, monitoring and evaluation of
                  resettlement implementation procedures.
      [ ]         Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

      [ ]         Forests (OPIBP 4.36)

      [ ]         Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)

      [ ]          Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

      [ ]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP/GP 7.60f

      [ ]          Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP/GP 7.50)




Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [] B [] C [X] FI [] TBD (to be determined)

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared.

April 20, 2009




 By supporting the proposed project. the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination a/the parties' claims on the
disputed areas

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS

Does not apply

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timingI should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

    It is expected the EA document will be drafted, publicly disclosed and consulted in the
country in March-April, 2009. By April 30, 2009 it will be also disclosed in the WB Infoshop.
The RPF is also expected to be publicly disclosed in the country and WB Infoshop by April 30,
2009.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                                    Helmut Schreiber                                   March lO, 2009
 Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards                                  Agi Kiss                                           March 25, 2009
  Coordinator:
    Comments
  Sector Manager:                                      John Kellenberg                                      Aprill, 2009
    Comments




IReminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in~country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

