Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4043 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/14/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Djibouti 
Project ID: P107395 
Project Name: Improving Health Sector Performance 
Task Team Leader: Sameh El-Saharty 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Child health (S);Population and reproductive 
health (S);HIV/AIDS (S);Tuberculosis (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original Project Development Objective (PDO) of the HSDP is to improve the quality of 
health services in a sustainable manner in order to reduce maternal and child mortality. This will 
be achieved through (a) improvement of maternal and child health services; (b) improved 
availability and quality of para-medical personnel; (c) improved availability of drugs in health 
facilities; and (d) increased capacity of the Government to implement and execute reforms. 
These activities should set in place the initial conditions necessary for attaining Millennium 
Development Goals in maternal and child health (MDGs 4 and 5) .  Moreover, an IDA project on 
HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria Control in the amount of USD12 million was closed on September 
30, 2008.  The Government requested that the Bank continues its support to these programs 
aiming at combating communicable diseases, which contributes to MDG6.  Accordingly, the 
PDO will be expanded and made specifically linked to the three health related MDGs as follows: 
to improve the quality of health services in a sustainable manner in order to contribute to the 
achievement of the health-related Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) of reducing child and 
maternal mortality and combating communicable diseases.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed activities will be included under the following components:  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Improving the Health Service Delivery Performance (US$4 million) (Under Component 
One). The additional financing will continue supporting the delivery of: (i) child health services 
such as immunization, Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI), and treatment of 
malnutrition; (ii) maternal child health services such as perinatal care, family planning, skilled-
attended delivery, and emergency obstetric care; and will support the additional activities, 
originally supported under the HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis project, related to the 
delivery of: (iii) prevention and treatment services of HIV/AIDS and other prevalent 
communicable diseases such as Voluntary Counseling and Testing (VCT), Directly Observed 
Treatment Short-course (DOTS), and malaria cases.  This component will finance minor civil 
works, limited medical equipment, office equipment, office supplies, training, and technical 
assistance.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Improving the Performance of Health Systems (US$3 million) (Under Component Four).   
This component will continue financing activities aiming at strengthening the MOH management 
capacity and improving the performance of the different health systems in support of health 
services.  These include different MOH Directorates such as the health regions, health 
promotion, human resources, drugs and medical supplies, disease surveillance, and information 
systems. This component will also support the UGP and the Executive Secretariat (ES) to 
manage the project activities and fiduciary functions including financial management, 
procurement, and environmental plan in addition to strengthening the program monitoring and 
evaluation including health facility and client satisfaction surveys.  Specifically, this component 
would provide the necessary funds for minor civil works, limited medical equipment, office 
equipment, office supplies, training, technical assistance and support demand creation activities 
such as social mobilization and community outreach.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The specific sites and communities to be included in the project’s additional activities have been 
defined during preparation. In particular, construction of new buildings and rehabilitation /  
extension of existing ones will be financed by the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies is adequate.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
Mr Gael A. Gregoire (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed additional financing project is categorized as a B, since it might generate small 
and site-specific adverse environmental impacts associated with civil works, through the 
construction of rehabilitation of buildings. Accordingly, an Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared by the borrower, 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and has been reviewed and cleared by the Bank. This EIA will be disclosed in-country and at the 
Infoshop prior to project appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This BP is triggered since procurement and distribution of impregnated bednets for malaria 
control will be financed by the project. Nevertheless, as indicated in  “BP 4.01, Annex C - 
Application of EA to Projects Involving Pest Management”,  a pest management plan is not 
required for the procurement or use of impregnated bednets for malaria control.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/13/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EIA will be completed and disclosed before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameh El-Saharty 
03/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Akiko Maeda 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
