Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC4288
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Djibouti 
Project ID:  P107395 
Project Name:  Improving Health Sector Performance 
Task Team Leader:  Sameh El-Saharty 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (33%);Child health (17%);Population and 
reproductive health (17%);HIV/AIDS (17%);Tuberculosis (16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original Project Development Objective (PDO) of the HSDP is to improve the 
quality of health services in a sustainable manner in order to reduce maternal and child 
mortality. This will be achieved through (a) improvement of maternal and child health 
services; (b) improved availability and quality of para-medical personnel; (c) improved 
availability of drugs in health facilities; and (d) increased capacity of the Government to 
implement and execute reforms. These activities should set in place the initial conditions 
necessary for attaining Millennium Development Goals in maternal and child health 
(MDGs 4 and 5) .  Moreover, an IDA project on HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria Control in 
the amount of USD12 million was closed on September 30, 2008.  The Government 
requested that the Bank continues its support to these programs aiming at combating 
communicable diseases, which contributes to MDG6.  Accordingly, the PDO will be 
expanded and made specifically linked to the three health related MDGs as follows: to 
improve the quality of health services in a sustainable manner in order to contribute to the 
progress towards achieving the health-related Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
of reducing child and maternal mortality and combating communicable diseases.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed activities will be included under the following components:  
 
 
Improving the Health Service Delivery Performance (US$4 million) (Under 
Component One). The additional financing will continue supporting the delivery of: (i) 
child health services such as immunization, Integrated Management of Childhood 
Illnesses (IMCI), and treatment of malnutrition; (ii) maternal child health services such as 
perinatal care, family planning, skilled-attended delivery, and emergency obstetric care; 
and will support the additional activities, originally supported under the HIV/AIDS, 
Malaria and Tuberculosis project, related to the delivery of: (iii) prevention and treatment 
services of HIV/AIDS and other prevalent communicable diseases such as Voluntary 
Counseling and Testing (VCT), Directly Observed Treatment Short-course (DOTS), and 
malaria cases.  This component will finance minor civil works, limited medical 
equipment, office equipment, office supplies, training, and technical assistance.  
 
 
Improving the Performance of Health Systems (US$3 million) (Under Component 
Four).   This component will continue financing activities aiming at strengthening the 
MOH management capacity and improving the performance of the different health 
systems in support of health services.  These include different MOH Directorates such as 
the health regions, health promotion, human resources, drugs and medical supplies, 
disease surveillance, and information systems. This component will also support the UGP 
in management of the project activities and fiduciary functions, including financial 
management, procurement, and environment as well as in strengthening the Executive 
Secretariat (ES) management capacity.   The component will also strengthen the program 
monitoring and evaluation including health facility and client satisfaction surveys.  
Specifically, this component would provide the necessary funds for minor civil works, 
limited medical equipment, office equipment, office supplies, training, technical 
assistance and will support demand creation activities such as social mobilization and 
community outreach.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The specific sites and communities to be included in the project#s additional activities 
have been defined during preparation. In particular, construction of new buildings and 
rehabilitation/extension of existing ones will be financed by the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
Mr Gael A. Gregoire (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project#s additional financing is categorized as a B, since it will generate 
small and site-specific adverse environmental impacts associated with medical waste and 
civil works, through the rehabilitation of health institutions. There will be some new 
construction and land acquisition under this project, but it is on government-owned land 
and therefore is not expected to trigger OP 4.12.  The construction consists of : (1) two 
buildings to serve as regional sub-directorates on government owned-land; (2) several 
maternity waiting homes, which will be attached to health facilities on land owned by the 
government; and (3) a nutrition center that will be built as an extension of an existing 
government building on government-owned land.  None of the sites are used as a source 
of livelihood. No additional civil works involving construction are expected under the 
project, nor loss of, and/or access to sources of livelihood since all interventions are site 
specific and will occur on already existing structures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term adverse impact is anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Impact Assessment including an Environmental Management Plan 
were developed under the existing project and have been updated for the proposed 
additional financing, for an adequate management of wastes from health facilities, 
including infectious and special wastes and debris generated by civil works. Additional 
technical expertise will be required to supplement capacity at the Ministry of health.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The existing medical waste management plan was prepared using extensive consultation 
with stakeholders throughout the country including the Ministry of Health, the Ministry 
of Environment, the Executive Secretariat managing the HIV/AIDS project and the health 
facilities# personnel.  The EIA/EMP has been prepared after a series of consultation with 
the stakeholders and has been disclosed in-country and at the Info Shop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameh El-Saharty 
05/06/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
05/06/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Fatou Fall 
05/06/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
05/06/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Akiko Maeda 
05/06/2009 
Comments:   
