Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2767 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Djibouti 
Project ID: P088876 
Project Name: DJ-URBAN POVERTY REDUCTION PROGRAM 
Task Team Leader: Anthony G. Bigio 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Other social services 
(30%);Solid waste management (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
African Development Bank 
8.00 
 
Islamic Development Bank - Al Aqsa Fund 
8.00
16.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective of the proposed operation is to contribute to the alleviation of 
poverty in the neighborhoods of Djibouti-ville and in the secondary urban centers of the country, 
by improving access to basic urban services and infrastructure, and supporting local associations 
and municipal councils, and providing access to micro-credit for revenue-generating activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The DUPREP will have the mandate of operating at the national scale for the reduction of urban 
poverty, implementing activities in the capital city and in the five secondary regional urban 
centers of the country. It will contribute to accelerate Djibouti's progress towards the 
achievement of the MDGs, with particular reference to access to improved water sources and to 
all-season roads, and household electrification rate.  
 
The proposed program would have three components:  
Page  2
a) 
provision of local infrastructure and basic services, to be implemented via labor intensive 
techniques, so as to favor the satisfaction of the population's needs in terms of access, as well as 
the creation of employment opportunities for a little qualified manpower;  
 
b)
support to community development, which would benefit community associations, non 
governmental organizations and Local Authorities, with the purpose of supporting their local 
economic development initiatives at the community, neighborhood, and city levels;  
 
c) supply of micro-finance services to individuals and communities, so as to facilitat the 
creation or the reinforcement of revenue-generating activities within the targeted communities, 
and to increase the employment and consumption opportunities of poor households.  
 
The DUPREP would build on the accomplishments of the previous operations, and has the 
ambition of reinforcing and making permanent the strengths of previous experiences. Hence, the 
first two components would be in continuity with the activities of the PDSTP, while the micro-
finance activities would be based on the experience of the Djibouti Social Fund, a project initated 
in 2001 with the support of the African Development Bank, and now concluding its operations.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Djibouti-ville and the five secondary urban centers where reside the newly-created national 
Regional Councils, i.e., Ali Sabieh, Arta, Dikhil, Obok and Tadjourah.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
ADETIP's Operational Manual covers the screening requirements of all sub-projects for their 
possible environmental impact.  Given that currently ADETIP manages various investment 
operations at once, and that it would in the future incorporate new functions previously 
performed by the Djibouti Social Fund in the area of micro-finance, the agency's Operational 
Manual will need to be revised and updated to reflect the new institutional basis and mandate of 
the Agency and its new competencies. In the course of such revision, the mandatory 
environmental screening mechanisms will be reviewed by the Regional Safeguards team to 
ensure their compliance with Bank standards and procedures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
.
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
.
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Anthony G. Bigio 
03/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
02/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
