Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3343
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P089866 
Project Name:  DO Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Lucio Monari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
116.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
116.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objectives of the proposed project are to (i) reduce distribution losses and 
increase cash recovery of the country’s three major distribution companies, and (ii) 
improve the quality of power supply to consumers.  The project would support the critical 
element of the Government’s strategy to achieve financial sustainability of the sector, and 
will contribute to achieve the CAS objectives of stabilizing the economy and improving 
the competitiveness of the DR. The following performance indicators have been selected:  
(i) Increase in the Cash Recovery Index of the distribution companies, and (ii) increase in 
the quality of power supply.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 – Rehabilitation of Distribution Networks (US$120 million) in selected 
areas of EdeNorte, EdeSur and EdeEste.  This would be a two-year time slice of the three 
EDEs investment program in rehabilitation and upgrading of medium and low voltage 
circuits by: (i) replacing existing run-down and aged medium and low voltage overhead 
lines; (ii) expanding distribution substations and feeders; (iii) replacing and installing 
meters, cables and transformers, and new connections for those customers who have 
Page  2
irregular connections; (iv) for large consumers, installing remote meters; and (v) in areas 
difficult to manage, installing theft-proof equipment.  
 
Component 2 
–
Social Work with Consumer Communities (US$5.0 million) receiving 
Component 1 investments, in order to re-establish trust and define clear rules between 
them and the EDEs, in the context of the “24-Hours of Light Program” of improving 
power supply in areas where the CRI is rising.  
 
Component 3 – Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.5 million). This 
includes consultants to assist CDEEE and the EDEs with project implementation by: (a) 
preparing the initial bidding documents and the Operations Manual, (b) ensuring that the 
project activities are well coordinated between CDEEE, the EDEs, the contractors and 
other relevant agencies (i.e. municipalities, other utilities), (c) ensuring that the supplied 
equipment and civil works are in compliance with the project design and work schedule, 
and (d) implementing a system for monitoring and evaluation of performance indicators.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover the entire country. Nonetheless, the rehabilitation works would 
take place in selected areas of the distribution networks to be determined during project 
implementation. The specific subprojects were selected by the electric distribution 
companies based primarily on the contribution they would make to improve the cost 
recovery index, CRI. The first year’s program will be defined before negotiations, while 
later year’s programs are subject to change.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (SDV) 
Mr Alejandro M. Deeb (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is expected to be largely beneficial to the environment, as improvements on 
continuity and reliability of service provision will reduce the need for individual energy 
sources, a major source of air and noise pollution. The project will also produce waste 
that requires proper management to avoid serious contamination.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the characteristics of the project, focused in rehabilitation of urban distribution 
lines with well known and defined environmental impacts, environmental guidelines will 
be used to provide directions on the planning and execution of the works, and will 
reiterate the special handling of PCB contaminated material. The development and 
adoption of environmental guidelines has been agreed by all key stakeholders. The 
contemplated works will be conducted by, or under the immediate supervision of, the 
distribution companies, and no major environmental impact should be expected if the 
agreed guidelines are implemented. Compliance will be exercised through environmental 
auditors to strengthen the approach already adopted by SEMARN.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Dominican Republic has weak enforcement capabilities of its environmental regulations. 
The GODR is well aware of this situation and has, with the concourse of the CNE 
(supported with a Bank operation) requested and obtained support to strengthen this area. 
A
MOU has been signed and it’s being implemented under Bank’s supervision. The 
environmental control approach adopted is briefly defined as: (i) environmental licensing 
is required classified according to the intervention’s expected environmental impact; (ii) 
the Environmental License defines an environmental management plan that the licensee 
agrees to implement; (iii) as recorded in the license the licensee has to provide periodic 
progress reports on the implementation of the agreed environmental plan; (iv) these 
reports ought to include an audit report, prepared by certified independent environmental 
auditors registered with the Ministry of Environment, SEMARN (or by registered 
environmental consultants while auditors are being trained).  Environmental control is 
managed through private sector participation. SEMARN with the support of the Bank is 
training a cadre of 40 to 60 professional in environmental auditing for international 
certification.    But SEMARN has not yet the require capability, as the new procedures 
and training will take place during late 2007 and mid 2008. The new country 
environmental framework, as described, will be applicable to the project.  
 
Dominican Republic has a rich cultural heritage and important historical landmarks and 
buildings that could be impacted if the proposed works do not incorporate special 
provision for dealing with such, probably few, cases. Contingent guidelines have been 
prepared, discussed and agreed with project implementers to avoid the potential risk of 
negatively affecting the cultural assets of the country.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Electricity distribution has been classified as a minimum environmental impact activity in 
many countries, including the Dominican Republic. Managing PCB contaminated oils 
and disposable old equipment (after 1980 the use of PCB was outlawed through the 
Montreal Protocol as a persistent pollutant) has received proper attention by the GODR. 
In consensus with the interested parties SEMARN adopted clear regulations that are 
being followed.  
 
The existing distribution companies and SEMARN have agreed to: (i) jointly adopt 
guidelines for environmental good practices; (ii) the distribution companies will enact the 
guidelines through their Board of Directors as Corporate Guidelines for immediate 
application; (iii) SEMARN is in the process of opting for a Certification of not requiring 
additional environmental supporting documentation to grant the corresponding 
environmental licenses; and (iv) the disposal of discharged equipment will follow the 
existing regulation which has been incorporated in the agreed environmental guidelines.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Guidelines for environmental management were developed as a cooperative effort 
between the electric distribution utilities and the national environmental authority, 
SEMARN. Once the basic document was agreed it was disclosed through the Internet 
using the web-portals of several distribution companies. SEMARN processed the 
Guidelines as a complement to existing regulations, following a procedure that included 
legal, technical and social revisions. The process to enact the Guidelines is underway and 
includes additional public consultations before final approval. Once the Guidelines have 
been formally enacted become mandatory to all project participants.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/22/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lucio Monari 
01/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alejandro M. Deeb 
01/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
01/30/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Walter Vergara 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
01/30/2008 
Comments:   
