Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/17/2009 
Report No.:  AC4641
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P090010 
Original Project Name: DO Social Sectors 
Investment Program 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P116369 
Project Name:  DO Additional Financing  Social Sectors Investment Progr 
Task Team Leader:  Carine Clert 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (50%);Nutrition and food security (25%);Other human 
development (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's Development Objective to improve the coverage, targeting, and 
effectiveness of the Borrower's social protection programs would remain unchanged. The 
implementation arrangements, as described in the Loan Agreement and the project 
appraisal would also remain unchanged. To allow full implementation of the additional 
activities, the Loan's Closing Date would be extended by eighteen months, from June 
30th 2012 to December 31st, 2013.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed AF would affect both Component One and Two, as described below.  
 
Component 1. The proposed AF would affect Component One, denominated #Provision 
of National Identity Documents,# by providing additional funding (US$ 1.3 million) to 
subcomponent 1B, denominated #Provision of assistance to identified poor households to 
obtain their national identity documents.# As described in the Original Loan Agreement, 
this targeted assistance includes, among others, #the contracting of paralegal staff for the 
Page  2
Borrower#s Social Cabinet#.  The AF would cover for higher than initially estimated 
costs for the originally planned activity of contracting these paralegal staff and their 
supervisors. During Project preparation, US$ 5.71 million had been budgeted for 
subcomponent 1B. The AF would increase this amount by US$ 1.3 million, bringing the 
total Bank financing to US$ 7.01 million.  
 
Component 2. The proposed AF would also affect Component Two of the Project, 
denominated #Strengthening of Social Protection Services.# This includes three 
subcomponents: i) #Strengthening the Institutional Capacity of the Social Cabinet# 
(Subcomponent 2A); ii) #Strengthening of the Institutional Capacity of the Targeting 
Instrument SIUBEN# (Subcomponent 2B); and iii) #Social Policy Monitoring and 
Evaluation,# including the enhancement of transparency and capacity for impact 
assessment of social protection programs, including social audits and monitoring by civil 
society (Subcomponent 2C).  
 
First, the AF would provide additional funding under Subcomponent 2B of the Project 
(US$ 5.975 million), which focuses on improving targeting performance by 
#strengthening SIUBEN#s institutional capacity.#  
 
Second, it would provide additional funding under Subcomponents 2A and 2C to 
support improvements in the effectiveness, results-orientation, and transparency of the 
redesigned CCT Solidaridad Program, through technical assistance and capacity-building 
activities. Specifically, the AF would:  
 
(a) 
Under Subcomponent 2A, respond to the recent revamping of the Social 
Cabinet#s CCT Solidaridad Program by supporting the training of managers and 
technical staff at central, regional and local levels. Consistent with the new integrated 
approach of the CCT, managers and staff from the CCT, Education and Health services 
would be included.  To this effect, the AF would finance technical assistance and 
capacity-building activities to design, implement and monitor the results of the training 
strategy (US$ 1 million US $).  
 
(b) 
Under Sub-Component 2C, enhance the results-Orientation and the Transparency 
of the Redesigned CCT Program ( US $ 1.7million). Under this Subcomponent, the AF 
would cover two sets of new activities. First, it would support the development of a 
comprehensive Monitoring and Evaluation System for the redesigned CCT.Second, the 
AF would support the development of mechanisms to strengthen community participation 
in, and social oversight of, the CCT. The AF would support Government efforts to 
promote the empowerment of Program beneficiaries and their organizations into small 
nuclei (beneficiary committees) and to increase transparency and accountability of the 
Program to the CCT beneficiaries. The AF would finance technical assistance, training 
and outreach materials for three main sets of activities for these purposes.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Dominican Republic   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed AF focuses only on the purchase of services (technical assistance, capacity-
building) and hardware (technology for SIUBEN) only. Consequently, the AF would not 
trigger any environmental or social safeguards. The environmental Category C attributed 
to the Social Protection Investment Project would remain unchanged.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
N/A 
Page  5
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Carine Clert 
08/07/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Faust 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/07/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
08/07/2009 
Comments:   
