                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/19/2009                                     Report No.: AC4390
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Dominican Republic                  Project ID: P106619
Project Name: Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS 2)
Task Team Leader: Fernando Montenegro Torres
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 17, 2009      Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2009
Managing Unit: LCSHH                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            36.03
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    12.84
                                                                     12.84
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed second phase of this APL is designed within the framework of the general
objectives of the APL approved by the Board in 2003: i) improved mother and child
health and reduction of poverty; ii) implementation of new health sector reform laws (42-
01 and 87-02), including strengthening the stewardship role of the MOH; consolidating
universal health insurance as the public stewardship organization for the health sector;
development of regional health care networks; and health insurance mechanisms.

  The Project's Development Objectives are to: (i) Improve the capacity of RHSs to
deliver timely prioritized quality services known to improve the health of mothers,
children and people with chronic conditions by public providers at the first level of care;
(ii) improve health system responsiveness, defined here as the institutional capacity of
public sector health organizations to conduct strategic purchasing of health care services
and goods, and to respond to public health emergencies.

3. Project Description
The proposed project is the second phase of an APL. It is consistent with the objectives
and agreements of the APL, which called for three consecutive loans. The first phase
following a restructuring focused on strengthening health care infrastructure,
reorganization of regional health systems, strengthening multiannual financial planning,
and supporting expansion of enrollment of the poor in the SR. The current global
financial crisis and its impact on the fiscal resources available for human capital
investments pose new challenges to multiannual financial plans and implementation of
the universal health insurance system enacted by law in 2001.

 The project consists of three components:

 Component 1: Introducing a results-based financing mechanism for the first level of
care in RHSs (US$21.1 million - Bank financing US$14.8 million)

 Component 2: Strengthening the capacity of the MOH to improve and monitor health
system responsiveness (US$15.3 million - Bank financing US$12.5 million)

 Component 3: Improving quality of public spending on health care goods and services
(US$12.1 million - Bank financing US$8.7 million)

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is national in scope, but will focus on prioritized areas to increase access to
primary health services and improved delivery of primary health care services.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
   Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project was originally classified as a Category B at the PCN stage, but as project
preparation progressed the team found that a Category C would be more appropriate
given that the project activities would cause no adverse environmental impacts and no
civil works would be financed. OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) is the only
safeguard policy triggered, which reflects that technical assistance related to
environmental aspects will be supported during project implementation. The Bank will
work with the client to develop a strategic approach to address biomedical waste
management in the health sector, which will capitalize on past analytical work from
APL1 and other projects, as well as the approval of recent legislation specific to
biomedical waste management (see #4 below). The aim is to have a positive impact on
public health, worker safety, and link the notion of improved environmental management
to quality health service delivery.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Substandard biomedical waste management is a persistent issue in the Dominican
Republic. If managed improperly, the wastes produced by health establishments pose
health risks for the public and personnel as well as environmental contamination. Past
projects have included measures related to biomedical waste management, and while
discrete advancements have been noted there is a clear need for macro-level engagement
on the issue to support long-term improvements on a national scale. Though the types of
risks posed by improper waste management are indirectly related to the proposed
project's actual activities, the project is well-placed to provide technical assistance in
support of better practices at a strategic level, framing the issue as not only environmental
but as one facet of improving the quality of health care.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Several studies and programs to improve biomedical waste management have been
initiated in the past through World Bank projects and by other donors. These have
achieved notable results in the short term and in localized areas, but widespread
improvements have not been sustained in the long term. Under APL1, an evaluation of
biomedical waste management in the Dominican Republic was conducted in 2007. This
included a review of the waste management procedures for a sample of health facilities.
The evaluation found that the majority of health facilities included in the study was not
compliant with relevant laws, most facilities did not have set procedures for biomedical
waste, and that personnel were often untrained or did not have the resources for proper
waste management.

 A regulation to the General Health Law was passed in February 2009, which establishes
clear procedures and an institutional framework specifically for biomedical waste
management. Soon after the regulation was passed the client prepared a manual for
healthcare waste management, which included detailed procedures for health centers to
create internal institutional structures for waste management (as mandated by the
regulation) as well as actual procedures for waste management. The manual requires
further strengthening, but is a positive step in addressing both institutional and practical
aspects of this issue.

 Given the foundation of past analytical work (supported by the Bank and other donors)
on practices for biomedical waste management in the Dominican Republic combined
with the momentum of new legislation, PARSS2 is well-positioned to build capacity
within the MOH to implement these procedures. Under the proposed project the client
would build on previous work to apply lessons learned from past experiences and
develop a strategy to implement measures from the new regulation.

 The implementing agency currently has low capacity to implement biomedical waste
management procedures, lacking staff, capabilities to monitor health facilities' waste
management practices and enforce standards, and coordination between other
Government actors associated with these issues (e.g. environmental, solid waste, and
regional health authorities). Authorities are supportive of capacity building activities and
have in the past undertaken a limited initiative on training health care professionals on the
proper care of biomedical waste management under the auspices of the Japanese aid
agency JICA. The government has expressed interest in pursuing a more strategic
approach to adopting safeguard measures in its health sector and has asked the Bank to
provide technical assistance.

  Rather than limit the initiative to specific activities of the proposed project, the planned
strategy would apply more broadly to the health sector. Terms of reference have been
prepared by the client for a consultancy that would include the design of a personnel
training program, an environmental management plan, and create educational materials
for health workers. The Bank will work closely with the client as the consultancy is
carried out, as part of an ongoing strategic engagement with the health sector.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An initial strategy workshop is planned with the MOH, which will bring together other
relevant authorities linked to environmental issues and the health sector. A consultation
with outside stakeholders (e.g. NGOs, academia, public health organizations) would take
place after the consultancy is underway.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/19/2009
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/19/2009
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/19/2009
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
EA disclosure is not applicable.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           No
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres        06/15/2009
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gunars H. Platais                 06/12/2009
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Keith E. Hansen                   06/15/2009
  Comments:
