Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4249 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Dominican Republic 
Project ID: P106619 
Project Name: DO - Health Sector Reform APLII (PARSS2) 
Task Team Leader: Fernando Montenegro Torres 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 27, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project’s Development Objectives are to: (i) increase the access of uninsured individuals 
from poor households in prioritized areas to primary health care services known to improve 
health outcomes for mothers, children and people with chronic conditions; (ii) improve health 
system responsiveness, defined here as the institutional capacity of public sector health 
organizations to conduct strategic purchasing, planning, monitoring and evaluation for the 
delivery of primary health care services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed second phase of this APL is designed within the framework of the general 
objectives of the APL approved by the Board in 2003: i) improved mother and child health and 
reduction of poverty; ii) implementation of new health sector reform laws (42-01 and 87-02), 
including strengthening the stewardship role of the MOH;  consolidating universal health 
insurance as the public stewardship organization for the health sector; development of regional 
health care networks; and health insurance mechanisms.  
 
Component 1: Expanding social protection in health using results-based financing.  
 
Page  2
The objective of this component is to introduce improved mechanisms for accountability and 
strategic purchasing in the SR while expanding coverage of the basic package health services to 
the poor.  
 
Component 2: Strengthen MOH ability to improve delivery of essential public health functions 
with an emphasis on primary health care services.  
 
The objective of this component is to support the MOH to better deliver essential public health 
functions with an emphasis on Primary Health Care within the framework of the national 
objectives and organizational arrangements envisioned in the Health Sector Strategic Plan and 
the Health Sector Reform Laws.  
 
Component 3: Improve strategic purchasing for health services within the framework of 
separation of health system functions.  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional capacity of public 
organizations to improve strategic purchasing of health care goods and services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scope, but will focus on prioritized areas to increase access to primary 
health services.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency currently has low capacity to implement safeguards, lacking staff to 
address issues surrounding biomedical waste management, capabilities to monitor health 
facilities’ waste management practices and enforce standards, and coordination between other 
Government actors associated with these issues (e.g. environmental, solid waste, and regional 
health authorities). Several studies and programs to improve biomedical waste management have 
been initiated in the past through World Bank projects and by other donors. These have achieved 
notable results in the short term and in localized areas, but widespread improvements have not 
been sustained in the long term.  
 
A
new regulation to the General Health Law was recently passed, which establishes clearer 
procedures and institutional responsibilities specifically for biomedical waste management.  
Given the foundation of past analytical work on practices for biomedical waste management in 
the Dominican Republic combined with the momentum of new legislation, PARSS II is well-
positioned to build capacity within the MOH to implement these procedures. The MOH is 
seeking the Bank’s assistance to do so, and this will be done through institutional strengthening 
measures at the central level, developing a personnel training program at the level of health 
facilities, and building incentives for better waste management practices into the overall project 
as one variable of improved health service delivery.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered due to the project’s implications for biomedical waste management, both 
in expanding access to primary health care as well as in improving the quality in the delivery of 
health care.  No civil works will be financed by the project. 
 
As part of the first phase of the project (PARSS I), an Environmental Assessment of 
biomedical waste management in the Dominican Republic was conducted in 2007.  This 
evaluation found that the majority of health facilities included in the study were not compliant 
with the relevant laws, most facilities did not have set procedures for biomedical waste, and that 
personnel were often untrained or did not have the resources for proper waste management. 
 
Under PARSS II the government will build on past diagnostic work and develop a practical 
manual of procedures for biomedical waste management, which will serve as the project’s 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF).  The manual will also outline institutional roles 
and responsibilities for waste management (including monitoring), form the basis for a personnel 
training program, and inform the creation of educational materials for health workers.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not procure any pesticides for purposes of vector control and activities are 
unlikely to lead to increased pesticide use. However, as project preparation advances, the team 
will assess if there will be a need to include procedures for proper handling, application, storage, 
and disposal of pesticides within the EMF and training program.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/06/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The MOH is currently in the process of hiring a consultant to prepare the EMF.A draft will 
be prepared, disclosed and consulted with relevant stakeholders before project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres 
03/12/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
