Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/06/2009 
Report No.:  49936
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P106619 
Project Name:  Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS 2) 
Task Team Leader:  Fernando Montenegro Torres 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
13.74
13.74 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed second phase of this APL is designed within the framework of the 
overarching objectives of the APL (Adaptable Program Loan) approved by the Board in 
2003: (i) improved mother and child health and reduction of poverty; (ii) implementation 
of new health sector reform laws (42-01 and 87-02), including strengthening the 
stewardship role of the MOH; (iii) consolidating universal health insurance as the public 
stewardship organization for the health sector; (iv) development of regional health care 
networks; and (v) health insurance mechanisms.  
 
The Project's Development Objectives are to: (i) improve the capacity of RHSs to 
deliver, in a timely fashion, quality services known to improve the health of mothers, 
children and people with chronic conditions by public providers at the first level of care; 
(ii) improve health system responsiveness, defined here as the institutional capacity of 
public sector health organizations to conduct strategic purchasing of health care services 
and goods, and to respond to public health emergencies.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is the second phase of an APL (Adaptable Program Loan). It is 
consistent with the objectives and agreements of the APL, which called for three 
Page  2
consecutive loans. The first phase -following a restructuring- focused on strengthening 
health care infrastructure, reorganization of regional health systems, strengthening 
multiannual financial planning, and supporting expansion of enrollment of the poor in the 
SR (Subsidized Regime).  
 
The project consists of four components:  
 
Component 1: Introducing results-based mechanism for the first level of care in 
Regional Health Services (US$21.49 million - Bank financing US$14.52 million).The 
component would introduce results-adjusted capitation mechanisms to better align 
incentives to improve delivery of health services at the first level of care.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening the capacity of the MOH to improve health system 
responsiveness while fostering transparency and accountability (US$10.00 million - Bank 
financing US$7.00 million).  This component's objectives are to strengthen MOH 
capacity to deliver public health goods and services  while fostering transparency and 
accountability, and to strengthen existing information systems for the adequate 
functioning of results-adjusted capitations  
 
-
Subcomponent 2.1. Strengthening the strategic planning and evaluation capacity 
of the MOH to improve transparency and accountability with an emphasis on improving 
health system responsiveness.  
 
-
Subcomponent 2.2. Strengthening monitoring, information and evaluation 
systems for results-based financing  
 
Component 3: Improving quality of public spending on health care goods and services 
(US$12.57 million - Bank financing US$8.80 million). The objective of this component 
would be to strengthen coordination and institutional capacity of public sector 
organizations for more sustainable financing, planning and purchasing of health services 
and other key inputs needed to improve the quality of health services with an emphasis 
on primary health care. This component would include three subcomponents.  
 
-
Subcomponent 3.1. Strengthening public sector planning, procurement and 
distribution of medicines and medical inputs  
 
-
Subcomponent 3.2. Strengthening institutional capacity to expand and enhance 
social protection in health for the poor  
 
-
Subcomponent 3.3. Overall project coordination and operational costs for 
implementation of components 1 and 3  
 
Component 4: Support for Public Health Emergencies (US$0.10 million - Bank 
Financing US$0.10 million). The objective of this component is to support the MOH in 
coordinating and implementing activities for a swifter and better response to public health 
emergencies. This component would finance consulting and non-consulting services, 
technical assistance and goods including medicines, laboratory and protective equipment, 
laboratory reagents and other medical supplies, development and dissemination of 
materials for information campaigns, training for emergency preparedness and 
Page  3
incremental operational costs related to the health sector response to public health 
emergencies of local or international nature.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope, but will focus on prioritized areas to increase access to 
primary health services and improved delivery of primary health care services.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project was originally classified as a Category B at the PCN stage, but as project 
preparation progressed the team found that a Category C would be more appropriate 
given that the project activities would cause no adverse environmental impacts and no 
civil works would be financed. OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) is the only 
safeguard policy triggered, which reflects that technical assistance related to 
environmental aspects will be supported during project implementation. The Bank will 
work with the client to develop a strategic approach to address biomedical waste 
management in the health sector, which will capitalize on past analytical work from 
APL1 and other projects, as well as the approval of recent legislation specific to 
biomedical waste management (see 4 below). The aim is to have a positive impact on 
public health, worker safety, and link the notion of improved environmental management 
to quality health service delivery.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Substandard biomedical waste management is a persistent issue in the Dominican 
Republic. If managed improperly, the wastes produced by health establishments pose 
Page  4
health risks for the public and personnel as well as environmental contamination. Past 
projects have included measures related to biomedical waste management, and while 
discrete advancements have been noted there is a clear need for macro-level engagement 
on the issue to support long-term improvements on a national scale. Though the types of 
risks posed by improper waste management are indirectly related to the proposed 
project's actual activities, the project is well-placed to provide technical assistance in 
support of better practices at a strategic level, framing the issue as not only environmental 
but as one facet of improving the quality of health care.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Several studies and programs to improve biomedical waste management have been 
initiated in the past through World Bank projects and by other donors. These have 
achieved notable results in the short term and in localized areas, but widespread 
improvements have not been sustained in the long term. Under APL1, an evaluation of 
biomedical waste management in the Dominican Republic was conducted in 2007. This 
included a review of the waste management procedures for a sample of health facilities.  
The evaluation found that the majority of health facilities included in the study was not 
compliant with relevant laws, most facilities did not have set procedures for biomedical 
waste, and that personnel were often untrained or did not have the resources for proper 
waste management.   
 
A
regulation to the General Health Law was passed in February 2009, which establishes 
clear procedures and an institutional framework specifically for biomedical waste 
management.  Soon after the regulation was passed the client prepared a manual for 
healthcare waste management, which included detailed procedures for health centers to 
create internal institutional structures for waste management (as mandated by the 
regulation) as well as actual procedures for waste management. The manual requires 
further strengthening, but is a positive step in addressing both institutional and practical 
aspects of this issue.  
 
Given the foundation of past analytical work (supported by the Bank and other donors) 
on practices for biomedical waste management in the Dominican Republic combined 
with the momentum of new legislation, PARSS2 is well-positioned to build capacity 
within the MOH to implement these procedures.  Under the proposed project the client 
would build on previous work to apply lessons learned from past experiences and 
develop a strategy to implement measures from the new regulation.  
 
The implementing agency currently has low capacity to implement biomedical waste 
management procedures, lacking staff, capabilities to monitor health facilities' waste 
management practices and enforce standards, and coordination between other 
Government actors associated with these issues (e.g. environmental, solid waste, and 
Page  5
regional health authorities). Authorities are supportive of capacity building activities and 
have in the past undertaken a limited initiative on training health care professionals on the 
proper care of biomedical waste management under the auspices of the Japanese aid 
agency JICA. The government has expressed interest in pursuing a more strategic 
approach to adopting safeguard measures in its health sector and has asked the Bank to 
provide technical assistance.  
 
Rather than limit the initiative to specific activities of the proposed project, the planned 
strategy would apply more broadly to the health sector. Terms of reference have been 
prepared by the client for a consultancy that would include the design of a personnel 
training program, an environmental management plan, and create educational materials 
for health workers.  The Bank will work closely with the client as the consultancy is 
carried out, as part of an ongoing strategic engagement with the health sector.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
An initial strategy workshop is planned with the MOH, which will bring together other 
relevant authorities linked to environmental issues and the health sector. A consultation 
with outside stakeholders (e.g. NGOs, academia, public health organizations) would take 
place after the consultancy is underway.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/19/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
EA disclosure is not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres 
08/05/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
06/12/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
08/04/2009 
Comments:   
