Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2009 
Report No.:  51243
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P109932 
Project Name:  DO Emergency Recovery & Disaster Mgmt 
Task Team Leader:  Erwin De Nys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (27%);Power 
(26%);Irrigation and drainage (23%);Renewable energy (21%);Central government 
administration (3%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is an IBRD Emergency Recovery Loan of US$ 80 million to 
support the Government of the Dominican Republic with the reconstruction and 
rehabilitation of critical infrastructure damaged during the passage of Tropical Storms 
Noel and Olga.  The project will provide support for works involved with the 
reconstruction of physical infrastructure in the Water Resources Management and 
Electricity sectors and will provide retroactive financing for emergency works already 
completed in Water Resources Management, Drinking Water and Sanitation and 
Electricity sectors.  An institutional strengthening component is included to assist 
affected sectors with the development of improved disaster preparedness and response 
capacity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed loan will finance the reconstruction and rehabilitation of critical 
infrastructure in the Electricity and Water Resources sector specifically supporting the 
activities of the Dominican Corporation of State Electrical Companies (CDEEE) and the 
National Institute of Hydraulic Resources (INDHRI).  Drinking water will be supported 
Page  2
with retroactive financing directed at two agencies, the Santo Domingo Water and 
Sewerage Corporation (CAASD) and the Santiago Water and Sewerage Corporation 
(CORAASAN) to reimburse funds expended during the emergency phase of the disaster 
response.  
 
The preliminary project components are:  
 
Component 1, Water Resources - This component aims to: (i) rehabilitate the principal 
irrigation works damaged by Tropical Storms Noel and Olga; and (ii) support priority 
disaster-related institutional strengthening activities and equipment. The project would 
restore the operation of these systems through reconstruction and stabilization of critical 
physical infrastructure such as water storage facilities, head-works and canal systems.  
 
Component 2, Rehabilitation and Risk Management in Electricity Sector - Main 
objectives of this component are to restore priority electricity infrastructure and make 
improvements needed in the short term in the areas affected by the tropical storms Noel 
and Olga; and to strengthen the sector’s ability to respond to natural disasters.  
 
Component 3, Rehabilitation of water and sanitation infrastructure in Santo Domingo 
and Santiago - This project component is 100% retroactive financing to be provided to 
CAASD and CORAASAN to reimburse costs associated with the emergency restoration 
of  water and sanitation services affected by the storms to the cities of Santiago and Santo 
Domingo.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Projects have been identified by INDRHI and CDEEE and presented to the Bank for 
possible inclusion in the project. Works activities are dispersed throughout the country 
and are generally located in rural non-urban areas. No works are planned in or around 
protected areas and no works will require the purchase of land or resettlement. All works 
to be completed under the project pertain to the rehabilitation and reconstruction 
damaged infrastructure. No change in location, service level or function will be made 
under the project. Any design modification to existing structures will relate to improving 
the structure’s performance in future disaster situations. Typical activities include:  repair 
of power transmission lines, repair and rehabilitation of irrigation canals, replacement of 
damaged water control structures, repair of power generating facilities, repair of dams 
and associated infrastructure such as transmission lines and access roads.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gerald E. Meier (LCSUW) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
The project is considered Category “B” (partial assessment) and OP 4.01 is triggered.  
 
Works contemplated under this project relate to water resources management and 
electric generation and distribution. In all cases works are designed to restore damaged 
services and strengthen specific facilities to improve their performance during future 
disaster events. Works are of small to medium size and will be executed within existing 
right-of-ways and on existing service sites. No amplification or augmentation of services 
is contemplated under this project and design modifications will be included to strengthen 
the works against future events. For example, transmission lines to be rehabilitated may 
be moved within existing right-of-ways to reduce their vulnerability. Additional gabion 
structures may be included to improve the performance of existing structures. Access 
roads to critical dams will be rehabilitated to reduce vulnerability and to guarantee access 
to dam sites during emergencies.  
 
Based on a review of the works proposed, likely environmental impacts are those 
typically associated with construction activities and are limited to direct impacts to the 
work site during actual construction. Positive impacts include the restoration of basic 
services such as electricity, irrigation, and drinking water and sanitation services.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
Both CDEEE and INDRHI works have components relating to dams. INDRHI is the 
agency responsible for the maintenance of dams and CDEEE is the entity responsible for 
the operation of those dams used for the generation of hydroelectric power. The project 
includes activities in both Components One and Two involving works to existing dams. 
These dams must be evaluated by INDRHI and CDEEE, respectively, prior to the 
execution of works.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As no new service capacity is to be created under this project, the long-term 
consequences will relate to improved resilience of infrastructure to future disaster events.  
No activities have been identified that will promote or induce growth or development 
beyond that experienced prior to the passage of the storms. The long-term impacts 
anticipated are reduced costs in recovering from future disasters and improved 
survivability of infrastructure and services during such events. Institutional strengthening 
activities are designed to improve management capabilities particularly within the water 
resources management sector with emphasis on watershed management and watershed 
rehabilitation and improved response capability with the rehabilitation of the 
meteorological early warning system.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project objective is to restore damaged infrastructure assets. Alternatives in the 
rehabilitation process will relate to design modifications included to improve future 
performance during a disaster. No new infrastructure will be constructed under the 
project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Management  
 
Most of the works included in the program include a design component. While most 
works currently included are consistent with Category C classification, designs are not 
yet finalized, and the scope of works may change resulting in more significant (Category 
B) impacts. Both INDHRI and CDEEE will submit project packages to the Bank for 
review, together with the results of their environmental screening as required under 
national law. Based on this exchange, the Bank will review projects for environmental 
compliance and recommend any additional requirements as needed.  
 
As per the Project Operational Manual, CDEEE and INDHRI will manage the 
environmental compliance for their respective works. Contracts for all project-supported 
works will include specific environmental compliance clauses designed to deal with 
issues related to typical construction activities. In both cases, CDEEE and INDHRI 
provide site clerks that regularly inspect contractor activities. These inspections will 
include environmental compliance and will be submitted in accordance with the schedule 
provided in the specific contracts. These activities will become part of the contract 
management record which is the basis for contractor payment within the respective 
agencies. These environmental clauses will be included in the project operations manual 
together with guidance for their application.  
 
Safety of Dams  
 
Page  5
To comply with the requirements of OP/BP 4.37, a Bank specialist in dam safety will 
conduct an initial safety review of all dams associated with the project prior to the 
execution of 
–
or
disbursement against – any related works.  This initial screening by the 
Bank specialist will identify those sites which would be subject to the requirements of the 
OP/BP 4.37 policy.  Once those sites have been identified, the borrower will contract an 
independent specialist to conduct a full inspection and review of procedures and to 
produce a written report of findings and recommendations.  Financing for said activities 
would be included within the project.  
 
In addition to the requirements provided in OP/BP 4.37, the project will include an 
institutional strengthening element directly related to the operation of dams. Under this 
task, a consultant will be engaged to review and revise dam safety operating procedures. 
The purpose of the review is to update dam operations manuals taking into account the 
availability of improved data from the meteorological early warning network, newly 
calculated water balances, and changes in land use and rainfall/runoff characteristics.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Community participation and communication is major focus for INDRHI. Irrigation 
systems are community based and secondary networks are community managed through 
water committees. Works selected for inclusion in this project were identified through a 
process of public meetings with the affected communities. In the case of CDEEE, a large 
share of their participation is in the form of retroactive financing for emergency works.  
Additional works to be constructed focus on restoration of generation and distribution 
capacity.  
 
The Bank is working with the borrower to finalize the Operational Manual, which 
includes an Envrionmental Management Framework. The EMF will be disclosed as a 
stand alone document in a timely manner in accordance with OP/BP 8.00 and 
disseminated through the World Bank's Infoshop and the INDRHI and CDEEE websites. 
The EMF will provide guidance on the approach to be taken during implementation for 
the selection and design of proposed investments and the planning of mitigation 
measures, when necessary. The EMF will be subject to consultation and disclosure by the 
Borrower during project implementation, which will be undertaken at a time appropriate 
for the nature of the operation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/22/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Environmental Management Framework will be disclosed in country on the INDRHI 
and CDEEE websites in a timely manner and in accordance with OP/BP 8.00, which 
requires that the document be disclosed at a time appropriate for the nature of the 
operation in order to provide sufficient flexibility for rapid response.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
No 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
07/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gerald E. Meier 
07/11/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alessandro Palmieri 
07/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
07/14/2008 
Comments:  ISDS was signed by Regional Safeguards Coordinator, Reidar Kvam.  ISDS has been 
filed in IRIS. 
