Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3869 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Eastern Africa 
Project ID: P112688 
Project Name: East Africa Agricultural Productivity program 
Task Team Leader: David J. Nielson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To enhance the generation and dissemination of improved agricultural technologies (innovations 
and new genetic material) by upgrading existing national agricultural research institutions in 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda into Regional Centers of Excellence (RCOEs), to 
improve regional coordination of agricultural research, and to support region-wide the 
availability of improved genetic material (seeds and breeds). The achievement of these 
objectives will contribute toward increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the 
agricultural sector in East Africa, raising farm incomes and reducing poverty, and improving 
food security in both the short and longer term.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1.  Strengthening Regional Centers of Excellence (RCoEs) (US$20 Million) aims at 
strengthening the institutional capacities that are needed to establish regional centers of 
excellence (RCoEs). Each CoE will focus on a specific area (to be determined during 
preparation).  This component will fund the rehabilitation and modernization of the selected 
research centers: civil works, equipment including laboratory equipment, vehicles and 
machinery, library materials and equipment including software and hardware to support an 
Page  2
information system. It will also finance consultant services, graduate training at the M.S. and 
Ph.D. level, short-term training in key technical areas, workshops and operating costs.  
 
Component 2.  Technology Generation and Dissemination (US$34 Million) will finance 
research and dissemination at the national and regional levels.  These research and dissemination 
activities would cover the whole spectrum of the value chain 
–
from basic production to post-
harvest handling, marketing, processing and consumption.  It will allocate resources through a 
variety of mechanisms i.e. commissioned research, competitive grants etc. to promote 
partnership initiatives through centers of excellence, networks and national institutions.  To add 
value to national programs, the EAAPP will promote partnerships across countries to work on 
problems of common regional interest. Research projects would propose solutions to problems 
that are common to at least two countries and would involve institutions from at least two 
countries. Dissemination projects would have the same regional focus and would use 
participatory strategies and mechanisms to scale up technologies so that the intended clients can 
benefit from them. These projects would create partnerships with a range of institutions, both 
public and private to facilitate the adoption of available technologies.   Thus, each IDA credit 
recipient will implement activities that will benefit both that country and the region.  The choice 
of eligible activities will be determined during preparation but will follow the guiding principles 
of the Framework for Africa Agricultural Productivity (FAAP) developed by FARA to 
implement CAADP Pillar IV.  
 
Component 3. Seed Supply (US$60 Million).   This component will support activities and 
investments contributing toward increasing the availability of seed in the short term (1-3 years) 
for the commodities corresponding to each of the CoEs.  This would include measures to 
strengthen the capacities of both public and private sector to carry out seed production in each 
participating countries.  Support would be provided for quick disbursing, quick response 
activities focused on scaling up production of breeder and basic seed and strengthening seed 
exchange systems and seed quality assurance procedures.  More specifically, the program will 
provide support towards production of basic seed/genetic material  and certified seed production; 
basic equipment and operational costs associated with basic and certified seed production  
(upgrading of processing equipment, procurement of mobile cleaners, maintenance of storage, 
rehabilitation of small scale irrigation infrastructure); seed quality control; rapid 
assessments/studies, training, workshops;  facilitation of exchange of quality seed and genetic 
material by building capacity of national seed regulators; rapid assessments/studies, training, 
workshops. Detailed design for the component will require further work. Implementation 
arrangements will be developed and finalized during pre-appraisal and appraisal respectively.   A 
technical team including representatives from AGRA and the CGIAR system is being constituted 
to carry out this design work.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination, Policy Research, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
(US$ 6 Million). This component will strengthen the project management and M&E capacities of 
the implementing agencies at the regional (ASARECA) and national levels. The component will 
support operating costs, travel, equipments, vehicles, supplies, and training/workshops at both 
levels.  An M&E system for EAAPP will be designed by each CoE and by ASARECA and a 
baseline will be established against which to assess progress in the implementation of the 
EAAPP.   This component would also support policy analysis and advocacy at each CoE and at 
Page  3
ASARECA related to cross-boundary technology transfer, dissemination, and adoption.  Some of 
the financing for each country CoE would be forwarded to ASARECA for its regional 
coordination role. The role of ASARECA in implementation of EAAPP would be to provide a 
platform for coordination among regional participants, provision of technical assistance, and 
support for monitoring and harmonization activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the following entities: Tanzania: Ministry of Agriculture, 
Food Security and Co-operatives (MAFC); Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research; Uganda: 
National Agricultural Research Organization (NARO); and Kenya Agricultural Research 
Institute (KARI). Each of these institutions will also be directly responsible for handling all 
safeguard policies, as well as preparation of the ESMFs and PMPs for each country.  
 
All of these institutions have had experience in developing and implementing these types of 
frameworks under other Bank lending operations and are believed to have the necessary 
capacity.  Should capacity weaknesses be identified during project preparation, capacity building 
measures will be outlined in the ESMF and built into the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is assumed that some of the operation activities may have adverse environmental impacts 
associated with intensive agriculture (related to pesticide, soil and water, bio-diversity and 
biosafety). Since the exact project activities and their sites will be determined only during project 
implementation, the project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to guide environmental and social due diligence for the future project activities and 
disclose it before appraisal. During implementation, individual project activities will be screened 
and EMPs for them prepared following the procedures outlined in the ESMF.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
It is assumed that the operation will include activities related to pest and pesticide 
management, and will trigger OP 4.09. To ensure compliance with OP4.09, the ESMF will 
incorporate OP4.09 related guidance for future project activities. Once individual pest 
management related project activities are identified during project implementation, Pest 
Management Plans (PMPs) will be prepared and disclosed.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Given that earthworks and civil works may take place for rehabilitation of regional research 
centers, chance finds provisions will be incorporated in ESMF and construction contracts.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Not triggered. Project will use a negative list of ineligible activities incorporated in the 
ESMF to identify activities triggering OP 4.10 ineligible under the project,   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The Centers of Excellence which will be developed are within existing institutions and 
current campuses, and therefore no land would be acquired.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Not triggered. Project will use a negative list of ineligible activities incorporated in the 
ESMF identifying activities triggering OP 4.37 ineligible under the project.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/22/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The tight project preparation timeline is determined by commitments at the corporate (VP) 
level and demand created by the food crisis.  
 
Environmental Management Frameworks (EMFs) and Pest Management Plans (PMPs) will 
be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal (January 8, 2009), in the country and 
at the Bank’s InfoShop.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David J. Nielson 
12/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
12/11/2008 
Comments:   
