Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/22/2009 
Report No.:  AC2938
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Eastern Africa 
Project ID:  P103639 
Project Name:  Eastern Nile Planning Model 
Task Team Leader:  Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 26, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTWR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Information 
technology (25%);General public administration sector (25%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (67%);Regional integration (33%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.60 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
6.50
7.10 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the ENPM Project is that countries in the Eastern Nile 
adopt an improved decision support modeling framework to identify water-related 
investments and evaluate them in a regional context.   
 
3. Project Description 
The ENPM Project contains three major components:  
 
Component A: Knowledge Base Development  
 
This interactive information base will provide a shared, synoptic view of the Eastern 
Nile basins and their investment possibilities, with opportunities and risks as viewed from 
an economic, environmental and social perspective.  
 
Component B: The ENPM Modeling System  
 
Page  2
The ENPM modeling system will include a suite of simulation, optimization and multi-
criteria analytical tools to analyze the economic, environmental and social aspects of 
proposed investments in a water resources systems framework and to evaluate alternative 
scenarios of the future.  
 
Component C: Institutional and Human Capacity Building  
 
The ENPM will support the strengthening of ENTRO, country institutions and 
university partnerships, as well as a structured stakeholder process to ensure that the 
systems developed are driven by multi-sectoral stakeholder demand and appropriate to 
support decision-making.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Eastern Nile region, and is located in the riparian countries 
of Ethiopia, Sudan and Egypt.  The main sub-basins of the 1.6 million km2 Eastern Nile 
Basin include the Blue Nile, Baro-Akobo Sobat, Tekeze, and the Main Nile system. The 
project is of a technical assistance nature and the information generated on 
environmental, social, economic perspectives on the water resources systems and existing 
and proposed infrastructure is expected to assist in future mainstreaming of 
environmental, social, and safeguard aspects into investment projects.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASDI) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
Ms Astrid Hillers (ENV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This recipient-executed trust fund technical assistance project is not expected to have any 
adverse environmental or social impacts; in fact, the aim of the project is to build local 
and regional knowledge, stakeholder processes, and institutional capacity to better handle 
environmental and social issues in water resources planning.  The project has thus been 
categorized as Category C.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are many possible direct, indirect and long-term impacts possible from the various 
types of water infrastructure being considered for the Eastern Nile Region.  This project 
seeks, through targeted technical assistance, to develop a good knowledge base, modeling 
tools, and institutional capacity to better identify such issues and to compare alternative 
investment strategies from a more holistic perspective.  
 
The project seeks to improve the systematic management of the growing environmental 
knowledge base of the region, collating information on the climate, water resources, land, 
and known environmental impacts of investments.  The modeling to be supported intends 
to try and capture the often neglected but critical environmental impacts of proposed 
investments.  As in the social case, the comprehensiveness of this difficult task will 
depend on the state of the knowledge base and relationships to be modeled with the 
available information.  The institutional capacity to better manage environmental issues 
will be strengthened through staffing (environmental experts and interns), training, 
university partnerships, and awareness-building efforts.  
 
The social knowledge base on the Eastern Nile is not well established or organized.  The 
ENPM would seek to collate available social information, including what is known about 
the social impacts of proposed projects.  The modeling tools, that often neglect social 
issues, are being designed at the request of the ENPM regional working group to try to 
best capture social issues in evaluating and comparing scenarios.  This is difficult and 
much of the initial effort in the ENPM will be in examining the depth of the available 
knowledge base (e.g. people that need to be resettled for particular projects depends on 
whether pre/feasibility studies or other relevant surveys have been conducted) and 
outlining social impact indicators and relationships that can be modeled effectively (e.g. 
jobs per ha of irrigated area developed in different locations) with the available 
information.  Broad stakeholder awareness and participation is limited in many such 
modeling efforts.  The ENPM has already initiated stakeholder participation through a 
multi-sectoral regional working group that has guided the ENPM preparation.It is 
expected that a major role of the ENPM is to improve stakeholder awareness and 
interaction in order to develop a shared understanding of potential water investments in a 
regional context and guide the development of the knowledge base and analytical tools.  
Social capital is being built through project staffing (social development experts and 
interns), training, information dissemination, meetings, university partnerships and just 
Page  4
working together across sectors and countries to better understand how the significant 
potential of the Eastern Nile can be harnessed to improve livelihoods and reduce 
vulnerability, especially of the poor.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project is not expected to have adverse impacts. Several project alternatives were 
considered trading off complexity and time of development.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is not expected to have any significant adverse social or environmental 
impacts.  Borrower capacity to implement the project effectively is adequate as planned.  
Furthermore, a #Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards# was 
developed under the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project in 2008. This document is 
applicable to all technical assistance projects that fall under NBI. The ongoing NBI 
Institutional Strengthening Project will support the development of a Nile safeguards 
framework that will set the ground rules for investment operations in the Nile Basin.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include technical, bureaucratic, and minister-level officials, regional 
working groups, national forums, universities, and the general public.  No significant 
safeguard issues needed to be discussed at this stage, but a series of structured 
stakeholder consultations is planned as part of project implementation to help guide the 
ENPM development and facilitate its use for decision support on water infrastructure on 
the Eastern Nile.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/19/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
No adverse environmental or social impacts expected from this technical assistance 
project.  Environmental Category C project - no environmental or social safeguard 
documents required to be developed or disclosed.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
06/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Astrid Hillers 
06/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
06/22/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
06/22/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
06/22/2009 
Comments:   
