Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2009 
Report No.:  47820
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Eastern Africa 
Project ID:  P112688 
Project Name:  East Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
Task Team Leader:  David J. Nielson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance regional specialization in agricultural 
research and to facilitate increased sharing of identified agricultural technologies across 
national boundaries.  The objective will be pursued by upgrading existing national 
agricultural research institutions in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania into Regional Centers 
of Excellence, supporting regional research, training and dissemination activities and  
regional coordination of these activities, and by supporting increased availability of 
improved genetic material (seeds and breeds) in the selected products in participating 
countries. The achievement of these objectives will contribute toward increasing the 
productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector in East Africa, raising farm 
incomes and reducing poverty, and improving food security in both the short and longer 
term.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1.  Strengthening Regional Centers of Excellence (US$20.7 Million) aims at 
strengthening the institutional capacities that are needed to establish Regional Centers of 
Excellence. Capacity strengthening will focus on the physical facilities and human 
Page  2
resources needed to sustain program objectives and outcomes at both the regional and 
national level.  
 
Component 2.  Technology Generation, Training and Dissemination (US$41.0 Million) 
will finance technology generation, training and dissemination that has been agreed at 
national and regional levels as evidenced by inclusion in an annual regional research plan 
for each commodity and for training and dissemination. Regional plans will be developed 
and agreed upon through regional meetings convened by ASARECA. Research, training 
and dissemination activities will cover the whole spectrum of the value chain 
–
from 
basic production to post-harvest handling, marketing, processing and consumption.  
 
Technology Generation. EAAPP will support research activities developed within the 
center of excellence in partnership with regional stakeholder countries. Each RCoE will 
implement activities that will benefit both that country and the region. Implementation 
will take place through research sub-projects that propose solutions to problems or 
opportunities that are common to at least two countries and involve institutions from at 
least two countries. All countries will participate in the activities of the three RCoEs. 
Therefore, a country that hosts a RCoE will also participate in the activities of the two 
RCoEs hosted by other countries.  
 
Training and Dissemination.  Training and dissemination sub-projects will have a 
regional focus and use participatory strategies and mechanisms to train researchers, 
extensionists, farmers in the latest innovations and to scale up application of 
technologies. These projects will create partnerships with a range of institutions, both 
public and private to facilitate the dissemination and adoption of available technologies. 
Regional training and dissemination activities will focus on: (i) ensuring increased 
availability and access of information and improved technologies; (ii) strengthening the 
capacity of the agricultural advisory service providers (supply side) and farmers 
(demand); (iii) strengthening linkages between research, extension and end users 
(farmers, farmers organizations, private sector actors);  and (iv) establishing a regional 
platform for exchange/share of knowledge and experiences in scaling up agricultural 
innovations.  
 
Component 3. Improved Availability of Seeds and Breeds (US$20.8 Million).   This 
component will support multiplication of seeds, strengthening the enabling environment 
for regional seed trade, and improving the capacity of seed companies and informal seed 
producers.  Support will be targeted at the three commodities selected in the Regional 
Centers of Excellence, with special emphasis on increased availability of materials 
needed for dissemination of the technologies included in the “best bet” training programs 
noted above.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$7.5 Million). This 
component will finance management and coordination at the national and regional levels. 
At the national level the project will be managed through the establishment of 
coordination units or teams within existing structures for coordination of national 
projects. In Ethiopia an EAAP coordination team will be placed in the Rural Capacity 
Page  3
Building Project coordination units in Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
and the Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research (EIAR). In Kenya an EAAPP team 
will be placed in the KAPAP Secretariat that will be placed in the Ministry of 
Agriculture. In Tanzania, the ASDP coordination unit in the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Food and Cooperatives (MAFC) in Tanzania will take on responsibility for coordinating 
implementation of EAAPP within MAFC and the Ministry of Livestock Development 
(MoLD).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania. Technology 
generation and dissemination activities would take place within existing fields and 
laboratories of agricultural research stations, seed farms or regulatory agencies. This 
would not cover a wide geographic area and field testing would take place on small plots 
of land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potential large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts 
associated with EAAPP. There are potential risks or negative impacts that could arise 
from EAAPP implementation. In particular, these could include:  
 
•
Increased vulnerability to pests due to poor pesticide management or introduction of 
new cultivars  
 
•
Localized agro-chemical pollution and reduction of water quality from agro-chemical 
use or poor handling of pesticides and disposal of empty chemical containers;  
 
•
Unintended movement or transmission of new agricultural technologies within or 
between countries as a result of field trials or other research activities.  
Page  4
•
Land or water degradation due to the rehabilitation of small scale irrigationsystems or 
the construction or rehabilitation of buildings   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Same as above   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Country specific environmental and social management frameworks (ESMFs) have been 
developed for the activities taking place under EAAPP. Each ESMF also incorporates a 
pest management plan (PMP). The country specific ESMFs build on the existing 
framework for environment management and regulation within implementing countries 
and establish a set of specific processes, policies, capacity building and monitoring 
activities that would be required to mitigate the potential environmental risks or impacts 
arising from implementation of EAAPP. Capacity building and implementation of the 
ESMF has been budgeted for in each country.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are members of the agricultural research and dissemination community, 
farmers and policymakers. Draft ESMFs have been developed and publicly disclosed 
prior to appraisal by the Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research, the Kenya 
Agricultural Research Institute, and the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Cooperatives 
of Tanzania. Final versions will be disclosed in March.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David J. Nielson 
03/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Martin Fodor 
03/09/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
03/09/2009 
Comments:   
