Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3692
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P100047 
Project Name:  Ain Sokhna Power Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anna Maria Bjerde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 13, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Analysis of economic growth (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
600.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
831.30 
 
African Development Bank 
550.00 
 
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
208.50
1,589.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objectives are to (i) assist the Government of Egypt to 
ensure continuous electricity supply to meet demand in a sustainable manner through 
investment in new generation capacity; and (ii) improve the 
sector’s financial 
sustainability by providing technical assistance to EEHC to support sector revenue 
improvements.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is a 1,300 MW supercritical steam turbine power plant using natural 
gas as the main fuel (and mazout as the back-up fuel).  The plant will be owned, operated 
and managed by the East Delta Electricity Production Company (EDEPC), one of 
EEHC’s subsidiaries responsible for electricity production in the geographical territory of 
the proposed power plant site.  
 
The proposed project includes the following: (i) two 650 MW steam turbine generators; 
(ii) two steam generators (once-through supercritical boilers); (iii) electrical equipment 
including transformers and switchyard; (iv) auxiliary mechanical equipment including 
Page  2
pumps and drives, heat exchangers and de-aerators, critical piping and piping valves; (v) 
water and wastewater treatment systems and desalination plant; (vi) the implementation 
of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), including environmental 
monitoring equipment; (vii) distributed control systems and instrumentation; (viii) 
engineering and project management services including design, procurement and 
construction supervision as well as commissioning, testing and start-up; (ix) civil works, 
yard tanks as well as medium and low voltage switchgear; (x) substations and 
transmission lines to interconnect to the national power grid; and (xi) insurance.  
 
In addition, a technical assistance component is aimed at further enhancing the on-going 
energy sector policy dialogue with GOE. The assistance will mainly comprise of studies 
and policy support including rapid response support to EEHC in the implementation of 
the time-of-use tariff and further tariff adjustment recommendations from the on-going 
Energy Pricing Strategy work.  Based on the successful TA implemented in the 
electricity, renewable energy and natural gas sectors since 2004, an annual programmatic 
Bank budget of US$250,000 a year for the next three years has been allocated to enable 
continued rapid-response assistance and support based on the trust and cooperation 
established in the sector.  In addition, substantial trust fund resources from the Energy 
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) and the Public-Private Infrastructure 
Advisory Facility (PPIAF) have been mobilized.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed site of the new plant is an empty land area right next to an existing power 
plant on the Suez Gulf, which was commissioned about 5 years ago.  The site is about 52 
km south of Suez city.  The land in question is public (belongs to EEHC), and covers an 
unproductive sandy area without any structures, except for a temporary shed.  
 
Although the location and routing of off-site infrastructure, in particular the 
transmission lines required to transmit the electricity generated by the power plant to the 
national power supply system, is not yet finally determined; the new transmission lines 
are expected to be mostly constructed in parallel to existing lines and the area in question 
is generally empty public land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
It is expected that the construction and operation activities of the power plant may have 
potential environmental impacts.  
 
During the construction phase, impacts are expected in the form of increased dust, noise, 
vibration, etc. on land, along with the impact on the gulf of Suez from construction of the 
intake and discharge structures on physical aquagraphy, water quality, and aquatic 
habitats. Furthermore, traffic impact may be expected to occur during a short period at 
peak construction in the form of increased congestion on the main roads to the power 
plant. All of these impacts are expected to be localized, short lived, and reversible. 
Mitigation measures include good practice, and are included in details in the tables in 
Annex 10 of this Project Appraisal Document. All the mitigation, monitoring and 
management measures proposed will be adopted by the Project Company and imposed as 
conditions of contract on the contractor and any sub-contractors employed to build or 
operate any part of the power plant.  
 
During the operation phase, the main impacts can be summarized in the following:  
 
Air quality from stack emission. The power plant will burn natural gas as its primary 
fuel. As a result, the principle pollutant during normal operation will be NOx. During 
emergency operation (and for no more than 2% of operating time), the burning of light 
fuel oil will result in emissions of particulate matter and SO2 along with trace amounts of 
other pollutants. Emissions from the plant will meet both Egyptian and World Bank 
Guidelines. Air quality dispersion modeling indicates that cumulative ground level 
concentration, taking into account surrounding industries, are within the World Bank and 
Egyptian standards. The ESMP recommended that an air quality monitoring system 
composed of 2 or 3 monitoring stations be utilized during operation.  
 
Aquatic impact from cooling water withdrawal and discharge  
 
Page  4
Cooling water will be extracted at the rate of 36 m3/sec from the Gulf of Suez, and the 
heated plume will be then returned to the Gulf. The temperature of the returned cooling 
water at the point of discharge conforms to the Egyptian Standard, and the discharge as 
modeled satisfies the World Bank standard of a maximum increase of 3oC above ambient 
at the edge of the mixing zone (100 m from the point of discharge). In addition, the area 
affected by the highest temperature increases and therefore where aquatic ecology is 
likely to be most affected is localized. The aquatic habitats in this area have been found 
to already be relatively impoverished. Outside this area, more marginal increases in the 
Suez Gulf water temperature are likely to create new or improved habitats for flora and 
fauna.  
 
Noise impact from the plant operation  
 
The potential noise emissions from the plant during operation have been modeled to 
provide noise contours in the area around the site. The predicted operational noise levels 
at the site boundary and at all receptors are below the Egyptian and World Bank 
guidelines during both daytime and night-time.  
 
The main potential impacts from the transmission lines include avian and aircraft 
hazards; induced effects from electromagnetic fields; vegetation damage, habitat loss, and 
invasion by exotic species along the right of way and access roads and around substation 
sites; and chemical contamination from chemical maintenance techniques. Proposed 
environmental mitigation measures include selecting the right of way to avoid important 
bird habitats, flight routes, and human activities; installing deflectors on lines in areas 
with potential for bird collisions; utilizing mechanical clearing techniques, grazing and/or 
selective chemical applications; selecting herbicides with minimal undesired effects; and 
maintaining naturally low-growing vegetation along the right of way.  
 
Although resettlement and land acquisition are unlikely, the exact final location of the 
associated infrastructure (i.e., transmission lines and substations) is not yet defined.  The 
areas in question are largely uninhabited public land; however, in order to handle any 
potential future changes, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared. If during 
implementation any land acquisition becomes necessary, a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) or abbreviated RAP - depending on the scale and severity of impacts 
–
will be 
prepared. The resettlement/land acquisition process should be completed prior to the start 
of physical works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Reliable electricity generation and supply will be critical for Egypt’s longer-term 
development, as demand for electricity is expected to increase considerably in the coming 
years. Positive long-term socio-economic impacts are expected, particularly through the 
provision of employment opportunities and economic investments into the area.  No 
long-term or irreversible indirect impacts are anticipated from the project activities, 
provided that the mitigation measures proposed in the ESMP are implemented.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
An analysis of alternatives was carried out during the ESIA preparation. The no action 
alternative to the proposed power plant would result in the demand for electricity 
exceeding supply, with an increasing deficit as demand increases in the future. As a 
result, the “no action” option was not considered to be a viableor acceptable alternative to 
the proposed project. Alternative electricity supply options were also considered, but it 
was determined that a new gas-fired plant at Al-Ain Al-Sokhna site was the preferred 
alternative. Alternative technology and fuel were also considered, and it was determined 
that the optimal option was gas oil-fired steam units, on the basis of primarily operational 
flexibility and grid stability and also fuel flexibility. Alternative sites were considered but 
the one at Ain Sokhna was preferred on a number of economic and non-economic basis.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Detailed tables summarizing the ESMP are included in Annex 10 on Safeguards Policy 
Issues. Institutionally, the ESMP delineates the roles and responsibilities for 
implementing the ESMP during construction and operation. Suitably qualified and 
experienced contractors will be responsible for the detailed design and construction of the 
power plant. Construction workers will be required to demonstrate appropriate skills, 
qualifications and/or experience prior to employment. During construction, Project 
Management Unit/Environmental Management Staff (will include 3-4 staff members, 
with Bachelor of Science degrees and/or 5 years high technical education) and the 
Assistant Plant Manager in collaboration with the Site Manager will ensure that all 
contracts with Contractors and sub-contractors stipulate all construction management 
measures (as given in the ESMP), operational design criteria and environment, health and 
safety standards which must be implemented at the project site.  
 
Implementation of these measures will be enforced by PMU/EMS and the Assistant 
Plant Manager and supervised by the Assistant Plant Manager, supported by EDEPC 
Project Manager in collaboration with the Site Manager, who will have direct 
responsibility for the Environment, Safety and Quality Assurance program on site during 
construction and operation. The Assistant Plant Manager is responsible for ensuring that 
construction works comply with the requirements of the ESMP and all environmental 
permits.  
 
During operation, direct responsibility for environmental compliance and the 
implementation of the mitigation, management and monitoring measures will continue to 
be with the Plant Environmental Staff under direct supervision of the Assistant Plant 
Manager. This position will report directly to the Chairman/General Manager of EDEPC. 
The Assistant Plant Manager will be based at the site and will be responsible for 
recruiting, training and managing his staff. He will be responsible for implementing the 
mitigation and management measures described above and for monitoring and record 
keeping of key environmental issues. In his role, the Assistant Plant Manager will also be 
responsible for maintaining any pollution control equipment and for developing and 
Page  6
implementing procedures for safe handling and storage of any hazardous materials used 
on site.  
 
The Assistant Plant Manager will also have lead responsibility for maintaining a written 
Environmental Register with respect to environmental impacts as required under 
Egyptian guidelines. The written records will identify the characteristics of discharges 
and emissions, details of periodic testing including results, procedures for follow-up 
environmental safety actions and the person in charge of this follow-up. Should any 
prescribed standards be breached, PMU/EMS, through the Assistant Plant Manager, will 
immediately inform the EEAA and disclose the procedures being taken to rectify non-
conformity.  
 
In addition, the project company must keep a record of any significant environmental 
incidents occurring at the plant including accidents and occupational illnesses, spills, fires 
and other emergencies. The Assistant Plant Manager will be responsible for ensuing that 
these records are maintained up to date and are available on site. The Assistant Plant 
Manager will supervise and lead the Environmental Department (ED) and the 
Environmental Management Staff (EMS) directed by the ED.  
 
The cost of ESMP implementation is estimated at US$1.85 million, which covers 
mitigation measures during construction and operation phases, institutional aspects and 
training, and monitoring program. The source of the ESMP implementation budget is 
EDEPC.  
 
In terms of previous capacity, the Borrower has been financing power projects with 
international financing institutions for several years, including the Tebbin Power Project 
financed by the World Bank, and is thus experienced with the Bank’s safeguard polices. 
Implementation of safeguard aspects of the Tebbin Power Project is highly satisfactory.  
 
In addition, Egypt has strict environmental regulations on ESIAs in conjunction with 
large infrastructure projects and each ESIA undertaken needs formal approval by the 
Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In order to ensure that the views and interests of all project stakeholders are taken into 
account, public consultation has been carried out according to the Egyptian guidelines, 
which require coordination with other government agencies involved in the ESIA as well 
as obtaining views of local people and affected groups. This consultation has been 
undertaken as part of the ESIA process. The adopted methodology for the public 
consultation, which conforms to Egyptian guidelines and World Bank requirements, 
comprises four elements, namely:  
 
(a) 
discussions with local stakeholders and interested parties during preparation of the 
environmental documents for local permitting requirements;  
 
Page  7
(b) 
discussions with local stakeholders during the scoping meeting organized in the 
Suez Governorate, and preparation of this ESIA-Report;  
 
(c) 
the organization of a Public Meeting in the Suez Governorate, and  
 
(d) on-
going consultation through an “open-door” policy during construction 
andoperation of the power plant.  
 
As far as public disclosure is concerned, major initiatives to inform the public and 
interested parties about the Al-Sokhna Power project include the following:  
 
(a) 
press advertisement describing the project and inviting interested parties to attend 
the public meeting and review the Draft Final ESIA Report;  
 
(b) 
distribution of an invitation and Arabic copy of the Non Technical Summary 
describing the context of the power plant, the technology employed, the impact on the 
environment, the mitigation measures and the ESMP; and  
 
(c) 
disclosure of the Draft Final ESIA Report and the Executive Summary, including 
ESMP locally and via the Infoshop.  
 
A
variety of environmental and socio-economic issues have been covered in these 
consultations.  A full methodology for consultation and disclosure is presented in the 
project’s Public Consultation and Disclosure Activities (PCDA), given inAnnex D of the 
ESIA.  
 
A
scoping session for this ESIA, undertaken by ECG in collaboration with the EEHC 
and EDEPC, took place on June 2, 2008 during which a wide selection of personnel from 
different orientations contributed actively to its activities. The key objectives of this 
consultation were to identify primary and secondary stakeholders, ensure that they had 
received sufficient information about the project during earlier ECG/EEHC/EDEPC 
consultation activities and to identify their immediate concerns.  
 
A
second consultation meeting with 105 participants was convened on August 6, 2008.  
this consultation was announced in daily newspapers well in advance, along with 
invitations sent to all relevant stakeholders.  Those consulted in these sessions expect the 
project to have significant positive long-term impacts, and in the short term considerable 
additional local employment will be created. A more detailed description of these 
meetings as well as other consultation activities is presented in the project’s Public 
Consultation and Disclosure Activities, Annexes A-D of the ESIA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/11/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  9
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anna Maria Bjerde 
12/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
12/18/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
12/18/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
12/18/2008 
Comments:   
