Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3539 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P100047 
Project Name: Ain Sokhna Power Project 
Task Team Leader: Anna Maria Bjerde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Analysis of economic growth (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
600.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
569.00 
 
African Development Bank 
290.00 
 
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
100.00 
 
KUWAIT: Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development 
100.00
1,059.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are to (i) assist the Government of Egypt to ensure 
continuous energy supply to meet demand in a sustainable manner through investment in new 
generation capacity; and (ii) improve the sector's financial sustainability by providing technical 
assistance to EEHC to support the implementation of adjustments to the electricity tariff 
structure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is a 1,300 MW supercritical steam turbine power plant comprising two 650 
MW steam turbines using natural gas as the main fuel (and mazout as the back-up fuel).  
 
The draft feasibility study identifies the proposed plant as an efficient addition to EEHC's 
power system and as part of its long-term expansion plan, which comprises a mix of Combined 
Cycle Gas Turbines, Steam Cycle (SC), Simple Cycle Gas Turbines, wind and possible more 
solar-thermal power plants.  EEHC's experience is that maintaining a balanced mix of 
Page  2
technologies in its generation mix facilitates operational flexibility (in its experience the SC has a 
superior record of cycling operation to follow the load and CCGT operates best as a base-load 
unit), particularly given that CCGT is more sensitive to ambient air temperature, i.e., higher 
temperatures reduce the output of the CCGT plants 
–
a
concern in Egypt where the reserve 
margin is already under pressure.  To mitigate the increased capital cost and lower fuel efficiency 
of the SC technology, EEHC is designing the proposed power plant to use a supercritical boiler.  
This will be the first supercritical boiler in Egypt and in the region.  The supercritical boiler will 
increase the overall efficiency of the power plant by up to 4%, in addition to reducing emissions 
and having a faster response to load following.  
 
The proposed project will also support, through on-going technical assistance and in-depth 
policy dialogue, the implementation of design changes currently under formulation to the 
electricity tariff to apply Time of Use (ToU) pricing in order to shift peak load.  A programmatic 
TA program of US$250,000 for the next three years has been agreed with the Government for; 
inter alia, this specific purpose.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed site of the new plant is an empty land area right next to an existing power plant on 
the Suez Gulf, which was commissioned about 5 years ago.  The site is about 52 km south of 
Suez city.  The land in question is public (belongs to EEHC), and covers an unproductive sandy 
area without any structures, except for a temporary shed.  
 
Although the location and routing of off-site infrastructure, in particular the transmission lines 
required to transmit the electricity generated by the power plant to the national power supply 
system, is not yet finally determined; the new transmission lines are expected to be mostly 
constructed in parallel to existing lines and the area in question is generally empty public land.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been financing power projects with international financing institutions for 
several years, including the Tebbin Power Project financed by the World Bank,  and is thus 
experienced with the Bank’s safeguard polices.  Implementation of safeguard aspects of the 
Tebbin Power Project is highly satisfactory.  
 
In addition, Egypt has strict environmental regulations on ESIAs in conjunction with large 
infrastructure projects and each ESIA undertaken needs formal approval by the Egyptian 
Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Given the project’s nature and size, it is classified as Category A for the purposes of 
evaluating the potential project
impacts with regard to the environmental and social aspects; as 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
such, a detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be carried out.  The 
Egyptian Electricity Holding Company has finalized terms of reference and is in the process of 
retaining an independent consulting firm to carry out this work.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The potential triggering of BP 4.11, i.e., physical cultural resources and any follow-up action 
will be determined in the course of preparation of the ESIA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although resettlement and/or land acquisition is unlikely, the final information related to the 
location of the associated infrastructure (i.e., transmission lines and substations) is not available.  
The areas in question are largely uninhabited public land; however, in order to handle any 
potential future changes a the preparation of a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is included 
in the scope of work of the indepentent consulting firm that will be responsible for the 
preparation of the ESIA. Questions relating to the potential triggering of OP 4.12, i.e., land 
acquisition and/or resettlement and any follow-up action in the form of site-specific Resettlement 
Action Plans/Land Acquisition Plans will be clarified during the preparation of the RPF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Egyptian Electricity Holding Company has finalized terms of reference for the ESIA 
work, and is in the process of retaining an independent consulting firm to undertake this task.  
The Terms of reference have been reviewed and approved by the MNA Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator.  A draft ESIA is planned to be available on August 5, 2008, while the final 
ESIA report will be completed by September 30, 2008.  Consultations with stakeholders and 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
project affected people are planned to be carried out at least twice, during the scoping stage 
and as soon as the draft ESIA and RPF have been completed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anna Maria Bjerde 
04/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/08/2008 
Comments:  Jaafar Friaa, Env. Reviewer 
Fatou Fall, Social Reviewer 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
04/08/2008 
Comments:   
