Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/09/2009 
Report No.:  AC3369
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P101103 
Project Name:  EGYPT - National Railways Restructuring Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michel Bellier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 9, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 12, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
270.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
35.00
35.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Egyptian National Railways Restructuring Project 
(ENRRP) is to assist the Government to improve ENR’s responsiveness to economic and 
social needs through more reliable, efficient and safer services, and to strengthen the 
company’s financial viability. As such the project will contribute to the successful 
implementation of ENR’s ongoing transformation plan, which aimsto enhance safety of 
services, improve customer service, develop the rail freight business, and achieve 
financial sustainability of railways operations.   
 
3. Project Description 
The ENRRP would finance key elements of ENR’s transformation program, with 
particular emphasis on those components that are critical to improving efficiency and 
safety, increasing revenue, and modernizing management practices.  The proposed 
Project consists of three components, and the overall financing of this Project amounts to 
US$305 million, of which (i) US$270 million IBRD financing; and (ii) US$35 million 
counterpart financing from other Donors’ grants and the ENR Budget.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Signaling Modernization (US$202 million - IBRD financing US$197 
million for goods and works, counterpart financing US$5 million for supervision). 
Component 1 of the Project will finance needed investments in signaling systems from 
Arab el-Raml to Alexandria and centralized traffic control (CTC) for that section and 
Cairo 
–
Banha (on the Cairo-Alexandria line), as well as the supervision of those works.  
 
Component 2: Renewal of 200 km of track (US$80 million - IBRD financing US$60 
million, counterpart financing US$20 million). Component 2 of the Project will finance 
priority track-renewal goods and works for 200 km of track along the Cairo-Aswan line 
(149 km on four sections of track) and the Benha-Port Said line (51 km on two sections 
of track), and supervision of those works.  
 
Component 3: Modernization of Management and Operating Practices (US$ 10 million-
financed by ENR). Activities under this component are directed toward developing and 
cementing changes in managerial and staff practices that reflect the operational and 
financial restructuring of ENR.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will affect part of the 5,085 km of railway network, both in the Nile Delta 
and along the Nile Valley. The project components will be undertaken in the intensively 
cultivated, densely populated Nile Valley and Delta. The area has been settled since 
prehistoric times and its natural ecology has been almost totally obliterated by thousands 
of years of human activities. Agriculture and its associated irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure, as well as a vast and highly diverse multitude of life support systems and 
facilities for its’ multi-million inhabitants have created man-made ecosystems that have 
been in place for thousands of years. The wildlife consists of species that are able to 
tolerate human activities and manage to survive the changes introduced on their habitat. 
There is no indication that the construction works and subsequent operation of the lines 
will have any irreversible or significant additional adverse impacts on wildlife and 
habitats in areas adjacent to these lines.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
According to the World Bank’s Operational Policy 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, 
the proposed project is classified as category B, requiring partial assessment in the form 
of preparation of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report. The 
ESIA was carried out by an independent consulting firm and focused on the modernizing 
the signaling system on the Arab El Raml-Alexandria Line, creating a Central Traffic 
Control (CTC) Center in Tanta, and replacement of 200 km of the tracks in upper and 
lower Egypt. The ESIA report was completed according to terms of reference prepared 
by ENR and cleared by the World Bank.  
 
The ESIA carried out by the consultant indicated that no adverse impacts on the Nile 
River water course, its Rosetta branch, and four major canals that will be crossed by 
some works of the project. The study showed no indication of adverse contamination to 
the water course nor adverse impacts on the natural habitat of the Nile Delta, triggering 
no additional safeguard policies on natural habitat (OP/BP 4.04). The construction works 
and excavations are conducted in the old railway corridor requiring no land acquisition. 
Excavation depths required for cables are shallow and the probability of any chance 
findings of artifacts is very small. Both safeguard policies on Cultural Property (OPN 
11.03) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) are thus not triggered.  
 
The main potential project impacts are believed to be short-term (i.e., during 
construction) socio-economic impacts on three groups: train users, local residents of 
communities adjacent to the train corridor, and frequent users of level crossings. Potential 
socioeconomic impacts on train users include expected delays due to construction work 
and the potential need to use other modes of transportation during the construction 
period.  Potential impacts on level crossing users include the need to identify and use 
alternative crossing pathways during construction.  
 
It is expected that noise generated during certain construction activities (mechanical 
shaking and sifting of ballast gravel of basaltic fragments during ballast replacement 
Page  4
work) will exceed permissible levels. Similarly, certain construction activities (e.g., 
welding, asphalting, excavation of foundations and cable trenches, etc) are expected to 
generate some air pollutants. These impacts will also affect people in communities 
adjacent to the railway corridor as well as construction crews.  
 
Underwater cables are expected to cross the Rosetta Branch of the Nile River at Kafr El 
Zayat, and at four major irrigation canals. The insulated cables will be placed in water- 
tight PVC pipes before laying on the bottom. The pipes will be anchored to the river 
bottom using precast cement blocks. The process is, therefore, unlikely to result in any 
water contamination and does not impact any elements of the aquatic ecosystem of the 
water courses.  
 
Habitats along the railway corridor in this project are all man-made and none is 
considered threatened. Wildlife of the Nile Delta and Valley is among the most diverse of 
any terrestrial habitat in Egypt. The wildlife consists of species that are able to tolerate 
human activities and manage to survive the changes introduced on their habitat. There is 
no indication that the construction works and subsequent operation of the lines will have 
any irreversible or significant additional adverse impacts on wildlife and habitats in areas 
adjacent to these lines.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not by itself affect the nature of traffic on lines where signaling 
equipment will be modernized and track renewed. Increased capacity may result in higher 
traffic.  The operation of system after project implementation will result in a net positive 
environmental impact as stipulated by the more efficient use of the system, less passenger 
travel time, less energy consumption and gaseous emissions per passenger unit, and 
reduction of noise levels and disturbance to passengers, inhabitants near the railway 
corridor, and the wildlife of the nearby habitat.  
 
Overall, the proposed ENRRP is expected to have positive social impacts through 
improved services and safety on core routes resulting from project investments in track 
renewal and signaling. Financial compensations by line Ministries and the Ministry of 
Finance of Public Service Obligations imposed on ENR, under the broader ENR 
transformation plan which the project supports, will ensure ENR can continue offering 
reduced tariffs to several categories of users and operate unprofitable local services used 
by rural residents.  Where local services will be discontinued, the decision will be taken 
after Governors have made sure that alternative transport modes are available to 
passengers. Under the plan third class services have also been folded into second class 
services and tariffs on the later trains used among others by low income passengers will 
remain stable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Possible alternatives for project elements and activities were considered in terms of 
construction scheduling, materials, methods, and transportation modes with the goal of 
Page  5
selecting the appropriate alternative to minimize possible adverse impacts.  The selected 
alternatives were deemed to be the most appropriate.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental management plan (EMP) was developed as part of the ESIA.  The 
EMP includes a detailed mitigation plan and environmental monitoring plan, and an 
institutional strengthening and training plan.  The mitigation plan includes detailed 
guidelines regarding the management of construction dust and debris and safety, work 
scheduling in order to minimize delays and blockage of level crossings, besides a public 
awareness campaign. The total cost for the EMP implementation is LE 1.32 million, 
which will be financed en
tirely from ENR’s budget.  
 
The focal point for the implementation of the EMP will be the Environmental Specialist 
in the Project Implementation Unit (PMU). Before project implementation, ENR will hire 
a
consulting firm to assist the PMU in its activities during the first two years of project 
implementation, including the environmental management plan implementation. ENR's 
present organizational structure does not include any institutional entity with the 
responsibility for undertaking environmental management duties. Implementation of the 
environmental management plan and its mitigation measures suggested in this report, 
therefore, requires the establishment of an effective institutional entity to undertake these 
environmental management duties. ENR is in the process of creating an Environmental 
Affairs Directorate (EAD) who will be in charge of implementing the EMP. The Ministry 
of Transport is currently considering the creation of a Health and Safety Directorate. In 
addition to its mandate relating to health and safety issues, the new directorate will be 
responsible for environmental management aspects in all departments and organizations 
of the ministry including the ENR. The EMP includes a specific training and capacity 
building program, for the various responsible parties of the EMP implementation (e.g. 
EAD director, PMU environmental specialist(s), ENR general staff, etc.). Budget for 
training will be provided from ENR’s own resources.  
 
The EMP includes the implementation schedule for various activities. Specifically, the 
mitigation measures during construction phase will be included in the contractor’s 
bidding documents. The formation of the EAD Directorate, and the inclusion of an 
environmental specialist in the PMU will take place before project implementation. The 
monitoring activities will take place during project implementation, and include daily, 
weekly, and bi-monthly monitoring activities.  
 
Monthly reports will be submitted from the environmental specialist in the PMU to 
ENR’s senior management on the implementation of the EMP. A section on the status of 
the implementation of the environmental management plan will be included in the 
quarterly project progress reports to be submitted from the PMU to the World Bank, and 
will include details on institutional measures, training and capacity building activities, 
mitigation measures, and monitoring activities.  
 
Page  6
ENR has submitted the ESIA to the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) 
for its review and clearance on Novembe
r
17,
2008. It is ENR’s responsibility toensure 
that EEAA clears the ESIA before any work commences.  
 
English and Arabic versions of the ESIA report were disclosed on ENR’s web siteon 
6/1/2008 and 12/14/2008, respectively.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the ESIA, stakeholder consultations were carried out through interviews and 
data collection in public scoping for train users, users of level crossings, and residents in 
areas adjacent to construction sites (totaling 1,166 individuals representing the various 
groups).  In addition, two public consultation meetings in Minya and Cairo, which were 
well advertised in a major daily newspaper, were attended by a total of 184 participants.  
Information on the project as well as a summary of the findings of the ESIA were posted 
on the consulting firm's website for public review prior to the consultation meetings. The 
complete ESIA was published in Arabic and English on ENR’s website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/14/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/16/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Bellier 
11/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed 
11/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman 
01/08/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
01/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
11/24/2008 
Comments:   
Page  8
