Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3047
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P094311 
Project Name:  Integrated Sanitation& Sewerage Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ayat Soliman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (50%);Sewerage (30%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Water resource management (P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
61.00 
 
GERMANY: German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ) 
4.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 16.50
81.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the project is to contribute to the sustainable improvement in: (i) 
sanitation and environmental conditions for the resident communities and (ii) the water 
quality in the selected drainage basins within the served areas.  
 
The development objective outcome will be measured by the following indicators:  
 
•
Improved access to sustainable sanitation services (% increase in coverage and 
no. of households connected).  
 
•
improvement in environmental and hygiene conditions in villages (beneficiary 
satisfaction  surveys,  reduced sewage ponding, hygiene evaluation procedures).  
 
•
reduction in pollution loads of the receiving water bodies (ambient fecal coliform 
and BOD/ DO).   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The following project components are proposed to achieve the above objective:  
 
Component 1: Provision of sanitation systems within selected drainage sub-basins (total 
cost US$120 million) - This component aims to plan, design and construct sanitation 
systems for a total of 14 clusters in the selected priority area within the two command 
areas of Mahmoudeya and Mit Yazid, falling within the Governorates of Beheira, 
Gharbeya and Kafr El Sheikh in the Delta. The component will be divided into three sub- 
components:  
 
(a) 
Centralized sanitation systems construction: includes the construction of complete 
sanitation systems for an estimated 222 larger villages (>1500) within 14 clusters, 
including: (1) Construction of treatment plants, and (2) Construction of collection 
network consisting of house connection, transmission lines, and pumping stations;  
 
(b) 
Decentralized sanitation system construction/ rehabilitation: will serve an 
estimated 120 individual villages/ hamlets with population size less than 1500 
inhabitants, providing them with a decentralized system consisting of shallow sewers and 
anaerobic baffled reactors, and relying on delegated community management for 
subsequent O&M. It will also include the upgrading and rehabilitation of existing 
networks in some villages to acceptable design standards, if feasible; and  
 
(c) 
GTZ pilot decentralized systems: this sub-component builds on and replicates the 
implemented GTZ pilot model in Kafr El Sheikh in an estimated 20 villages in the project 
area, based on the communities’ expressed willingness to engage. The model serves 
villages of up to 5000 inhabitants and depends heavily on community participation and 
commitment for the O&M of these systems based on simple (natural system) technology.  
 
Component 2: Establishment of a local result-based monitoring and evaluation system 
(total cost US$1.1 million) - This component will establish a results-based monitoring 
system within the HCWW that links the improvements in sanitation coverage with 
anticipated environmental and water quality impacts. The component will include 
technical assistance support for expertise in designing the system, identification of 
monitoring sites, data collection and analysis, results review, finalization, and 
communication.  It will coordinate among national institutions within the IWRM 
framework, particularly the M&E system established under IIIMP, as well as among the 
local organizations (incl. WSC’s, CDAs, WUA’s and Water Boards) to develop their 
capacity to engage in monitoring water quality and improved environmental conditions 
and hygiene practices and share results regularly with relevant stakeholders.  
 
Component 3: Institutional development and capacity building (total cost US$19.5 
million) - This component aims to promote institutional development within the national 
and local public institutions responsible for sanitation implementation to enhance their 
capacity to plan, design, construct and operate the rural sanitation investments, monitor 
outputs and outcomes, as well as promote hygiene practices and social mobilization. 
Through grant donor co-financing, technical assistance will be provided to each of the 
implementing agencies (HCWW, NOPWASD and the three WSC’s), consisting of:  
 
Page  3
(a) 
A technical assistance contract to provide specialist support to the implementing 
units in their mandates, covering technical, procurement, social and financial aspects;  
 
(b) 
Capacity building for contract management at the HCWW and the three WSC’s to 
serve in procurement and supervision of performance based O&M contracts, including 
through the demonstration of 2 pilots in the project area;  
 
(c) 
Training to the implementing unit staff and CDAs in technical and social 
mobilization aspects of the sanitation service implementation and O&M; and  
 
(d) 
Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring 
Framework (EMMSF).  
 
Estimated Project Cost: the total estimated cost of the project is US$ 201.50 million. Of 
this amount the Bank would finance around US$ 120 million and the Government of 
Egypt about US$ 61.5 million. Strong bilateral donor interest in co-financing has been 
expressed by the Government of Netherlands and GTZ. Currently, US$ 16.5 are pledged 
by the Netherland Cooperation, and US$ 4.0 million pledged by GTZ.   
 
Institutional Arrangements: The project serves a large number of small and scattered 
communities in the rural areas. The implementation model is therefore tailored to provide 
the balance between centralized planning and construction support, and decentralized 
implementation with a strong focus on social mobilization and community involvement 
in management and cost recovery. The project will be implemented through the following 
institutions at the national and local levels:  
 
•
A
Project Steering Committee will provide coordination, oversight, and overall 
direction.  The Steering Committee will be headed by the Minister of Housing, Utilities, 
and Urban Development or his delegate, and will be made up of representatives of 
HCWW, NOPWASD, Beheira, Gharbiya, and Kafr el-Sheikh WSCs, EWRA, MWRI, 
MOHP and representatives of the local popular councils from each of the three 
Governorates. The Director of the PIU will act as the Secretary.  
 
•
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU), will be housed in the HCWW, headed by 
a
PIU Manager and supported by financial management and procurement staff from 
HCWW, as well as a team of long-term and short-term technical assistance specialists 
who will work closely with NOPWASD and WSC counterparts to manage the project 
and build national and local capacity for rural sanitation programming, including 
integrated planning, technology and social intermediation guidelines, O&M contract 
management and overall monitoring and reporting.  
 
•
A
NOPWASD ISSIP Unit will be responsible for design and implementation of 
allnew wastewater treatment works. This unit will be headed by a senior NOPWASD 
official, supported by a team of specialists covering technical, procurement and financial 
management aspects of wastewater treatment plant design and construction, and 
supported by technical assistance in the above fields as needed.  
 
•
Rural Sanitation Units (RSU) will be created within each of the three WSC’s, 
responsible for  implementation of  centralized wastewater collection systems and the 
small scale decentralized systems, subsequent O&M management including procurement 
Page  4
and supervision of private sector O&M services as well as in-house O&M. The RSUs 
will also be responsible for ISSIP hygiene promotion and communication activities. Each 
unit will be headed by a Unit Head and include a team of five specialists covering 
wastewater management, social intermediation, environmental management, procurement 
and financial management. This team will also be supported by long and short-term 
technical assistance in the different fields.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area falls within the two command areas of Mit Yazid and Mahmoudeya, 
with a total population of about 1.35 million. The project area represents the first priority 
ranked areas for sanitation services within the command areas, based on multi-criteria 
ranking undertaken as part of the feasibility study. This first priority area covers about 
half of the total command area, and includes a total of around 870 villages and hamlets, 
with a current population of close to 1 million inhabitants.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The overall environmental impact of ISSIP, as defined by its goals and development 
objective, are expected to be highly positive, leading to the improvement in water quality 
and environmental and health conditions in the areas serviced with improved sanitation 
services. The implementation of integrated planning, implementation and monitoring 
across responsible sectors with strong community involvement will ensure that high 
priority areas and drainage basins are addressed, while demand responsiveness and health 
and hygiene education will strengthen community readiness for improved outcomes.  
 
Page  5
The Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Framework (ESMMF) 
developed includes (a) a set of mitigation measures to minimize the impacts during the 
construction and operation phases, (b) a monitoring program for ensuring impacts are 
within acceptable standards, and (c) institutional arrangements for the implementation of 
the management plan, including the necessary staffing and the required training program.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) establishing overall resettlement objectives 
and principles has been prepared, as there may be involuntary land acquisition under 
component 1 (provision of sanitation infrastructure). The RPF discusses legal aspects of 
land acquisition, and how the law has actually been applied in similar cases in Egypt in 
the past. As the extent of potential involuntary land acquisition becomes known, 
Resettlement Action Plans (or abbreviated RAPs depending upon scale and severity of 
impacts), will be prepared before any physical work/construction is initiated. The RPF 
includes criteria for the screening of subprojects, guidelines for mitigation and 
compensation, implementation arrangements for the RPF and assessment of the capacity 
for its implementation, and the identification of the source of funding for any resettlement 
activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Based in the environmental and social assessment, the project is not expected to have 
unprecedented and/or irreversible environmental and social impacts, provided that all 
developed mitigation measures included in the ESMMF are implemented. The World 
Bank will follow up on the implementation of the ESMMF through the proper due 
diligence in terms of reviewing the periodic progress reports, and carrying out of 
supervision missions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The following Alternatives  were evaluated with and without project alterative, 
alternatives of piping materials, alternatives techniques for biological treatment, 
disinfection alternatives, alternatives of utilization of decentralized treatment works 
effluent, and alternatives of utilization of sludge. The project design selected the 
alternative minimizing the environmental impact in each.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Egypt has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework (Law 04/1994 and related 
EEAA guidelines on EIA preparation) related to environmental protection, including 
clearly defined requirements for environmental assessment and mitigation. Furthermore, 
the Government of Egypt has been financing development/infrastructure projects with 
international financing institutions for several years and is thus quite experienced with the 
Bank’s safeguard polices.  
 
The EMP and Operations manual provide the framework for designing detailed 
environmental and social mitigation measures, to be undertaken for each of the sanitation 
Page  6
sub-projects. The PIU will have a liaison officer who will be responsible for the 
coordination or environmental activities during the different project phases with all 
stakeholders, and will be responsible for the preparation of the environmental/social 
section in the quarterly progress report. Furthermore, through the technical assistance 
component of the project, short term environmental consultants will be retained at each of 
the three WSCs to provide technical support to the environmental staff at these 
companies. These staff will be responsible for the environmental aspects of this project, 
and will continue to act in this capacity for the implementation of the larger national rural 
sanitation program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two Public Consultations were carried out. The first public consultation for this project 
was held over two days; the first day was June 13th 2007 for Kafr El Sheikh and 
Gharbeya Governorates in Kafr El Sheikh Water & Sanitation Company (KWSC) 
conference room. The second day was June 14th 2007 for Behera Governorate in Behera 
Water and Drainage Company (BWADC) conference room. Official invitations by 
HCWW and the three WSC were directed to representatives from Local Units, 
Directorates of Health, Departments of Enviromment and NGOs. There were 71 
attendees present, in the two days, including representatives from: KWSC, GHWSC, 
BWADC, Heath Directorates in the Governorates, Environmental Departments in the 
Governorates, Local Councils and Villages Administrations, Local NGOs,  and Local 
press.  
 
The second public consultation was on July 11th 2007, in one collective event for the 
three Governorates. Official invitations by HCWW and the three WSC were directed to 
representatives from Local Units, Directorates of Health, Departments of Environment, 
and NGOs. A flyer was also distributed among inhabitants of different villages in the 
project areas, along with short description for the Public Consultation objectives. At the 
end of the Second Public Consultation, the local TV of the Delta area, covering the three 
Governorates, made interviews with the ESIAF Environmental Consultant and Social 
Consultant in which about 10 minutes brief about the ISSIP and the ESA was presented. 
The interview was broadcasted on the same night of the Public Consultation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  8
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ayat Soliman 
02/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed 
02/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman 
02/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
