                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: 51562
Date prepared/updated: June 18 th , 2008

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: EGYPT                                  Project ID: Pll0935
                                                 Additional Project ID (ifany): P090073 -
                                                 Second Pollution Abatement Project
Project Name: LANDFILLING AND PROCESSING SERVICES FOR SOUTHERN ZONE IN
CAIRO
Task Team Leader: Hocine Chalal
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 2008              Estimated Board Date: Not applicable
Managing Unit: MNSSD                             Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset
Sector: Solid waste management
Theme: Climate change
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
CF Amount (US$m.):             US$ 4 -6 million
Other financing amOlmts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred proj ect                   Yes []                    No [X]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [X]                Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes []       No [X]
and Emergencies)                                                                    I
2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the project is avoidance of methane generation from landfills by operating a
sorting and compo sting facility for municipal solid waste, collected and received from the
southern zone of Cairo. This project will also refine, recycle or landfill some wastes (ineli
material), which is out of the scope of the carbon finance project. The daily waste treated is 374
tons/day (TPD) of domestic waste which has 80% organic content. The expected methane
emission in baseline, however, is based on the facility receiving an additional 1,100 TPD of
domestic waste when an existing public landfill closes in 2008. The project will mitigate
conservatively 301,000 tC02e (based on 1,100 tons/day) for the period 2008-2012. In 7 years the
project will mitigate 536,000 tC02e.

3. Project Description:
Egyptian Company for Solid Waste Recycling (ECARU) has a 10-year contract for the
processing and land filling of solid waste from the Cairo southern zone. The owner of the facility
is Cairo Cleaning and Beautification Authority (CCBA), Governorate of Cairo.
The sOliing and composting facility was constmcted in 2001 by Cairo Govemorate (Cairo
Cleaning and Beautification Authority; CCBA), but was not operated for three years because of
lack of technical expeliise as well as high operation and maintenance costs. CCBA put forward a
tender t1n·ee times, but two times were not successful as the single bidder's financial offer was
too high compared to the estimated tipping fees/ton allocated by CCBA. BCARD won the bid
third time dming 2004 with a low tipping fees, with consideration of carbon financing revenues.
The 1O-year concession contract was signed in June 2004, and the plant started operation July
2005.

The project involves the development of a treatment, recycling and disposal facility for the
purpose of processing solid waste collected and received daily from the southem zone of Cairo.
Waste received includes municipal solid waste, construction and demolition waste and non
hazardous industrial waste. Processes conducted the treatment facility involve the following:
       ·       SOliing.
       ·       Composting.
               Refining.
               Recycling
               Landfilling.

The daily waste collected and transpOlied from the southem zone to the treatment and disposal
facilities are as follows:
         a.      1500 ton/day of domestic waste (The existing compo sting plant currently
         processes an average of374 tons per day of domestic waste).
         b.      500 ton/day of demolition waste
         (An increased rate of around 5% is expected per year)

Waste composition rec.eived in the treatment disposal has the following composition:
       Organic matelials (food and garden waste): 59.2%
       Paper / cardboard / textiles:                  20.8%
         Subtotal, Organics:                                    80.0%
       Glass:                                         00.2%
       Plastics:                                      00.2%
       Metals:                                        00.1 %
       Misc.:                                         19.5%
         Subtotal, Non-compostable                           20.0%
         TOTAL                                               100.0%

The waste received has very low recyclables content and high organic content, because
recyclables are picked (at source by garbage men) before they arrive at the facility. Due to the
low recyclables received at the facility, it is not generating profit from selling recyclables, in
retum, the project is generating profit far less than expected.

All domestic waste is directed to the sOliing, compo sting and refining processes. On average,
reject from those processes is in the order of35% (ineli and non-recovered matelials), which is
transported regularly to the landfill, for final disposal following appropriate operational practices
(layeling, compaction, daily cover). Demolition waste is transpOlied directly to the landfill.
Municipal solid waste sorting and composting process that is applied in the project consists of
four main phases.
Phase I: Waste receiving and pre-sorting
       1. Collection tmcks enter the plant after weighing and waste is dumped onto the tipping
       floor.
       2. Skid steer loaders carry the waste to the feeding conveyors.
       3. Pre-sOliing of waste by two workers, one at each side of the feeding conveyor, to
       remove rubber tires, battelies, cardboard sheets, boxes, and large textiles such as carpets,
       blankets, etc.
       4. The closed bags are tom and open by a bag breaker installed on the feeding conveyor.

Phase II: Sorting of recyclables and baling
       1.      the waste is then transfelTed to sOliing conveyors, each conveyor suppOliing 8
       stations for the recyclables that are manually sOlied.
       2.      each line has 18 workers, and each station specializes in sorting and re removing
       one of the following matelials: plastic bags, H.D. plastic bottles, PET bottles, plastic
       boxes, plastic pieces, textiles,paper and cardboard, glass, iron and metals, aluminum and
       metal cans.
       3.      recyclables are collected in bins and baled by balers.
       4.      the rej ects from the trommel screen is collected in a bin.

Phase III: Treatment of organic material by biological aerobic process
       1.     The organic matter is collected from trOlmnel screens by a collecting conveyor
       where post sorting of glass is performed, then the material is transfelTed by a dump tmck
       to windrow area.
       2.     Water is added while tuming the windrows to keep the humidity always at 60%.
       3.     The windrows are tumed twice a week by special tuming machines to provide the
       oxygen necessary for the digestion process, as well as to mill and increase the
       homogeneity of the residues to expand area exposed to microbe digestion.

Phase IV: Preparation of the final product
       1.      Skid steer loaders feed compost to the screening units where fine products are
       separated.
       2.      Fine compost is packed in sacks or sold as bulle.
       3.      Pali of oversize refuse is added once more to the windrows as it works as an
       initiator alld activator to the compost and the remaining is transfelTed to the landfill.
       4.      Periodic laboratory tests alld analysis are carried out tlu"ough fennentation and
       maturation phases to ensure the quality of the compost.

The landfilling process will not be considered as pad of carbon finance operation since rejected
matelial going to the landfill are mainly ineli, gas generation rates are anticipated to be low and
so gas collection system will be unfeasible.

Capital and nmning cost of the lalldfill is an essential pali of the project financial projection as it
is a mandatory requirement of the contract.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
Country: Egypt
City: Cairo - 15 May City

The location of the sOliing and composting plant is in the Southem zone of Cairo-IS May. The
landfill is located in the deseli area 3.1 Km south ofthe 15th May City. The area is uninhabited,
and the main activities at the vicinity ofthe site encompass a neighbOling composting facility to
the east and a cement and a blick production facility that fall to the west beyond the Autostrad
highway.

The area of the SOliing & Composting plants is 15 hectare. The Landfill site is 40 hectare.




                              15 of May Composting Facility


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on tile Team:
Maged Malm10ud Hamed, Sr Enviromnental Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                         Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                     X
                                                                                             y
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              J'
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                      X

n.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. IdentifY and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)
The EA Policy is triggered to ensure compliance with the Bank's environmental policies and
procedures, to which all carbon finance projects are required to confoilll.

The main impacts dming the construction phase were found to be impacts on air quality, noise
and, health and safety of the constmction which could be easily mitigated with proper
management practices.

The main potential impacts during the operational phase encompass the adverse effects of
leachate and landfill gases resulting from solid waste decomposition. With regards to leachate
impacts, given the extreme depths of groundwater level at the proposed area, leachate generated,
if any, is anticipated only to impact soil quality. Neveliheless, to reduce potential impacts due to
leachate generation, the proposed disposal area is designed to incorporate a liner system and a
leachate collection system. Furthennore, leachate generation will be reduced by the development
of an adequate drainage system for rain water.

Waste decomposition will also emit landfill gases (e.g. methane and carbon dioxide). For safety,
these gases will be passively vented to air through a set of perforated PVC gravel filled pipes.
Since the site is uninhabited, any generated air emissions, odors, noise or health and safety issues
associated with operation will mainly affect the working force and employees on site. Therefore,
the staff will be well trained on proper practice for waste transport, unloading, compacting and
cover spreading. They will be also provided with personnel protective equipment, PPE, (e.g.
gloves, boots, unifol1ns and changing/washing facilities), respiratory and hearing protection
devices, first aid kits.

For the Post-closure phase, the leachate collection and treatment as well as the gas collection
systems will be continuously operated and managed as long as the leachate and gas are being
generated. A final capping will be applied on the landfill cells to seal them and minimize any
infiltration to the waste pile. Afforestation is suggested to restore the site.

Most potential impacts are mitigated through measures already incorporated in the project design
and management. Moreover, the developer will comply to an environmental management plan
including material handling, health and safety and waste disposal during the construction,
operation and postclosure activities.

A monitoring program will be performed as a part of the management scheme to guarantee the
continuous soundness of the activities. According to law 4/1994, establishments should maintain
an environmental register to track all the environmental aspects of their activities. The
environmental register will contain all self-monitoring results.

hl consistency with the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency guidelines for EIA studies, best
practice methodologies have been applied to analyze the proposed sanitary landfill components
and activities, as well as, assess the environmental components of the proposed area and its
ability to accommodate the proposed project. Based on the design concept of the proposed
landfill "Maximum recycling - Minimum landfilling", potential impacts of the proposed project
have been identified and a full management plan has been devised. hl this context, the proposed
15th May Sanitary Landfill is anticipated to reflect minimal impacts on the environment
As a result, no large scale, significant andlor irreversible impacts is anticipated.

Since the objective of the project is avoidance of methane generation from landfills through the
operation of a sorting and compo sting facility for municipal solid waste, the project is not
expected to have negative social impacts. Social safeguards policies will not be tliggered as the
project is located in an uninhabited desert area south of Cairo.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
No adverse impacts are expected as a direct consequence of the project. On the other hand,
the project does support an social and environmental program benefiting the local
communities and the global environment on a long tenn basis.

3. Describe any project alternatives (ifrelevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:
The "no development" alternative is not recommended because it would mean closing the
facility, thus creating jobless conditions, and disposal of waste, including its organic content,
without treatment in the landfill.
The facility is already operational and its location is adjacent to the landfill and far from urban
populations and from surface water resources. It is well connected by the existing road network
to the South Cairo Zone, which provides the main input (organic material) to the facility.
Accordingly, alternative locations for the proposed project location were not considered.

Alternative process technologies include hl-vessel Composting, Aerated Static Pile Composting
or TUilllel Compo sting. Windrow compo sting technology was selected by ECARU according to
various aspects:
       - Availability of large areas of land which is ideally suitable for compo sting of large
       volumes.
       - Simplicity of the windrow compo sting technology, which does not require sophisticated
       equipment.
       - Provision of work 0ppOliunities as this method is much dependent on manual labor
       assistance.
       - Climate conditions are suitable for aerobic composting technologies.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

ECARU has been operating waste treatment facilities since 2000.

An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared and is already under
implementation to address the safeguard and other environmental issues associated with the
project.


5. IdentiJj; the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Public consultation in the fonn of scoping meetings has been conducted on an individual basis
with the different stakeholders. These meetings aimed at providing a better understanding for the
study requirements, main constraints and concems and identifying other important stakeholders
for that type of development.

The EMP has been disclosed onsite and has been published on vvww.ecam.net




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                              30 December 2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            26 March 2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                             31 March 2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    na
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       na
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                   na
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    na
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    na
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   na
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               na
  Date of submission to fufoShop                                                na
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                na
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   na
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               na
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                na
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [Y]     No [ ]    N/A [ ]
EMP) repOli?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     26 March 2008
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA repOli?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
degradation of clitical natural habitats?
If the proj ect would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-clitical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Banle?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
culhu'al property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Plmming             Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Framework (as appropliate) been prepared in
consultation with affected hldigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plm1fpolicy            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
framework/process frmnework (as appropliate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review mld approve the
plan/policy frameworldprocess framework?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide mlalysis of policy mld institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been canied out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for celiification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dmn safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Pmlel of Expelis (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bmlie?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plml (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the proj ect?    Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Depmtment, and the memo to the RVP prepared
 and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent infonnation on the                  Yes [ ]                 No [ ]          N/A [X]
intemational aspects of the proj ect, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recOlmnendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the P ADIMOP include the standard disclaimer
refened to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to                  Yes [X]                  No [ ]         N/A [ ]
the World Bartle's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a                   Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional               Yes [Y]                  No [ ]         N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been                     Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the                         Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation aIrangements been                       Yes
agreed with the borrower aIld the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                                           Nal1},e        ~                             Date
 Task Team Leader:                             Rocine Chalal        ~okll~                                    6/18/2008
 Environmental Specialist:                     Samia Al-Duaij       ~             /'
                                                                                                              6/18/2008
 Social Development Specialist                 Knut Opsal              l~:..-r"-
                                                                                                              6/17/2008
                                                                                       I
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:                        II.                                      i                              i          ()
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    'Vt f\. Rocine Chalal
                                           \
                                                                (., liP) ('1 RfLrOl f{~..-t PlJ
                                                                ~

                                                                                                   If
                                                                                                           61 1}5( ZJJ~
                                                                                                                   '"

   Comments:                                                                  1(')
 Sector Manager:                               Luis Constantino         c::..~
   Comments:

                                                                              "            (Template Version November 2007)
