Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3819 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P095925 
Project Name: Alexandria Coastal Zone Management Project (Under the Investment 
Fund for the Mediterranean Sea Large Marine Ecosystem) 
Task Team Leader: Maged Mahmoud Hamed 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching objective of the project is to contribute to the reduction of land-based sources of 
pollution entering the Mediterranean Sea through the identified hot spots in the Alexandria area, 
especially Lake Mariout.  
 
The results of the project would be measured by the following outputs:  
 
-
A
coastal zone management plan for Alexandria is in implemented.  
 
-
Investments are made in pollution reduction measures to Lake Mariout.  
 
-
The pollution load to Lake Mariout is lowered, as measured in terms of key water quality 
parameters (Biochemical Oxygen Demand and Total Suspended Solids).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project consists of the following three components:  
 
Page  2
Component (1): Planning and Capacity Strengthening (approx. US$ 2.0 million). The expected 
outcome is an increased capacity by the various relevant entities to manage the coastal zones in 
and around Alexandria in an integrated, participatory and sustainable manner. The outputs for 
this component include: (i) a master plan for the management of the coastal zones of Alexandria 
including Lake Mariout; (ii) the strengthening of the new Alexandria Coastal Zone Management 
Committee to address the sustainability of the pollution reduction measures including cost 
recovery and any other issues encountered during implementation of the project, and (iii) water 
quality software, circulation modeling and monitoring equipment. The recommendations of the 
master plan will be reflected in the future land use plan for the city of Alexandria.  
 
Financing for this component will be for consultancy services, public consultation workshops, 
training on ICZM, study tour, maps and GIS, and water quality monitoring equipment and 
software. The determination of equipment type (e.g. stationary or portable), location, and 
parameters will take place during project preparation. This component will be implemented by 
the EEAA, with the main beneficiary being EEAA, Alexandria RBO and the Governorate of 
Alexandria.  
 
Component (2): Pollution Reduction (approx. US$ 5.0 million). The expected outcome is a 
reduction in the land based source of pollution entering the Mediterranean, either directly or 
through Lake Mariout. The output of this component is the completion of one or more low-cost 
innovative pollution reduction measures such as an in-lake engineered wetland or in-stream 
treatment among others. Financing for this component will go to: (i) consultancy work for the 
preparation of the necessary feasibility studies for the few pollution reduction measures, and (ii) 
goods and works for the implementation of those measures.  
 
As a blended operation with EPAP 2, two wastewater projects currently in the EPAP 2 pipeline 
will enhance the impact of the proposed pollution reduction measure. These projects include the 
Amria petroleum refining public company with a proposal to use NMP solvent instead of Phenol, 
the national paper private company with a proposal to supply and install second stage biological 
wastewater treatment plant, and Wael Tex with a proposal for rehabilitation of the Industrial 
Wastewater.  
 
This component will be implemented by EEAA, utilizing the most relevant agencies/ministries 
as executing agencies.  
 
Component (3): Project Management (approx. US$ 0.5 million). The expected outcome is the 
documentation of the project results for the purpose of up-scaling and replication. The outputs of 
this component include the documentation and dissemination of lessons learned from the project. 
Financing for this component will go to: (i) consultancy work for developing an M&E evaluation 
scheme, and (ii) consultancy services to the PMU. This component will be implemented by the 
EEAA.  
 
Project Implementation Arrangements  
 
The proposed implementation arrangements will be as follows:  
 
Page  3
At project level  
 
The Project Management Unit. The Project Management Unit (PMU) for EPAP 2 will serve as 
the PMU for the proposed project. However, the PMU will have to be reinforced by hiring three 
new staff: (i) a technical manager, (ii) a financial manager, (iii) a technical staff. The PMU will 
have the overall technical and financial responsibility of the project, and will provide the focal 
point of contact for the project. The PMU will be responsible for the preparation of tender 
documents, receiving and evaluating bids, managing contracts, supervising works and 
consultants, and prepare progress reports. The Coastal Zone Management Unit in EEAA will act 
as the Technical Secretariat of the Project and will prepare the annual work plan which will be 
reviewed by the soon to be established Alexandria Coastal Zone Management Committee.  
 
Depending on the selected pollution abatement measure in Component 2, the PMU may have to 
contract a relevant agency (for example, For the investment component 2 (investment), the PMU 
will sub-contract the works to the Egypt Public Agency for Drainage Projects for in-stream 
wetlands, or the Ministry of Agriculture for in-lake wetland). The management of the investment 
component will also be transferred from EEAA to the relevant agency/ministry after project 
completion.  
 
The Project Steering Committee (PSC). This Committee will include high-level representatives 
each from the EEAA at the central level, the EEAA at the local level (i.e the Regional Branch 
Office in Alexandria) and the Alexandria Governorate as well as other key stakeholders 
(ministries, research institutes, NGOs, Fishermen Association, Fishermen Syndicate, etc.). The 
Committee will be co-chaired by the Alexandria Governorate and a representative from EEAA.  
The PSC will meet twice a year to review progress and propose any remedial actions if 
necessary.  
 
At governorate level  
 
The Alexandria Coastal Zone Management Committee. The Committee will facilitate an 
inclusive and participatory approach to CZM in Alexandria as such a structure has been 
inexistent in Egypt. It will be instrumental in the organizing consultations for the preparation and 
adoption of the Coastal Zone Master Plan. In addition, the Alexandria Committee will review the 
annual work plan prepared by the PMU. To clarify the roles and responsibilities of EEAA and 
the Governorate, a Memorandum of Understanding will be signed between the two entities. The 
Alexandria CZM Committee will coordinate with the Lake Mariout Management Committee 
subject to the General Authority for Fish Resources Development Fisheries Department of the 
Ministry of Agriculture.  
 
The Alexandria Regional Branch Office (RBO). The Alexandria RBO will have a critical role 
in overseeing the work on the Lake Mariout circulation model and in monitoring the water 
quality in the El-Mex bay jointly with the High Institute of Research and Development in 
Alexandria. The RBO will be responsible for acquiring the necessary technologies for the 
monitoring equipment, the water quality management and data analysis software as well as the 
maps and GIS capabilities.  
 
Page  4
At national level  
 
The National Committee for Integrated Coastal Zone Management. This Committee which was 
recently reinstated will provide scientific advice and inputs into the preparation of the Alexandria 
Coastal Zone Management Plan serving as a scientific advisory body in particular for 
Component (1).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be carried out in the region of Alexandria impacting Lake Mariout. The Lake 
water is pumped to El-Mex Bay in the Mediterranean Sea and is a major source of the Bay's 
pollution.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower’s institutional capacity for implementing Bank safeguard policies is high. The 
project will be implemented by the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA), which is 
also the implementing agency for the ongoing Egypt Second Pollution Abatement Project 
(EPAP2), and for the successfully closed EPAP1. EEAA has gained significant experience and 
built capacity that will be important for the implementation of this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project aims to approach integrated coastal zone management in a holistic manner by 
way of robust assessments to balance development needs and optimize conservation of natural 
resources. The project will implement one or more low-cost innovative pollution reduction 
measures such as an in-lake engineered wetland or in-stream treatment among others, keeping in 
mind the objectives of reducing the load of land-based sources of pollution entering the 
Mediterranean Sea in the “hot spots” of El-Mex Bay and Alexandria. The potential social and 
environmentalimplications of the project will be defined through an Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment Framework (ESIAF) that will meet the requirements of Egyptian laws and 
the Bank’s relevant policies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will have targeted investments that will lead to reduction of pollution reaching 
the Mediterranean Sea from Lake Mariout through the hot spots of Alexandria and El-Mex Bay, 
and the improved management for the protection and restoration of the Lake Mariout and 
adjacent coastal ecosystems.  Project activities could include the establishment of an in-lake 
engineered wetland or in-stream treatment among others, which will not cause conversion or 
degradation of natural habitats. There will not be a need for any mitigation measures as 
anticipated project activities will not lead to adverse impacts towards natural habitats. Scope of 
assessment of natural habitats will be covered as part of the environmental assessment process.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) will not be triggered as the proposed pollution 
reduction measures will be implemented in-lake (engineered wetland) or in-stream 
(biofilm/treatment). These measures will not cause disruption or digging of land, and will not 
pose a threat to any natural habitats. Additionally, a "Chance Finds Procedures Manual" will be 
prepared as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment Framework, and necessary 
provisions will be part of consultant contracts that will cover appropriate chance finds 
procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land take is unlikely. However, it could occur during the reinstatement of cross section of 
the drains. Therefore a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be 
prepared and disclosed prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The Project will not extract water from the Mediterranean Sea. Potential subproject 
investment activities will seek to improve the quality of influent into Lake Mariout, thereby 
improving the quality of water (reducing pollution load) that is discharged into the 
Mediterranean Sea through the El-Mex Bay and Alexandria.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/16/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft environment and social impact assessment framework report (ESIA) and draft 
resettlement policy framework (RPF) will be disclosed before project appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed 
11/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
11/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
12/01/2008 
Comments:   
