Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4632 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/08/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: El Salvador 
Project ID: P117440 
Project Name: Income Support and Employability Project 
Task Team Leader: Edmundo Murrugarra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Public administration- Other social services (70%);Vocational training (30%) 
Theme: Improving labor markets (45%);Social safety nets (35%);Poverty strategy, 
analysis and monitoring (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project seeks to support Government of El Salvador (GoES) efforts to mitigate the 
impact of the economic slowdown on the vulnerable population by providing income support 
and training, and to strengthen the institutional and policy capacity to develop inclusive social 
policies especially on social protection and employment dimensions.  The vulnerable population 
is defined as those unemployed due to the recent slowdown, including the inactive youth joining 
the labor force due to tightening household incomes.  These GoES objectives included in the 
PAC provide the opportunity to address immediate policy needs (income protection) while 
improving the employability through skills development, and strengthening the capacity in the 
GoES to design and implement socially inclusive policies.  Two specific policies addressed in 
this project are the development of the SPSU, and the development of more effective labor 
market training and intermediation systems that increase the employability of vulnerable 
individuals.  
 
The Proposed Project would achieve these objectives through the following actions:  
 
Page  2
To support the GoES efforts to mitigate the impact of the crisis on the income of poor 
households living in urban areas affected by the economic slowdown, the proposed project 
would finance the design and implementation of a temporary income support program (Programa 
de Ingreso Temporal, PIT) that provides income support to individuals in exchange for their 
participation in a community activity.The program includes a training package to enhance the 
participants' employability once they leave the program. Thus, the project would contribute both 
to achieve a short term impact on households' wellbeing and to enhance their labor market 
prospects for the time when the crisis has subsided and economic growth has returned to the 
country.  The performance of this objective would be monitored and evaluated using the 
following tentative indicators:  
 
-
Increased household incomes per capita in the targeted areas  
 
o
%
income increase in participants households  
 
-
Improved functioning of the PIT program.  
 
o
%
of
participants that are complying with training and  community projects co-
responsibilities.  
 
-
Increased demand for training programs in the PIT covered areas.  
 
o
%
increase in demand for training programs in covered areas.  
 
-
Increased utilization of the MINTRAB Red Nacional de Empleo in PIT targeted areas.  
 
-
o
%
increase in the number of individuals registering in the MINTRAB system.  
 
To support the GoES in enhancing existing interventions (or designing new ones) that improve 
labor market opportunities of Salvadoran households, especially the most vulnerable, the 
proposed project would provide support to design policies and strategies to: (i) improve the 
conditions in which individuals enter the labor market; (ii) improve the institutions that 
intermediate local labor markets; (iii) increase the effectiveness of the existing employment 
training system; and (iv) increase the quality of labor market information to guide policy making 
processes.  Specific activities will be carried out by the Ministry of Labor (on labor market 
issues) and in coordination with the Ministry of Education (on improving the alignment of the 
school system to labor market demands).  The achievement of this objective would be monitored 
with the following indicators:  
 
-
Increased effectiveness of the MINTRAB Red Nacional de Empleo by the vulnerable 
population (national).  
 
o
%
increase of RNE by the vulnerable population.  
 
-
Increased demand for training among the (national) vulnerable population.  
 
o
%
increase in training participants from the vulnerable population.  
 
-
Improved labor market outcomes for those participants in training and intermediation services.  
 
o
%
of
SNE participants that obtain employment  
 
o
Increased duration of employment after SNE and training participation.  
 
To strengthen the GoES capacity to coordinate, design, implement and evaluate social policies 
and build medium term strategies on social protection issues, the project would provide financial 
and technical support to the STP along the lines of its major priorities; this is, support to the 
development of the Universal Social Protection System and in particular the Comunidades 
Solidarias Urbanas program.  The preliminary monitoring outcomes of this objective include:  
Page  3
-
Design, piloting and implementation of critical information instruments such as the 
Beneficiary Unique Registry for Social Programs.  
 
-
Production of social policy assessments on issues such as Comunidades Solidarias (Urbanas 
and Rurales), and ex-ante evaluation of other social interventions.  
 
-
Approval of a legal framework regulating the decision making process in the STP.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve these objectives, the proposed five-year Project would be supported by a Specific 
Investment Loan (SIL) of about USD$70 million.  The dialogue on the exact amount of the loan 
has not been yet finalized with the GoES although it has been communicated that it has a ceiling 
of US$80 million. The proposed Project would have three main components, each tackling one 
of the main development objectives described before: (i) Support to the Design and 
Implementation of the Temporary Income Program; (ii) Strengthen Labor Market Information, 
Intermediation and Training Systems; and (iii) Support to the Design and development of the 
Universal Social Protection System.  This note describes the key activities of these components 
as discussed with the Government.  
 
COMPONENT 1: SUPPORT TO THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
TEMPORARY INCOME PROGRAM.  
 
This component aims to support the GoES in designing a program to provide temporary income 
support (PIT) to the vulnerable population in urban areas, in exchange for their participation in 
training and community projects.  This Component would be carried out by the social investment 
fund a
gency (Fondo de Inversión Social para el Desarrollo Local, FISDL) that is already 
managing the conditional cash transfer program Comunidades Solidarias Rurales (formerly Red 
Solidaria).  
 
Subcomponent 1.1.  Financing income transfers in the Temporary Income Support Program, 
PIT, in return for their participation in community and training activities, called PIT Activity.  
The identification of areas where PIT activities would take place is based on a recently 
developed urban poverty map (PNUD, 2009) and additional adjustments made by the STP.  
Municipalities would submit a PIT Activity proposal describing the nature of the activity, the 
number of participants and type of training to be associated to the activity, its expected duration, 
and the Municipalities' co-participation (e.g., materials, tools, or other skilled labor). The PIT 
Activity to be implemented would be related to social and community services (e.g., childcare, 
sports and youth activities, improvement of public spaces) and would not involve any substantive 
infrastructure activities.  The focus of the program would be in large Municipalities where the 
largest concentration of urban poor live (asentamientos).  Given the focus on urban areas, no 
issues related to indigenous populations would be expected.  The Government has requested a 
particular focus on youth and women, especially on those female household heads that may be 
disproportionally affected by the economic slowdown.  This component would be managed by 
the FISDL in partnership with the participating Municipalities.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2. Financing training design and delivery.  Participants in the PIT Program 
would participate in specific training modules during their stay in the program in order to 
Page  4
enhance their employability after they leave the program.  In contrast to typical workfare 
programs that solely focus on temporary employment, the PIT would provide income support 
conditional on complying with the participation in training activities, in addition to the 
participants' services within the community activity.  The design of the training package would 
be required for all eligible Activity proposals described in subcomponent 1.1, and would respond 
to the demands from the community and the advice from training experts (mainly INSAFORP).  
The training component in each PIT Activity proposal would be flexible in its content and format 
to adjust to specific characteristics from the participating individuals, type of activity, and 
Municipality strategy.  It is expected that most training activities would be carried out through 
the network of training institutions articulated by INSAFORP, although other training 
institutions may be involved as well.  FISDL would be responsible for coordinating the training 
package with INSAFORP, and this subcomponent would pay for training providers.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3. Institutional strengthening of the FISDL.  The nature of projects that would 
be carried out in the Temporary Income Support Program is different from the typical 
infrastructure-oriented projects managed by the FISDL so far.  This additional load on new types 
of projects would require strengthening FISDL capacities to manage these projects.  This 
subcomponent would finance, then, the following activities: (i) support to municipalities in the 
identification and preparation of subprojects that involve PIT program participants; (ii) 
supervision of program execution, including the compliance of the individuals´ commitments; 
and (iii) monitoring of the program management and evaluation of results, in an articulated 
fashion with that of the M&E system being developed at the STP.   The subcomponent would 
finance advisory services in the form of consultants, training activities, and field studies on 
similar experiences (like that of Trabajar, in Argentina).  
 
Subcomponent 1.4. Institutional strengthening of the Municipalities, especially in areas related 
to identification, prioritization, preparation and supervision of community level projects.   The 
objective of this component is to develop the technical capacity of Municipalities in terms of 
project cycle management and local governance.  In addition to efforts to strengthen FISDL's  
capacity to work with Municipal Governments, these local governments themselves would 
require specific interventions, including: (i) financial and technical support in drafting a 
Municipality Medium Term Development Plan where problems are identified and prioritized, 
and short and medium term actions are consistent over time; (ii) financing training activities for 
Municipality staff on project preparation, implementation and supervision, and (iii) financing a 
social scientist to support the PIT Activity identification process, in volumes that decline over 
time.  
 
COMPONENT 2: STRENGTHEN LABOR MARKET INFORMATION, 
INTERMEDIATION AND TRAINING SYSTEMS.  
 
This Component aims to strengthen the capacity of the GoES to design and execute policies 
aimed at increasing the employability and improving labor market intermediation, especially for 
the poor and vulnerable.  This Component, led by the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection 
(MINITRAB) would include other partners such as the Ministry of Education (MINEDU) and 
INSAFORP.  The specific subcomponents would be developed in harmony with other guiding 
principles of the GoES especially that of ´territoriality´ (territorialidad), defined as strengthening 
Page  5
the role of local governments (i.e., Municipalities) in public policy making. This component 
would finance the following subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 2.1. Labor Market Intermediation System. This component would support the 
effective ´territorialization´ of intermediation activities by the MINTRAB.  This would be 
achieved by strengthening the MINTRAB National Employment Network (Red Nacional de 
Empleo, RNE) based on the Local Employment Offices (Oficinas Locales de Gestión de 
Empleo, OLGE), and articulating them with Municipal governments and other actors such as the 
academic and training communities.  The existing RNE is an information system where OLGEs 
upload or download information on job vacancies and offers.  The system has been serving 
mostly a population of secondary school or University graduates that may not be the same as that 
in the poorest settlements in the targeted municipalities.  This information system, however, does 
not report to the MINTRAB and existing organizational arrangements have weakened their 
functioning.  The subcomponent would expand the RNE to cover the most vulnerable 
municipalities and settlements, and expand its coverage of the more vulnerable population.  
Specifically, the subcomponent would finance technical assistance (in the form of consultancies) 
and other equipment necessary to: (i) improve the institutional arrangements in the RNE system; 
and (ii) develop improved instrument for data collection in the RNE so that it can be better used 
in the intermediation process.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2. Labor Market Information System. This subproject would involve the 
strengthening of MINTRAB´s Research Direction (Dirección de Investigación) by creating a 
monitoring unit to analyze and monitor labor market indicators, which would feed the policy 
making process of the MINTRAB.   The subcomponent would finance technical assistance and 
equipment to: (i) create a system of labor market indicators, (ii) improve the design of the labor 
market module of the Encuesta de Hogares de Propósitos Múltiples (EHPM), and propose a 
design of a quarterly report based on that data (in coordination with the Statistical efforts in the 
STP), and (iii) provide training to the technical MINTRAB staff for the analysis and reporting 
using different sources of data (EHPM, Social Security, etc), (iv) create a Labor Market Monitor 
that reports quarterly in national trends and provides information relevant for local OLGEs.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3. Employment Training System.  This component would enhance the existing 
training system to better articulate institutions from different sectors (public, private) and 
activities (financing, provision, accreditation, and evaluation).  This component would finance 
technical assistance (in the form of consultancies), training activities, and equipment to attain: (i) 
a
diagnostic of the national training system in El Salvador and its impact on labor market 
outcomes, (ii) an evaluation of training institutions to assess their population coverage, impacts, 
and costs, (iii) an assessment of the national training system and their regulatory parts (Ley de 
Formación Profesional) to identify areas that need to be adjusted to enhance the impact of the 
public resources. Because of its broad range, this sub-component may include specific activities 
with INSAFORP, Ministry of Education, and local Universities.  
 
Subcomponent 2.4. Aligning Education Programs and Labor Market Needs. This 
subcomponent would identify areas in the education sector that need to be aligned to improve the 
transition between the school system and the labor market (and other training programs).  The 
upper secondary level in El Salvador has both formal education programs as well as off-school 
Page  6
interventions, such as the remedial education program EDUCAME for school dropouts.  This 
subcomponent would finance technical assistance to: (i) assess the performance of the secondary 
school system in terms of labor market needs; and (ii) identify specific actions to harmonize and 
strengthen the linkages between the secondary education and labor market institutions (training 
and intermediation) to facilitate school to work transitions. The subcomponent would be 
implemented by the MINEDU under the coordination of the MINTRAB.  
 
COMPONENT 3: SUPPORT TO THE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
UNIVERSAL SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEM.  
 
This component aims to provide institutional support to strengthen the STP given its role in 
coordinating social public policies. This component would also strengthen the different 
institutional spaces for policy coordination, such as the Inter-Sectoral and Inter-Institutional 
Committees.  This component would address these needs by providing technical assistance to the 
following activities:  
 
Subcomponent 3.1. Institutional Arrangements for Enhanced Social Policy Making.   The STP 
has been restructured to streamline its role as a social policy coordinating unit and this has 
involved the creation of several units that need to be defined in their functions and articulated in 
their interactions.  Also the GoES created new arrangements such as the Comité Intersectorial 
SPSU, the Comité Técnico Intersectorial, Plan Anti Crisis y SPSU, and the Comité Inter-Estatal, 
each working under different Secretariats of the Presidential Office (GoES, 2009).This 
subcomponent would finance technical assistance, training events, and facilitation services to: (i) 
assess the organizational flow within the STP regarding social policies decision making 
processes, and (ii) enhance the coordination with line Ministries relevant for the social policy 
making process.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2.  Support the Design and Implementation of Information Instruments for 
Social Policy Decision Making.  The STP would have increased responsibilities in designing and 
coordinating social policies. The STP has identified Monitoring and Evaluation of Public 
Policies as one of its strategic areas, and has requested support for the development of an 
integrated framework and information instruments for social programs.  In this context, the STP 
needs to have a system that provides information to monitor and evaluate policies and programs, 
and technical capacity to analyze the information and produce policy relevant reports.  This 
subcomponent would finance technical assistance, equipment and software to: (i) design and 
implement the Social Program Beneficiary Unique Registry (BUR), including the design of a 
single model for targeting from a 'rights perspective' and a multi-dimensional poverty approach; 
(ii) design, pilot and implement the instrument for social program information collection; (iii) 
design a targeting mechanism to be used with the information of the BUR; and (iv) develop of a 
Monitoring and Evaluation System for Social Programs aimed at supporting a Performance 
Evaluation System in the country.  
 
Subcomponent 3.3.  Strengthening the managerial and technical capacity of the STP.  The new 
roles of the STP will require, in addition to a streamlined organization and increasing volumes of 
information, the capacity to analyze the new data, transform it into policy relevant information, 
and generate specific policy products (Laws, Decrees, and Program Design) to address specific 
Page  7
problems.   This subcomponent would finance technical assistance and equipment to: (i) generate 
the analytical capacity to use the information produced under sub component 3.2, including 
analysis of household surveys, administrative data from Ministries, administrative data from 
operational entities (such as FISDL), and others; (ii) generate the capacity to analyze policy 
alternatives (policy simulation); (iii) generate the capacity to implement social accountability 
methodologies; and (iv) generate the capacity to draft policy regulation and briefs (drafting 
Laws, Decrees, etc).  This subcomponent would include participation from staff from line 
Ministries and other agencies in order to enhance the multi-sectoral approach adopted by the 
STP.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project (Component 1) will be carried out in a number of urban municipalities with the 
highest rates of poverty, social exclusion, and precariousness, as defined by the GoES and that 
will be disseminated by the STP.  
 
Fondo de Inversion Social para el Desarrollo Local (FISDL)  
 
10a
Av. Sur y Calle Mexico  
 
Bo. San Jacinto frente a ex Casa Presidencial  
 
San Salvador  
 
El Salvador  
 
Secretaria Técnica de la Presidencia de la Republica (STP)  
 
Casa Presidencial  
 
San Salvador  
 
El Salvador   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The current mission is evaluating the borrower's capacity for determining the environmental 
implications of possible sub-projects. Activities to be financed under the project are not likely to 
have significant environmental impacts, nevertheless, since the exact eligibility criteria and types 
of sub-projects to be financed is still to be determined it is not possible to define the exact nature 
of the environmental skills which will be required.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered since it is possible that small community projects could be financed 
under the project. The project would utilize a simple environmental management framework to 
guide project selection and evaluation.   
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Since the project will be focused in urban areas Indigenous populations in El Salvador are 
not expected to be directly affected by it.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
No activities that may cause displacement will be financed under the proposed project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Specific safeguard-related studies are not planned to be carried out at this point since specific 
investments in community infrastructure are not know at this time. Nevertheless the 
Technical Annex 10 'Safeguard Policy Issues' of the PAD will be prepared by specialists on 
the team. This Annex will include a description of the project objectives, types of community 
project to be financed, review procedures and justification for the project rating. A brief EMF 
will be prepared which will document agreed procedures for review and evaluation of 
proposed sub-projects.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Edmundo Murrugarra 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
 
Comments:   
