Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3478 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/29/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Eritrea 
Project ID: P110202 
Project Name: Power Distribution and Rural Electrification Project Additiional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Kyran O'Sullivan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Regulation and competition 
policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Draft revised PDO to be considered during appraisal  
 
(a) expansion of electricity access to households in peri-urban and rural areas  
 
(b) improving the quality and adequacy of the electricity supply in its territory  
 
(c) improved efficiency of electricity sector operations through strengthening the institutional 
capacity of key energy sector agencies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Additional financing is proposed for the following:  
 
(i) Part A of original project. Rehabilitation and Expansion of Urban Electricity Distribution in 
Asmara  
 
(ii)Part B of original project. Rural electrification  
 
(iii)New Component: Required maintenance and replacement and spare parts for generating 
plants in the interconnected and isolated systems   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
New Asmara North (66/15kV) susbstation; upgrading/rehab of Asmara East and Belesa 
substations; replacement and undergrounding of medium voltage (MV) distribution system in 
Asmara and replacement of low voltage (LV) electricity distribution system in Asmara city. 
Construction of MV and LV electricity distribution lines to villages near to the major towns of 
Keren, Barentu, Dekemhare and Adi Keih. Generation plants at Hirgigo near Masawa, at Beleza 
and at Assab.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Energy and Mines established a multi-disciplinary team in 2003 to carry out the 
Environmental and Social Assessment for the original project. It consists of two volumes: 
Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) Report including the Environmental and Social 
Management and Monitoring Plan (ESMMF); and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
The Dept of Geography at the University of Asmara was involved in compiling the sections 
related to the physical and biological environments.  During the Mid Term Review scheduled for 
Ma
rch ’08 an assessment will be made of the institutional capacity now in place to oversee 
monitoring of implementation ESA and ESMMF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Some adverse environmental impacts from construction activities and potential for some 
minimal resettlement impacts largely in the form of temporary land allocation for some civil 
works. For the proposed new component (replacement parts for generation plants) there is 
potential for fire and oil spillage while carrying out refurbishment   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The ESA has identified all known cultural heritage sites in the project areas. However many 
potentially sensitive sites are not yet known   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some resettlement impacts are possible in the form of temporary land allocation for some 
civil works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/25/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Borrower completed the Environmental and Social Assessment in full compliance with  
 
the relevant Eritrean and World Bank standards. The report consists of two volumes. One is 
the  
 
Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) Report, which includes the Environmental and 
Social Management and Monitoring Plan (ESMMF). The other is the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  
 
The project does not have unresolved safeguard problems.  Brief checks during field 
missions indicated that disruption for rural electrification has been negligible and involves 
only hand carrying and installation of electrical poles.  As stated above a report from MEM is 
pending to verify that the provisions of the Environment and Social and Monitoring Plan are 
being implemented for the rural electrification component.  Component A of the project 
(Asmara rehabilitation) has had a delay of 4 years, with construction just commencing.  
Hence the relevant provisions of the ESMMF and RPF in the case of this component will be 
reviewed to ensure they are still relevant and that their institutional responsibilities and 
mechanisms are in place. Considering the relative lack of issues in the rural component and 
the lack of activity in the urban component, safeguards have been rated satisfactory in the 
ISRs. There is provision in the ESMMF to contact the National Museum if any 
archaeological items are discovered during works.  
 
Additional Financing for cost overrun in Parts A and B of the original project will not have 
any new environmental or social impact and will not trigger any new policies beyond those 
already triggered. Additional Financing for the proposed new component i.e. Required 
maintenance and replacement and spare parts for generating plants” will not trigger social or 
resettlement issues as the works are wholly within existing plant premises.  Potential impacts 
linked to the proposed new activity are oil spillage and fire hazard.  A short addendum to the 
ESMMP will be disclosed prior to appraisal to describe the potential impacts and mitigation 
measures. During appraisal, if the ESMMP is further detailed or any changes made in 
consultation with the client, a revised addendum will be subsequently disclosed   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kyran O'Sullivan 
02/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/29/2008 
Comments:   
