Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3675
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Eritrea 
Project ID:  P110202 
Project Name:  Power Distribution and Rural Electrification Project Additiional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Kyran O'Sullivan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Regulation and competition 
policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Revised project development objective/outcomes  
 
(i) expansion of electricity access in rural areas;  
 
(ii) improve the quality and adequacy of the electricity supply;  
 
(iii) regulatory and institutional reforms in the sector to increase efficiency.   
 
3. Project Description 
10. 
The Project was approved on July 6, 2004.  The Development Financing 
Agreement (as amended) for the Project between the State of Eritrea (the Borrower) and 
the International Development Association (IDA) was signed on September 22, 2004 and 
became effective on December 20, 2004. The project was financed with a mix of credit 
and grant.  Of the total IDA Credit of SDR 20.0 million, SDR 2.82 (14 %) has been 
disbursed. Of the total Grant of SDR 14.5, SDR 8.46 (58%) has been disbursed.  
Page  2
Substantial disbursements of approximately $13 million will be made during 2008 as the 
Asmara component progresses.  The Credit Closing Date was extended from June 30, 
2009 to June 30, 2010 on December 12, 2007.  As part of restructuring the Grant Closing 
Date is proposed to be extended and will coincide with Credit Closing Date (June 30, 
2010).  
 
11. 
Project’s Original Objectives.  The project’s original objectives  were (a)carrying 
out a sustainable program for the expansion of access to electricity; (b) improving the 
quality and adequacy of the electricity supply in its territory (c) strengthening the 
institutional capacity of key energy sector agencies including regulatory and institutional 
reforms in the sector to increase efficiency and attract private participation.  
 
12. 
Restructured Project’s Objectives.  Restructuring of the project is necessary due to 
changed country and external circumstances outlined in paragraph 4 above.  .  It is 
appropriate in the current country context to restructure the project's objectives so that 
they are oriented to improving quality and reliability of electricity service delivery and to 
improving efficiency of EEC’s operations.Achievement of these objectives will establish 
the pre-conditions for a sustainable program of electricity service expansion when other 
country conditions such as stronger economic growth and a more enabling environment 
for private sector participation in the sector become more favorable.  
 
1st PDO expansion of electricity access in rural areas. The fundamental change in this 
objective is to adjust the current objective by deferring a programmatic expansion of 
access with private participation until financing conditions are more favorable. The 
ongoing project is financing construction of MV and LV lines to extend the electricity 
network to about 59 rural towns and villages. It is anticipated that about 70% of 
households in these towns will be connected to the service on completion of the project.  
As part of Government’s efforts to strengthen EEC’s financial situation, EEC’s 
investment program will be curtailed and large investments to expand rural electrification 
are likely to be delayed during the next few years.  Thus, a sustainable program for the 
expansion of electricity access with private sector participation will necessarily have to 
be deferred until conditions improve.  
 
2nd PDO improve the quality and adequacy of the electricity supply. This objective 
remains essentially unchanged.  The ongoing investment component for the Asmara 
system rehabilitation addresses this objective. Current system losses are about 24% of net 
generation. Much of the technical losses are due to the aging distribution system 
especially in Asmara. The electricity distribution system in Asmara (that accounts for 
Page  3
about 80% of the utility's customers) is more than 40 years old and has high technical 
losses (18%) and poor quality of supply (e.g. voltage fluctuation). It is anticipated that the 
technical losses in Asmara will reduce to about 7% at the completion of the project.  
Reduction of power losses will also reduce the quantity of fuel oil EEC would otherwise 
use to meet demand. At current prices, the fuel savings would amount to more than $2m 
per annum. The proposed new component for rehabilitation of the generation plants at 
Hirgigo and Beleza also addresses the objective of improving the quality, adequacy and 
reliability of electricity supply. These plants are in need of urgent overhaul and spares.  
Unless the rehabilitation is carried out, the plants will in all likelihood begin to fail i.e. 
brownouts and blackouts beginning in 2009 and eventual system collapse can be 
expected after 2 or 3 years.  Financing the rehabilitation will help ensure that Eritrea 
manages to avoid such a power crisis.  
 
3rd PDO regulatory and institutional reforms in the sector to increase efficiency. The 
key change to this objective is to focus it on electricity sector operational efficiency 
improvements which are fundamental to sectoral financial health.   A number of 
institutional development activities under the project will contribute to improved 
efficiency in sector operations.  These include a new billing system that will improve bill 
accuracy and integrate billing information with a new accounting system thus providing 
EEC’s management with greatly improved customer information.  Non-technical losses 
that are mainly due to metering and billing deficiencies should be reduced to less than 3% 
of electricity sales (i.e. within industry norms) in Asmara on successful completion of the 
project.  Other efficiencies that will be achieved include improved stock control.  Other 
activities under the project that are focused on institutional strengthening for the Ministry 
of Energy and Mines include activities to support more transparent regulation and 
preparation of an Operation Manual for the Government’s Rural electrification fund.  
 
7
The original and restructured project objectives are shown in Table 1.  
 
Table 1  
 
Original PDOs 
Revised PDO of restructured project  
 
(a) carrying out a sustainable program for the expansion of access to electricity 
(i) 
expansion of electricity access in rural areas  
 
(b) improving the quality and adequacy of the electricity supply in its territory 
(ii) 
improve the quality and adequacy of the electricity supply  
 
Page  4
(c) strengthening the institutional capacity of key energy sector agencies including 
regulatory and institutional reforms in the sector to increase efficiency and attract private 
participation 
(iii) improve efficiency in electricity sector operations  
 
13. A 
revised
 results framework that is consistent with the project’s restructured 
objectives is included in Annex 5. It shows progress to date (May ’08) in each of the 
project’s components and in its overall objectives.  
 
14. 
Proposed Use of Addition Financing. Additional financing is proposed for the 
project for the current component Part A Asmara Distribution Rehabilitation and for a 
new component Part F Rehabilitation of Generation Plants  
 
15. 
Additional financing to meet a financing gap in Part A ($4.5 million) Asmara 
Distribution Rehabilitation. The financing gap is due to: (i) a variation order that will 
replace wooden poles with steel poles and (ii) price increase following application of 
automatic price escalation clauses in the contract that are based changes in international 
materials prices such as copper, aluminum and steel.  Both concern contract No 839/100 
between the implementing agency – Eritrean Electricity Corporation (EEC) and the 
contractor for this component (Asea Brown Boveri of Spain). The contract value was 
$31.067 million (against which the IDA Credit financed $28 million).  The current 
estimate of cost overrun is anticipated will be approximately $8.0 million ($3.0 million 
for variation order; $4.6 million for price adjustment as per contract terms; $0.4 for 
consultant services).   SDR currency appreciation savings to date of approximately $2 
million will also be applied to the financing gap in the Asmara component. 
Approximately $1.4 million earmarked for the rural electrification fund (Part C of the 
project) will be reallocated to Part A to fill the remaining financing gap.  
 
16. 
Additional financing for Rehabilitation of Generation Plants ($13 million).  The 
restructured project includes a new component to carry out overhaul and rehabilitation of 
EEC’s main generation plants at Hirgigo, Beleza and Assab.  Thisuse of additional 
financing falls under category (b) of the Guidelines for Additional Financing which 
provide for activities that scale up a project’s impact and development effectiveness.  
 
17. 
Project Implementation Arrangements.  There will be no change to the project’s 
implementation arrangements.  The two implementing agencies will continue tobe the 
Ministry of energy and Mines and the Eritrean Electricity Corporation (EEC)   
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rural electrification in 59 towns and villages in the Keren, Barentu, Adi Keih and 
Dekemehare areas. Rehabilitation of the electricity network in Asmara . Rehabilitation of 
geenration plants near Massawa at Hirgigo and at Belza and Assab   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (AFTTR) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The ISDS of the original project (P057929) describes the key safeguard issues and their 
management for the project. The scope of the projects original components are 
unchanged. The project remains category B and the existing mitigation instruments of the 
Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Plan (ESMMP) and Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) are adequate to cover all the activities financed under the 
additional financing. No changes to the provisions of the Amendment to the ESMMP that 
was publicly disclosed on March 10, 2008 were found to be necessary during appraisal. 
The Addendum of March 10, 2008 is therefore extant.  The rural electrification 
component will be completed in June 2008. Supervision in March 2008 found that a total 
of 7 persons were affected by crop damage during line installation.  Their concerns have 
been filed and noted by the administration. The affected persons were compnensated in 
April 2008. The key safeguard issues described here relate to the project's new 
component Part F Rehabilitation of Generation Plants. provisions of the ESMMP to 
mitigate the impacts of this component were confirmed during appraisal of additional 
financing in March 2008.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project's new component Part F Rehabilitation of Generation Plants does not change 
the environmental category of the project or trigger new safeguard policies.The 
component involves rehabilitation of diesel engines and associated infrastructure (fuel 
tanks and wast oil storage) at existing sites.   Potential environmental impacts linked to 
the proposed new activity are oil spillage and fire hazard.  No additional risks were 
identified during appraisal and procedures with fuel storage & handling facilities, cooling 
water systems, plant waste water and oily water disposal systems, monitoring indicators, 
and fire protection were confirmed to conform to industry norms.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The existing mitigation instruments of the Environmental and Social Management and 
Monitoring Plan (ESMMP) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) are adequate to 
cover the project's new component Part F Rehabilitation of Generation Plants. 
Institutional arrangements involve a multi-disciplinary team in the Ministry of Energy 
and Mines working with the Ministry of Environment and other agencies to coordinate 
the adoption of environmental management requirements. Analyses during supervision 
missions confirmed this view and judged the ESMMF to be a viable vehicle in which to 
assure compliance with the EA policies of the Bank and Borrower during 
implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
DOE has collaborated with with the National Museum who is charged with rescue 
excavation work in the context of archaeological structures encountered during civil 
works for the Asmara rehabilitation component. construction in this component began in 
January 2008. Mechanisms for affected people to register claims are well established 
with village and town administrations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/13/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
Page  8
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kyran O'Sullivan 
05/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
05/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
05/16/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/16/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
05/16/2008 
Comments:   
