Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC4057
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P114683 
Project Name:  ET-Productive Safety Nets II (FY09) Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  William David Wiseman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (98%);Central government administration (1%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Vulnerability assessment 
and monitoring (S);Other social development (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
This Additional Financing will be provided for the Productive Safety Net project (PSNP) 
with the objective of ensuring that the needs of vulnerable food insecure households are 
adequately addressed. The project activities consist of a public works program, the 
objective of which is to contribute to watershed development, environmental 
transformation, improved farming and land-use management systems and community 
infrastructure, under the community watershed development approach of the government.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed instrument being processed under OP/BP 8.00.  Since such instrument can 
make funds available quickly, it is well-
suited to respond to Ethiopia’s short-term needs 
for additional support to the PSNP. The operation is proposed to be financed through the 
reallocation of undisbursed IDA resources from Ethiopia’s ongoing IDA portfolio and 
new IDA commitments.  
 
Page  2
The proposed Project consists of additional financing to fill the PSNP financing gap that 
has emerged as a result of the food price inflation and drought in 2008. This would allow 
the PSNP to continue to operate in 2009 as designed, providing a similar level of support 
to food insecure households as has been provided up until 2008. Specifically, financing 
would be used to provide cash and in-kind transfers to food insecure households. 
Financing would be channeled through the existing World Bank APL project, allowing it 
to continue to meet its development objectives.  
 
The PSNP has an established track record of providing transfers on a timely basis, in 
cash and kind, to food insecure households. Resources are provided through a labor-
intensive public works program for households with able-bodies members and as direct 
support grants to labor-poor, elderly or otherwise incapacitated households. The public 
works program aims to create productive community assets, with a focus on soil and 
water conservation. Evidence to date indicates that at its current scale and scope the 
PSNP, in spite of the crisis suffered in 2008, is having a measurable impact on 
beneficiary livelihoods as measured by income and assets.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be country-wide; public works activities under the PSNP will be carried 
out in some 282 woredas in Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR and Tigray Regional States, 
selected on sp
ecific criteria outlined in the Government’s Program Implementation 
Manual.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
One of the key objectives of the PSNP is to address the underlying causes of food 
insecurity, to which land degradation is universally agreed to be a major contributor, 
particularly in highland areas. Thus the design of the PSNP public works program, is 
Page  3
intended to have environmentally positive impacts. Indeed, these activities, which 
include, for example, soil and water conservation, land reclamation and improvement of 
community infrastructure, have already been shown to constitute a vehicle for significant 
environmental transformation and enhanced productivity.  
 
It is nonetheless common knowledge that past mass-mobilization efforts in 
environmental rehabilitation in Ethiopia have sometimes failed or have been abandoned, 
as a result of which the environment has returned to its degraded state. Such adverse 
outcomes occur particularly if their locations or designs do not follow good 
environmental practice, or if they are incompatible with optimum overall management of 
the watershed. To address such issues, the approach to the environmental performance 
and sustainability of the public works program is three-pronged:  
 
(i) 
Public works are derived from a community-based approach to integrated 
watershed management, a process which forms the basis of the awareness-creation and 
training program, supported by a budget to provide technical and material inputs. 
Moreover, the PSNP public works are also viewed as contributing to the Nile Basin 
Initiative (NBI);  
 
(ii) 
Standards to be followed in the design and implementation of the individual 
public works are established in Community-Based Participatory Watershed Development 
Guidelines published by the MOARD, which are made available to concerned woreda 
staff and Development Agents, and in which techniques they are trained within the 
project; and  
 
(iii) 
The process of selection and screening of public works for possible negative 
environmental impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are 
incorporated in the design as appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia’s Environmental 
Impact Assessment proclamation. The process is documented in the ESMF produced by 
the Government and disclosed.  
 
To address the possible use of small quantities of pesticides in small-scale irrigation 
schemes, the government Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small-Scale 
Irrigation Schemes is published and disclosed under APL II, in accordance with the 
ESMF and OP 4.09.  
 
From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the proposed operation is a 
Category B project, since impacts of the project, for the most part, will be minimal, site-
specific and manageable to an acceptable level.  
 
In summary, this emergency operation triggers three safeguard policies: The 
Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01); the Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09), 
predicated on the possibility of small quantities of pesticides being employed in small, 
community-level irrigation projects; and the International Waterways Policy (OP 7.50), 
because of small-scale irrigation projects that may be implemented in watersheds of three 
international waterways.  
 
It may be noted that the PSNP public works program does not involve any resettlement 
or involuntary loss of assets or access to assets. Such projects are not permitted under the 
Page  4
PSNP. Thus the Involuntary Resettlement policy is not triggered. The project is not likely 
to give rise to any changes in land-use or cultivation patterns. Therefore OP 4.10 
(Indigenous Peoples) is not be triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Future activities are expected to consist of further watershed development interventions, 
and improved farming and land-use management systems, under the community 
watershed development approach of the government. They are expected to make further 
contributions to environmental regeneration and transformation, which is one of the 
objectives of the PSNP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The public works are designed to have positive environmental impacts. However, each 
project is screened under the ESMF procedures, and should there be any anticipated 
negative impacts, these are addressed by re-designing the project at planning and design 
stage, or substituting another community project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and 
management framework in Ethiopia:  
 
The Proclamation on the establishment of Environmental Protection Organs (No. 
295/2002);  
 
The Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 299/2002);  
 
The Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).  
 
There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for monitoring 
environmental compliance. These are the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) and 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD), which have decentralized to 
the regional level. In the case of MoARD, decentralization has gone further to the woreda 
and kebele levels. There exists a critical mass of capacity within the (MoARD) and EPA 
at the federal and decentralized levels to manage environmental and social safeguard 
issues.  
 
The process of selection and screening of public works for possible negative 
environmental impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are 
incorporated in the design as appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia’s Environmental 
Impact Assessment proclamation. The process is documented in the ESMF produced by 
the Government. The ESMF, produced by Government and disclosed under APL II, is 
incorporated in the awareness-creation and training programs. Responsibilities for its 
implementation and monitoring are designated at federal, regional, woreda and kebele 
levels in the ESMF: Implementation Guidelines.  In addition, joint government-donor 6-
Page  5
monthly public works reviews are conducted, which include monitoring of ESMF 
implementation, followed by corrective measures if required.  
 
To address the potential small-scale use of pesticides or chemical fertilizers, the 
government Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small-Scale Irrigation Schemes is 
published and disclosed, in accordance with the ESMF and OP 4.09. In order to address 
projects that might include the renovation or extension of medical clinics in the public 
works program, the government’s Waste Management Guide for Rural Health Clinics is 
published and disclosed, in accordance with OP 4.01.  
 
For APL I, Government and the Bank notified the concerned countries in accordance 
with the International Waterways Policy OP 7.50, covering the 5-year period of APL I 
and APL II. Since (i) the APL II Additional Financing (Fiscal ‘09) lies within this period, 
and (ii) water abstraction rates are well within notified levels, there is no need for further 
notification for the Additional Financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary farmers and their familes, and those involved in 
the implementation of the program. The provisions of the ESMF are incorporated into the 
training materials used at woreda and kebele levels, which reach over 1 million 
beneficiary households, and are regularly updated according to community and 
government staff feedback. Following consultations in accordance with government and 
World Bank policies, the ESMF was disclosed under APL II on 11/10/2006, as were the 
Guidelines on Integrated Pest Management and Medical Waste Management.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/16/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/16/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Pest Management addressed and disclosed as above   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William David Wiseman 
12/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
12/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
12/16/2008 
Comments:   
