Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4042 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P114683 
Project Name: ET-Productive Safety Nets II (FY09) Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: William David Wiseman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 4, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (98%);Central government administration (1%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Vulnerability assessment 
and monitoring (S);Other social development (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This Additional Financing will be provided for the Productive Safety Net project (PSNP) with 
the objective of ensuring that the needs of vulnerable food insecure households are adequately 
addressed. The project activities consist of a public works program, the objective of which is to 
contribute to watershed development, environmental transformation, improved farming and land-
use management systems and community infrastructure, under the community watershed 
development approach of the government.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project consists of additional financing to fill the PSNP financing gap that has 
emerged as a result of the food price inflation and drought in 2008. This would allow the PSNP 
to continue to operate in 2009 as designed, providing a similar level of support to food insecure 
households as has been provided up until 2008. Specifically, financing would be used to provide 
cash and in-kind transfers to food insecure households. Financing would be channeled through 
the existing World Bank APL project, allowing it to continue to meet its development objectives.  
Page  2
The PSNP has an established track record of providing transfers on a timely basis, in cash and 
kind, to food insecure households. Resources are provided through a labor-intensive public 
works program for households with able-bodied members and as direct support grants to labor-
poor, elderly or otherwise incapacitated households. The public works program aims to create 
productive community assets, with a focus on soil and water conservation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be country-wide; public works activities under the PSNP will be carried out in 
some 282 woredas in Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR and Tigray Regional States.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and 
management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the establishment of Environmental 
Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); The Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 
299/2002); The Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).  
 
There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for monitoring environmental 
compliance: the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) and Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development (MoARD), which have decentralized to the regional level. In the case of 
MoARD, decentralization has gone further to the woreda and kebele levels. There exists a 
critical mass of capacity within the (MoARD) and EPA at the federal and decentralized levels to 
manage environmental and social safeguard issues.  
 
The process of selection and screening of public works for possible negative environmental 
impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are incorporated in the design as 
appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia’s Environmental Impact Assessment proclamation. 
The process is documented in the ESMF produced by the Government and already disclosed.  
 
The additional financing will trigger no new safeguard policies, nor will it produce any impacts 
other than those already anticipated and managed under the existing ESMF, which is functioning 
for the existing project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Adverse environmental or social impacts might occur due to location or project design not 
following good practice. To cover such eventualities, OP 4.01 is triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
To address the possible use of small quantities of pesticides in small-scale irrigation projects, 
OP 4.09 is triggered.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Because some small-scale irrigation projects may be implemented in watersheds of three 
international waterways, OP 7.50 is triggered. Notification has already been made to riparian's 
on August 17, 2004.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/13/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No additional studies are required as the existing ESMF already covers all impacts expected.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William David Wiseman 
11/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/12/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
11/12/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
