Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3384 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P108932 
Project Name: Pastoral Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Ingo Wiederhofer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);General education sector 
(20%);Animal production (20%);Other social services (20%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (S);Natural 
disaster management (S);Decentralization (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
20.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching objective of the second phase is to improve the livelihoods of pastoral 
communities and establish effective models of public service delivery and disaster management 
th
at address communities’ needs and reduce their vulnerability.  
 
The second phase will seek to consolidate the progress made under Phase I of the PCDP, and to 
expand the geographic impact area in order to establish the platform from which the long-run 
development objective of sustainable pastoralist livelihoods can be met. The second phase will 
also focus more effort on livelihoods-oriented community investments, community 
empowerment and local organizational development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
PCDP II will continue implementation of the PCDP I program components, subject to 
modifications to further strengthen core components. PCDP I currently comprises: (i) 
Sustainable Livelihoods including a Community Investment Fund (CIF) , Income Generating 
Activities (IGA) and related support service activities); (ii) Pastoral Risk Management including 
a
Pastoral  Early Warning System (PEWS), Disaster Prevention Contingency Plans (DPCP) and 
a
Disaster Prevention and Contingency Fund (DPCF); and (iii) Project support and policy reform 
including policy reform, research and monitoring and evaluation activities. PCDP II will 
consolidate these components, re-focus activities under the sub-components and expand their 
geographic implementation area.  
 
While the Phase II program will maintain and expand the core Phase I components, project 
supervision reports and external reviews of project activities indicate the need for program 
strengthening in the following areas:  
 
Component 1. Sustainable Livelihoods  
 
Phase I experience indicates the need to: (a) strengthen community participation in CIF priority 
setting including raised women and youth participation; (b) clarify lines of responsibility at 
Woreda level; (c) ensure alignment of CIF and Woreda/provincial development strategies 
through better planning; and (d) to expand and diversify CIF investments, particularly to 
incorporate more production enhancing investments. Phase II should also expand the Program’s 
role in sustainable livestock and rangeland management, which underpins sustainable pastoral 
livelihoods. This may include investments in (a) private veterinary services; (b) strengthening of 
public veterinary regulatory, epidemiology and laboratory testing capacity to underpin private 
clinical services and livestock export marketing; (c) the development of an equitable and 
practical livestock and livestock product export policy, including taxation policy, and the 
development of public sector support programs for livestock export, particularly concerning 
health certification and traceability; and (d) increased emphasis on community based natural 
resource management.  
 
Component 2. Pastoral Risk Management  
 
The opportunity for further Pastoral Risk Ranagement (PRM) development under PCDP Phase 
II include: (a) developing an agreed multi-agency and multi-project approach to PRM in lowland 
areas, involving regional Disaster Prevention and Food Security Bureaus (DPFSBs) managing 
PCDP supported DPCP and EWS methodologies for PRM. These could help to (a) inform PSNP 
financed community-based labor intensive public works for disaster preparedness investments in 
normal periods and drought risk financing for Alert/Alarm interventions as identified in woreda-
based DPCPs; (b) the alignment of PEWS-related PCDP and Productive Safety Net Program 
(PSNP) administrative structures at regional and lower levels; (c) the continuous refinement of 
the PRM strategies and processes and supporting manuals; and (d) the development of an 
integrated database and web-based PEWS reporting system for all participating woredas. By the 
end of PCDP II, all lowland woredas should be covered by DPFSB PRM programs. Clear 
Page  3
Government commitment on the development of an integrated national approach to PRM would 
be sought during the design of the second phase in order to determine  
 
Component 3. Project Support and Policy Reform  
 
Government’s forthcoming policy statement should clearly identify areas requiring further 
policy analysis and development. Given the limited attention paid to policy reform under Phase I, 
the role of PCDP II in rangelands research, academic capacity building and curriculum 
development will be reviewed critically during appraisal. Continuation of this component will 
depend on an assessment of (i) medium-term donor support through other channels, and/or (ii) 
agreement on revised implementation arrangements.  
 
Component 4. Project Management  
 
Under Phase II, the Pastoral Development Officer (PDO) should be the focal person for PCDP 
activities at woreda level, coordinating the sector offices in the MOT, facilitating the work of 
PCDP staff when they visit the woreda, and overseeing the proper use of equipment and facilities 
provided through the Project to the woreda. Increased support of woreda Pastoral Development 
Officers (PDOs) and Mobile Outreach Teams (MOTs) by regional Mobile Support Teams 
(MSTs) is also important, with the necessary financial and logistics arrangements made to ensure 
a
sustained MST field presence. Given the location and nature of the project work, a relatively 
high turnover of project and regional administrative staff should be factored into PCDP II design. 
Relevant measures include comprehensive manuals for project component implementation, 
improved record keeping to minimize disruptions associated with personnel transitions, and 
increased and regular training to ensure core competencies are retained within implementation 
teams and provide incentives for individuals to remain with the Project. PCDP I has also lacked 
an effective project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and management information system, as 
well as a communications strategy. These gaps must be addressed in Phase II, possibly using 
contracted service providers as appropriate.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The primary target population for PCDP is poor pastoral and agro pastoral communities in the 
Afar, Somali, Oromia, Southern Gambella and Benshangul-Gumz regions of Ethiopia. The 
project will operate in the so-called lowlands of Ethiopia, with populations who pursue largely 
livestock-oriented livelihoods strategies.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based on the Environmental Assessment Management Framework (EAMF), the PCDP I 
prepared an Environmental and Social Screening List for Community Sub-Projects.  Project staff 
and implementing agencies were trained to use it, but gained little implementation experience.  
Based on this work, a PCDP II Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will 
be prepared, and further training, implementation support and M&E will strengthen institutional 
capacities to meet safeguards requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
PCDP II will finance small-scale subprojects under the CIF, RLF and DPIP, some of which 
will require environmental management.  An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) for Community Sub-Projects will be prepared that specifies subproject screening, the 
preparation of environmental and pest management plans as required, and implementation 
supervision to ensure that adverse impacts are avoided or minimized.  The ESMF will also 
specify additional training and capacity building at the federal, regional and Woreda levels to 
support effective implementation.  M&E procedures will track ESMF implementation and 
provide for annual reviews to support continuous performance improvement.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
PCDP II support for private veterinary services and small-scale irrigated agriculture results in 
the need for ago-chemical management.  Procedures and training to meet this safeguard 
requirement will be included in the ESMF.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project is not currently working in areas or
 with groups which would trigger the Bank’s 
IP policy.  The Project will institute social screening and social analysis in any new areas into 
which it expands in phase II to ensure that any such groups are recognized and their needs 
addressed.  In the event that this social screening identifies the need to trigger the IP policy, an IP 
Development Plan will be developed to ensure the interests and needs of such group are 
addressed in accordance with OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Given the vast amounts of land available to pastoralists and land's low marginal cost, any 
small parcels acquired through the construction of micro-projects (such as a school or health 
post) will not impose a significant cost to the pastoral community and not result in loss of access 
to any resources. Therefore, this safeguard policy is not triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/05/2008 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The PCDP I Environmental and Social Screening List for Community Sub-Projects will be 
revised and updated as an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for 
PCDP II.  The ESMF will be reviewed and approved by the Bank, and publicly disclosed, 
before appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities. In the event that 
indigenous peoples are identified in the project areas then ASPEN will be informed, assist in 
supervision, and provide input on the IPP.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ingo Wiederhofer 
02/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/27/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
02/26/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
