Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/30/2009 
Report No.:  48360
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P103022 
Project Name:  Ethiopia Protection of Basic Services Program Phase II Project 
Task Team Leader:  Trina S. Haque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 14, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);General education sector (15%);Health 
(15%);Agricultural extension and research (10%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (10%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(P);Other social protection and risk management (S);Participation and civic engagement 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
540.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,428.60 
 
African Development Bank 
161.90 
 Borrowing 
Agency 
657.50 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)59.80 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 295.90 
 
EC: European Commission 
67.30 
 
IRELAND, Govt. of 
32.90 
 
SPAIN, Govt. of 
40.70 
 
ITALY: Dev. Coop. Department (MOFA) 
10.20 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
47.50 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 10.90 
 
AUSTRIA, Govt. of: Fed Chancellery - Dir Gen Dev Coop. 
10.90
2,824.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program Development Objective (PDO) for PBS II is to contribute to expanding 
access and improving the quality of basic services in education, health, agriculture, water 
supply and sanitation, and rural roads delivered by sub-national governments, while 
Page  2
continuing to deepen transparency and local accountability in service delivery. The PDO 
is especially closely linked with the second and fourth strategic objectives of the CAS 
(improving access to and quality of basic service delivery; and fostering improved 
governance).   
 
3. Project Description 
The PBS II Program has four Subprograms:  
 
Sub-Program A-Support to Delivery of Basic Services. Two types of support are 
envisaged under this Sub-Program.  
 
Part A1 Basic Services Block.  While the original PBS had included (i) education, (ii) 
health, (iii) agricultural extension, and (iv) water supply and sanitation services delivered 
by sub-national governments as the basic service sectors, it has been agreed by 
Government and the Development Partners (DPs) that in PBS II rural roads will also be 
included as a basic service sector.  
 
As with PBS I, Subprogram A1 will finance recurrent expenditures (salaries, operations 
and maintenance) in the sub-national basic services (i.e. these are the eligible 
expenditures under pooled PBS IDA, donor, and Government own-revenue sources).  
Capital expenditures in these sectors would continue to be financed from Government 
sources (except in LIG woredas, see below).  
 
Part A2 Pilot Local Investment Grant (LIG) will continue to support the introduction, on 
a
pilot basis, of a multi-sector Specific Purpose Grant (SPG) from the Federal 
Government for capital investment in the health, education, agriculture, natural resources 
(including water), and rural roads sectors. The objective of the Pilot LIG is to better 
understand the constraints at the local level to increased and improved capital spending 
and to support the development of policies and instruments to address these constraints.  
One area of particular focus for the Pilot LIG under the PBS II will be to support the roll-
out of a new national system for local-level participatory planning.  
 
Sub-Program B-Health MDGs Support Facility will assist Government in its efforts to 
accelerate the attainment of health-related MDGs, in line with the goals and objectives of 
HSDP3, and with the principles and arrangements underpinning the International Health 
Partnership (IHP) Compact, the framework around the MDG Fund, and operational 
guidelines described in the Health Sector Development Program (HSDP) Harmonization 
Manual. It will provide financing for the MDG Fund in support of HSDP goals and 
targets via a pooled arrangement which will include a Bank-administered Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund (MDTF) as well as IDA resources. In addition to the IDA resources, the 
MDTF for Subprogram B will be established to allow those DPs who are not yet able to 
fully harmonize or to channel their funding directly to the MDG Fund to provide support 
to the health sector. The MDTF and IDA resources will finance priority activities for (i) 
the procurement of critical health commodities; and (ii) health system strengthening to 
support the accelerated attainment of health-related MDGs. Health commodities to be 
procured will include vaccines, contraceptives, long-lasting insecticide treated mosquito 
Page  3
nets, insecticide and spray pumps, emergency drugs, laboratory equipment and other 
medical equipment, and supplies to support health facilities.  Capacity building and 
training activities, studies and assessments, and TA will be provided to strengthen health 
systems in the following areas: (i) procurement; (ii) supply chain management and 
distribution; (iii) monitoring and evaluation; (iv) health care financing; and (v) select 
operational research and/or pilots for strengthening efficiency and effectiveness of 
decentralized basic services delivery.  Priority activities and related expenditures will be 
reviewed and agreed between the Ministry of Health and DPs each year during the 
Annual Review Meeting.  
 
Sub-Program C-Transparency and Accountability, will support the following two sets of 
activities:  
 
Part C1- Accountability in Decentralized Finances and Services.  Building on the 
experience of PBS I, Part C1 of Sub-program C will finance a series of activities 
designed to strengthen public financial management and procurement at the Federal and 
regional levels, to help create a system that effectively supports the delivery of high-
quality basic services.  
 
Support to Public Financial Management.  This will include:  (i) support for rollout of 
the upgraded version of the Integrated Budget and Expenditure (IBEX) system to 
Regions, Zones and woredas, and ongoing maintenance and support for the public 
financial management system; (ii) continued support to provision of additional 
accountants and IT staff and funding for auditors to enable them to discharge their 
Continuous Audit responsibilities and to improve overall accountability and provide 
fiduciary assurance regarding the use of PBS resources; (iii) strengthening of internal 
controls and internal audit; and (iv) external audit including capacity building for OFAG 
and ORAGs and streamlining the audit process for PBS II.  
 
Support to the Dissemination of Public Procurement Regulations/Documents at 
Decentralized Levels.  Under this activity which is meant to mitigate the procurement 
risks to procurement under PBS II, the project will fund the publication and 
dissemination of the revised public procurement proclamation, directives, Standard 
Bidding Documents, and the Public Procurement Manual as well as the provision of 
Technical Assistance and training for the Federal and Regional PPAs.  
 
Financial Transparency and Accountability.  This will include support for (i) the 
continued roll-out of FTA tools at the regional, woreda and kebele levels; (ii) the full 
implementation of budget literacy and media dissemination activities underpinning FTA; 
(iii) strengthening of local accountability structures and woreda Community Planning and 
Budgeting activities; (iv) capacity building for public officials at all administrative levels 
on relevant FTA approaches; and (v) monitoring and benchmarking of progress made 
towards FTA objectives.  
 
Part C2 -  Social Accountability. In order to ensure continuity and capitalize on the 
investments to date in social accountability activities, Part C2 aims to: (i) to roll-out 
Page  4
successful social accountability activities; and (ii) enhance and institutionalize capacity 
building for social accountability. Activities under Part C2 is expected to be financed by 
a
Multi-Donor Trust Fund administered by the World Bank and implemented using a 
non-government Management Agent.  
 
Sub-Program D - Monitoring and Evaluation (M & E). This sub-program will support 
the strengthening of existing national and sectoral M&E systems. Several M&E 
assessments will be implemented by lead Government agencies. Specifically, 
assessments will be conducted to look into the quality and reliability of administrative 
and financial data reported on some specific indicators, especially in the PBS sectors 
including the financial data reporting system. The results of these assessments will be 
used to identify critical challenges and design and implement activities to strengthen the 
data collection and reporting process at all levels in the reporting system. A series of 
activities to strengthen the existing monitoring tools of the PBS program itself will also 
be conducted, including household surveys, field visits, a harmonized study to monitor 
improvements in financial transparency and accountability based on the Woreda 
Benchmarking Survey, and other studies to enhance effective coordination, monitoring 
and evaluation of the various PBS Sub-Programs.  This sub-program will also provide 
targeted support to the Central Statistics Agency (CSA) to strengthen the surveys that the 
CSA conducts and expands its data network. Targeted support to MoWR will help rollout 
the new WaSH MIS to several woredas. Particular attention will be placed on ensuring 
that all studies, surveys and data quality assessments will complement existing initiatives 
and not duplicate ongoing efforts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
PBS II will be implemented throughout the country by local government authorities in 
collaboration with respective sector specialists operating at the local and regional levels. 
The physical setting is relevant for safeguards in respect of Part A2, Pilot Local 
Investment Grant (LIG), for which the safeguards instrument is an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), and Resettlement Policy Framework, disclosed 
in 2007 as part of PBS I Additional Financing. For each sub-project under the LIG 
component of PBS II, the physical setting is taken into account in the screening process 
conducted by woreda staff under the ESMF. 
 
In the case of Sub-Program B 
–
Health MDGs Support Facility, the physical setting is 
taken into account as part of the procedures to be followed when using the Guidelines for 
Medical Waste Management and Guidelines for Residual Insecticide Spraying, already 
disclosed under PBS I and re-disclosed in October 2008.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
For Subprogram A, Part A1 on Basic Services Grant, since the Project financing is 
limited to recurrent expenditures for basic services and does not include financing for 
capital development, safeguard policies are not triggered. Although there is concurrent 
Government financing for capital development in the basic services sectors that will 
enhance the development outcomes of Sub-Program A Part A1, this is not necessary to 
achieve the objectives of PBS II.  
 
The principal safeguards issues are associated with the Pilot LIG component. These 
impacts are not expected to be large-scale; neither will they be irreversible. They will be 
associated with sub-projects involving the construction and/or rehabilitation of small-
scale investments in the education, health, agricultural extension, water supply and 
sanitation, and rural roads sectors, as yet to be determined. In some cases there might 
arise small-scale resettlement issues due to encroachment on land or household assets.  
 
Other minor potential impacts are associated with the health component, in the area of 
waste management and the possible use of insecticides in conjunction with the use of 
mosquito nets.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In view of the relative small scale of the LIG component sub-projects, no potential long-
term or indirect impacts are normally expected. Nonetheless, the ESMF is designed to 
detect them with an Environmental Review (ER) in the unlikely event that they may 
arise.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative, o
ther than “No project”, exists for Part A1 – Basic Services Block Grant, 
which will cover salaries, and operations and maintenance of five sectors – health, 
Page  6
education, agriculture, water supply and sanitation, and rural roads. In the case of the 
Health component (Subprogram B), no practical alternative exists, apart from not 
providing the necessary health services.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Potential impacts will be addressed through an ESMF already disclosed in 2007 under 
PBS I. The screening process of the ESMF includes identifying whether the sub-project 
might give rise to resettlement issues. If so, the project will require reference to the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), also disclosed in 2007 under PBS I.  
 
Potential health-related impacts will be addressed by the Guidelines for Medical Waste 
Management and Guidelines for Residual Insecticide Spraying, already disclosed under 
PBS I and re-disclosed in October 2008.  
 
In addition, the LIG component will develop additional Technical Guidelines, some of 
which are already published, to ensure that the small-scale asset-building activities are 
designed so as to avoid or mitigate potential negative impacts.  
 
Furthermore, in view of the late start-up of the LIG component, which makes an 
immediate assessment of environmental and social impacts under PBS I unrealistic, PBS 
II will undertake a Mid-term Environmental Sustainability Study, to assess the 
application of safeguards provisions under PBS I. The objectives of this Environmental 
Sustainability Study, which will include field visits, are:   
 
•
To examine the quality and effectiveness of safeguard tools developed for PBSII 
as instruments for efficient integration of environmental concerns at the regional and 
woreda level.  
 
•
To assess the institutional arrangements, existing regulations, and capacity 
challenges for better ensuring appropriate environment management and assessment in 
the planning and delivery of services supported by PBS II.  
 
•
To review the consistency of PBS II approaches to environmental management 
with national policies and standards, and with approaches being taken by other national 
programs (e.g. Productive Safety Net Programme).  
 
•
To recommend ways of ensuring coordinated approaches (vis-a-vis other national 
programs) to enhancing the application of sustainable environmental practices at the 
regional and woreda level relative to the delivery of PBS-supported basic services.  
 
The findings and recommendations of the Environmental Sustainability Study will be 
taken into account in the October 2010 PBS II JRIS, in order to influence the re-design, if 
necessary, of the second half of PBS II.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The process of developing the ESMF and the RPF included government and private 
stakeholders. ESMF implementation, and RAP development procedures require 
Page  7
consultations with all stakeholders, including government and regulatory agencies, 
NGOs, municipal and woreda-level committees, local communities, and public 
disclosure.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/29/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/29/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/17/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Please note that the revised (1) National Guidelines on Medical Waste Management dated 
December 2007 and (2) Guidelines for Indoor Insecticide Residual Spraying dated April 
2007 were re-disclosed in the country on October 20, 2008 and submitted to INFOSHOP 
on November 17, 2008.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  8
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Trina S. Haque 
04/30/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
04/30/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
04/30/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
04/30/2009 
Comments:   
