Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3356
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P107139 
Project Name:  Sustainable Land Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Herbert Acquay 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P090789 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Climate change (S);Other 
environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.79 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
8.79 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed program are to reduce land degradation in 
agricultural landscapes and improve the agricultural productivity of smallholder farmers.  
 
The global environment objective is also to reduce land degradation, leading to the 
protection and/or restoration of ecosystem functions and diversity in agricultural 
landscapes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed SLM program would have three components: (a) Watershed management; 
(b) Rural land certification and administration and (c) Program management.  It is 
designed to combine the benefits of land tenure security and sustainable land and water 
management practices in watersheds.  
 
The objective of the Watershed Management Component is to support scaling up of best 
management practices in sustainable land management practices and technologies for 
Page  2
smallholder farmers in the “high potential”/“food secure” areas that are increasingly 
becoming vulnerable to land degradation and food insecurity. This objective responds 
directly to the priorities outlined in the PASDEP, namely building capacity in 
community-based approaches to watershed management, scaling up successful models 
for watershed management, and strengthening natural resource information management 
to disseminate more widely best management practices and innovations in sustainable 
land management. Implementation of watershed management interventions would be 
phased-in, according to the capacity of the government agencies and local communities.  
 
The objective of the Rural Land Certification component is to expand the coverage and 
enhance the government’s land certification project, with the aim of strengthening land 
tenure security for smallholder farmers. This objective is consistent with the priority of 
expanding the land certification project outlined in Ethiopia’s PASDEP because of the 
important role that tenure security plays to stimulate greater investment by farmers in 
sustainable land management practices. Assistance under this component also seeks to 
rectify the weaknesses in Ethiopia’s Stage 1 land certification process identified in 
various reviews, particularly the need to geo-reference and map individual parcels to 
avoid or minimize boundary disputes.  
 
The project would scale up an enhanced land certification process that has emerged 
from experiences from the Government’s land certification activities under two pilot 
projects financed by SIDA and USAID. The project would specifically finance training, 
equipment, and technical assistance to upgrade the organizational, technical, and 
managerial capacity of existing institutions/units responsible for land administration at 
the Federal, Regional and Woreda levels and the Judiciary.  
 
The SLM project would also finance in all the Woredas participating in the watershed 
management activities land certification interventions, including cadastral surveying, 
parcel-based land registration, and developing registries for rural land. Such interventions 
would facilitate timely processing and issuance of land certificates, with important 
features such as geo-referencing and mapping of household and farm plots, communal 
lands, etc. It would also facilitate the continuous updating of land registration records.  
 
The objective of the Program Management component is to provide financial and 
technical assistance to MoARD and the Regional, Woreda, and Kebele agencies 
responsible for sustainable land management to effectively support coordination and 
implementation of the SLM project. Support for coordination would include financing 
tasks assigned to the SLM Support Unit, MoARD by the National SLM Steering 
Committee to facilitate a coordinated and harmonized approach to SLM investments in 
Ethiopia. To strengthen project management, funds would be available to finance 
selected technical assistance and training such as in financial management, procurement, 
and monitoring and evaluation.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program would be implemented on existing farmlands and communal lands in 35 
watersheds in six Regional States in Ethiopia (i.e. Amhara, Oromiya, Tigray, SNNP, 
Beneshangul Gumuz, and Gambela). These watersheds, with an average size of about 
8,500 ha, comprise 15 to 20 sub-watersheds. There will be no resettlement or land re-
distribution.  
 
To faciliate a transparent and fair land certification process, the project implementers 
would work with existing local institutions, especially the Kebele Land Administration 
Committees, which are responsible for adjudication of land use rights, boundaries of farm 
and household plots, etc. The committee is made up of citizens selected by the people and 
government officials; it plays an important role in minimizing conflicts. A study by 
Deininger et al. (2007)  reported that the land certification process in Ethiopia is 
participatory and there were generally no biases in favor of wealthier households or 
against women, including female-headed households.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed SLM program is expected to have positive environmental impacts because 
it would finance interventions in watershed rehabilitation and management such as 
terraces, contour bunds, and reforestation. It would also finance interventions to improve 
land tenure security for small holder farmers, which is an important incentive for farmers 
to invest in environmentally sound practices.  
 
Page  4
Some communities, through the participatory watershed management planning process 
may propose small-scale community-based infrastructure such as water harvesting 
systems (i.e. farm ponds, storage tanks, roadside flood harvesting, etc.), and drinking 
water supply systems. Though small, such investments could have some localized 
environmental impacts if environmental concerns are not taken into account in the 
location and/or design.  
 
No separate environmental assessment was conducted for the SLM program because the 
types and location of specific interventions would be determined through the 
participatory watershed planning process. Therefore, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to screen out all proposed 
interventions that could have adverse environmental impacts.  
 
A
review of the communities in project areas was conducted and no groups were 
considered to be indigenous people, based on the characteristics outlined in the Bank's 
Operational Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESMF mentioned above would help to identify potential adverse environmental 
impacts and, where necessary, disqualify the proposed intervention or develop and 
incorporate into the design appropriate mitigation measures before it is recommended for 
financing by the Woreda (District) Office of Agriculture.  
 
Under the ESMF, project screening would be conducted at woreda level. In exceptional 
cases it may be necessary for a project to be reviewed at a higher level, in which case 
under Ethiopia’s Environmental Management law, the Regional Environmental 
Protection Authority (REPA) would be the responsible authority. The REPA decides if an 
EIA is necessary, and if so, the Regional Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Development, 
one of the implementing agencies for the SLM program, would arrange with the 
concerned woreda office for the EIA to be conducted by its staff or consultants. Woreda 
staff will be trained for this eventuality. The REPA would review the EIA and make the 
final decision on whether a proposed sub-project should proceed or not.  
 
In terms of insitutional responsibilities for the ESMF, the Regional Bureau of 
Agriculture and Rural Development would have overall responsibility for effective 
implementation of the ESMF. At woreda level, the Woreda Environmental Focal Person 
(WEFP) would be responsible for ESMF implementation. The SLM program would 
Page  5
finance capacity building activities on the application of the ESMF for the relevant 
government agency staff.  
 
The effective use of the ESMF would be regularly reviewed as part of the monitoring 
and evaluation system for the SLM program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders groups include: small holder farmers in the 35 selected districts, 
Village Watershed Development Committees, District Office Of Agriculture, Regional 
Office of Agriculture and Rural Development, Federal Minstry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development. The ESMF includes very detailed participatory procedures for stakeholder 
identification, consultation, and decision-making.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/20/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Herbert Acquay 
02/26/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
02/26/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
02/26/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/26/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
02/26/2008 
Comments:   
