Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/25/2008 
Report No.:  AC3349
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P096323 
Project Name:  Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources Development 
Task Team Leader:  E. V. Jagannathan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTWR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Power (10%);Roads and 
highways (10%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.75 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
7.25
25.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to promote accelerated, sustainable and equitable 
growth in the Tana and Beles sub-basins through the establishment of credible 
mechanisms for  integrated planning, management, and development of the sub-
basins’ 
water and land resources. Targeted institutions include existing and evolving institutions 
including the Tana Sub-Basin Organization, Beles Sub-Basin Organization, the Abbay 
River Basin Authority, existing regional bureaus, related federal agencies, and other 
evolving stakeholder entities and partners essential for shared-vision sustainable 
planning, management and development of the sub-basins. The emphasis is on working 
towards the use of the sub-basin’s water resources for sustainable and accelerated growth.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has the following four components:  
 
Page  2
A. Sub-basin Resources Planning and Management [$10m]:  This component aims to 
develop the enabling institutional infrastructure and capacity necessary for stimulating 
and managing sustainable investments in the Tana and Beles sub-basins. Two sub-
components will be supported:  
 
A1. Hydrologic Information System Development ($5m):  This includes support for a 
modern network of hydro-meteorological and groundwater monitoring stations, 
associated hardware, software, and information systems, special studies, as well as 
facilitation of the use of the system for pressing management and development problems 
in Lake Tana and the overall Tana and Beles sub-basins.  
 
A2. Resource Planning and Management Capacity-building ($5m):  This supports the 
Tana Sub-Basin Organization (TaSBO), Beles Sub-Basin Organization (BeSBO), and its 
parent Abbay Basin Organization.  In particular, support will be provided to the Sub-
basin organizations to build an appropriate knowledge base, analytical capacity, and 
structured stakeholder c
onsultation to develop “shared vision” sub-basin plans and 
management instruments to optimize social, environmental, and economic opportunities 
in the sub-basin.  
 
B. Natural Resource Management Investments [$50m]: This component aims to 
undertake critical investments to improve the natural resources management in the Tana 
sub-basin.  Given the urgency of such investments in the Tana sub-basin and the early 
nature of engagement in the Beles sub-basin, this component is confined to investments 
solely in the Tana Sub-basin.  Two sub-components will be supported:  
 
B1. Watershed Development ($45m):  This includes support for sustainable watershed 
development investments covering about 80,000 ha in the Ribb, Gumara, and Jamma 
sub-watersheds in the Lake Tana sub-basin.  Activities will support livelihood 
improvement, natural resources management (soil and water conservation, afforestation, 
and agro-forestry), and institutional strengthening.  
 
B2. Flood Management ($5m):  This supports community-based flood management and 
adaptation around the flood-prone areas around Lake Tana.  Activities will support flood 
risk management and non-structural/small structural approaches to manage the impacts of 
floods: including floodplain management and flood mitigation planning; flood 
forecasting and early warning; and emergency response and preparedness at national, 
local and community levels.  
 
C. Growth-Oriented Investment Preparation [$6m]:  
This component aims to 
support the institutional capacity and investment facilitation required for sustainable 
development of the Tana and Beles sub-basins to realize the growth vision for the region. 
Two sub-components will be supported:  
 
C1. Development Agency Support ($2m):  This includes support to relevant existing 
government bureaus (e.g. BoWRD, BoARD, Amhara Investment Agency) and potential 
entities (e.g. a sub-basin development organization) to better plan and facilitate public 
and private sector investments through provision of appropriate expertise, office 
modernization, targeted training, and investor facilitation.  
 
C2. Growth-oriented Investment Preparation ($4m):  This includes support for the 
preparation of investments in the Tana and Beles sub-basins, including surveys, pre-
feasibility and feasibility studies, environmental and social assessments, designs, 
Page  3
implementation arrangements, and associated analytical work and stakeholder 
consultation to ensure that these investments (expected to be better identified through an 
ongoing Growth and Endowment study) are prepared with both growth and sustainability 
considerations.  
 
D. Project Management [$4m]: This component aims to support overall project 
planning, coordination, management, quality oversight and technical supervision, 
effective procurement and financial management, as well as consolidated monitoring and 
reporting of project activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The physical investments proposed for this project are concentrated in the Tana and Beles 
sub-basins. These are the sub-basins of Abbay basin (the Blue Nile Basin).  These include 
physical investments in the Lake Tana catchment area (the Ribb, Gumera, and Jemma 
catchments) for watershed management and small-scale community-level flood 
management interventions in selected areas in the flood-prone woredas around Lake 
Tana.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
TBIWRDP is an EA Category “B” project given that significant adverse environmental 
and social impacts are not expected given the nature of the proposed activities that focus 
on institutional development, watershed and flood management investments, and 
investment preparation. Potential impacts are all manageable and will be addressed 
within the project.  
 
Page  4
The safeguards policy concerns vary by project component, and none are expected to 
cause any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts:  
 
•
Component A (Sub-basin Planning and Management): During the development of 
sub-basin development and management plans, it will be important to balance economic, 
environmental and social factors with a good mix of analysis and stakeholder 
consultation to achieve sustainable development. Institutional development activities will 
include relevant activities linked to capacity building for environment and social issues 
and ensure that institutions responsible for managing development around Lake Tana 
have the necessary structures, skills and procedures in place to ensure that development is 
done in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner.  
 
•
Component B (Natural Resources Management in Tana Sub-basin): Most of the 
proposed interventions are environmentally beneficial or are likely to have insignificant 
adverse impacts.  Nonetheless, some interventions, especially those linked to watershed 
management and site selection of structures, need procedures to ensure that they are done 
with adequate technical (environmental, pesticide management, gabion/check dam 
construction) knowledge to ensure they achieve their intended objectives as required 
under OPs 4.01, 4.09 and 4.37.  Some activities may also involve limited concerns for 
involuntary resettlement resulting from land acquisition or restrictions on access to 
resources that are not wholly communal or which affect specific households more than 
others.  There are no groups in the project area that fall into the WB definition of 
indigenous peoples.  However, project design includes necessary criteria and procedures 
to ensure that specific needs of vulnerable groups are identified and addressed.  
 
•
Component C (Growth-Oriented Investment Preparation):  The preparation of 
public and private investments to promote sustainable growth in the Tana Sub-basin will 
need to include environmental and social assessments as appropriate.  
 
•
Component D (Project Management): The project monitoring needs to include 
appropriate environmental and social indicators.  
 
The project triggers the OP 7.50 on international waters. The physical activities – 
watershed development and flood management – have been agreed by the Eastern Nile 
Council of Ministers (ENCOM) as part of the Eastern Nile Strategic Action Plan 
(ENSAP) of the Nile Basin Initiative.  The GoE is in the process of formally notifying the 
NBI Council of Ministers through the Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO) 
regarding the TBIWRDP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are not expected to be significant adverse impacts due to project-related activities 
in the project area.  However, there are a number of activities anticipated in the area that 
are of environmental and social concern – including a Tana-Beles Hydropower diversion 
tunnel under construction, flow regulation dams on rivers tributary to Lake Tana, the 
development of intensive irrigated agriculture around the lake, new ago-processing and 
tannery industries, unplanned fisheries development, and urban development without 
adequate waste water treatment.  The development of sub-basin development and 
management plans, and preparatory work for growth-oriented investments, under 
Page  5
TBIWRDP is focused on shaping basin developments to carefully consider 
environmental, social, and economic aspects to ensure that proposed investments are 
sustainable and appropriate instruments are developed for effective Lake regulation.  The 
environment and social instruments also ensure that all activities are undertaken using 
environmentally sound techniques and to benefit a broad range of stakeholders.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project has sought to focus project physical investments (Component B) on 
sustainable natural resource management 
–
specifically on watershed management and on 
community-based flood management which are intended to maximize the environmental 
and social benefits of the project while minimizing any adverse impacts. The preparation 
of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Pest Management Plans (PMPs) and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for Component B sub-projects will consider 
alternatives to avoid or minimize adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared for TBIWRDP (integrating environmental and 
social assessments and frameworks developed as part of the preparation of the physical 
interventions – watershed development and flood management).  As needed, 
theyprescribe the preparation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Pest 
Management Plans (PMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for Component B sub-
projects by the responsible regional bureau. Gabions/check dams for gully reclamation 
and flood management works will be designed by qualified engineers.  The ESMF also 
mandates including environmental and social issues in the development of the Tana and 
Beles Sub-basin Integrated Water Resource Development Plan during project 
implementation (Component A), as well as the preparation of EAs and RAPs during the 
preparation of capital investments for the second phase of the project (Component C).  
 
The borrower has limited capacity to implement safeguard policies, though the regional 
environment bureau (EPLAUA) has staff trained and experienced in the relevant 
disciplines and procedures.  As described in the ESMF and RPF, TBIWRDP will provide 
training and capacity building to support implementation of the safeguards instruments, 
especially for Components B and C.  On Component A, TBIWRDP will provide long-
term technical assistance to support the plan development process, in particular its 
environmental and social aspects.  
 
The ESMF/RPF documents were disclosed in the Bank and in the country on February 
8, 2008.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Preparation of the sub-basin plans in Component A will be a highly consultative process 
on all dimensions of the plan, including environmental and social issues.  This process 
Page  6
will include government and private stakeholders at the national, regional and local 
levels. The development of sub-projects in Component B will also involve consultations 
with local people during sub-project planning, design and implementation, including the 
safeguards aspects.  The social analysis completed for the flood and watershed activities 
involved participatory methods and ensure that project design takes into account the 
different needs of community sub-groups. M&E will also be done through beneficiary 
participation to ensure adequate consultation for future investment. The safeguards 
instruments have been developed through consultation and have been disclosed as 
required.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr E. V. Jagannathan 
02/25/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
02/25/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
02/25/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
02/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
 
Comments:   
