Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/20/2009 
Report No.:  AC4207
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P098132 
Project Name:  Tourism Development 
Task Team Leader:  Francois Nankobogo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 6, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other domestic and international trade (100%) 
Theme:  Other trade and integration (50%);Export development and competitiveness 
(25%);Other financial and private sector development (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
3.00
4.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to contribute to enhancement of the quality and 
variety of tourism products and services in targeted destinations so as to increase the 
volume of tourism, foreign exchange earnings, and jobs.  
 
It is expected that the implementation of the project will yield the following key 
outcomes, particularly in key destinations: (i) an increase of annual international visitors; 
(ii) increased average spending by visitors translating into higher foreign exchange 
earnings; and (iii) an increased number of direct and indirect tourism-related jobs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will have four components: (i) destination development, focused on 
tourism product which entails two aspects (the quality of the cultural experience, both 
tangible and intangible, and, the quality and variety of the supporting supply-side service 
providers); (ii) market development, (iii) institutional and capacity building, and (iv) 
monitoring and evaluation and project implementation.  
 
Page  2
The project focuses on three major destinations, Lalibela, Aksum and Addis Ababa 
while addressing some areas of development for the other destinations. Its main objective 
is to demonstrate what a well developed destination can bring to the tourism sector not 
only through the increased income and jobs it can create, but also the learning effect for 
the other destinations. It is hoped that both the public and private sectors will gain useful 
lessons and replicate the development experience in the other destinations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Axum, Lalibella and Addis Ababa.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project will finance construction and rehabilitation activities related to the 
(i) improvement of basic infrastructure (paving of the current core site road and 
construction of two short by-pass roads in Lalibela; (ii) rehabilitation of the road (12 km) 
leading to Yimerahane Kiristos; (iii) renovation and improvement of the National 
Museum in Addis Ababa;(iv) rehabilitation and upgrading of tourists/visitors facilities in 
Lalibela, Axum, and Addis Ababa,(v) the provision of water supply and sanitation 
facilities; and (vi)solid waste management. Potential safeguard issues are likely to include 
loss of vegetation, soil and water pollution, soil erosion, dust and noise pollution as well 
as resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed project activities will not have any indirect and/or long term impacts 
because the environmental and social screening process as outlined in the ESMF will 
Page  3
enable sub-project implementers to identify, assess, mitigate and monitor potential 
adverse environmental and social impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this is the first project towards implementation of the Government's tourism policy, 
alternatives to this project were not discussed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To ensure that future tourism investments are implemented in an environmentally and 
socially sustainable manner, the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for future tourism sub-
projects enabling sub-project implementers to identify and mitigate potential adverse 
environmental and social impacts. The screening process will also identify potential 
adverse social impacts due to land acquisition. In the event that a sub-project involves 
land acquisition, the provisions of the RPF will be implemented; the RPF outlines 
policies and procedures to be applied in this regard. OP 7.50 has not been triggered 
because the riparian notification requirements have either already been complied with 
pursuant to a previous project, or else, are not required for the type and scale of 
development considered.  
 
Although the borrower has gained significant experience with the implementation of the 
Bank's safeguard policies in several other sectors, capacity in this regard in the tourism 
sector is very limited. Therefore, to ensure efficient implementation of both the RPF and 
the ESMF, the Project Coordination Unit will (i) recruit a qualified Resettlement 
Specialist who will work out of the Mayor's Office in Lalibela; (ii) hire a qualified 
Environmental Consultant (to be located in Addis Ababa) who will coordinate the 
requisite environmental management activities; and (iii) provide training in safeguards 
issues to relevant stakeholders.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Relevant public sector (Ministry of Tourism and Culture with its subdivisions including 
the authority for research and conservation of cultural heritage) and private sector entities 
along with civil society organizations and communities in key destinations participated in 
workshops aimed at discussing the content of all prepatory studies, including the ESMF 
and RPF. The ESMF has been prepared in consultation with the relevant stakeholders and 
potentially affected persons in rural and urban areas. The results of these consultations 
indicated that while there may be some difficulties due to the potential relocation of 
potentially affected persons, there will also emerge new job and training opportunities, 
and the infrastructure investments such as roads will not only benefit the tourists but also 
the local residents who will have better access to markets and social services. The ESMF 
includes a requirement for public participation during the planning stage of future sub-
projects. The initial draft ESMF and draft RPF were disclosed in Ethiopia on February 
23, 2009; and at the Bank's Infoshop on March 6, 2009. Revised final drafts of the ESMF 
Page  4
and the RPF were disclosed in Ethiopia on March 11, 2009, and at the Bank's Infoshop 
on May 20, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Page  5
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francois Nankobogo 
05/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
05/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
05/20/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
05/20/2009 
Comments:   
