Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/20/2008 
Report No.:  AC3838
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P106855 
Project Name:  General Education Quality Improvement Project - APL 1 (GEQIP) 
Task Team Leader:  Halil Dundar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 19, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (60%);Secondary education (30%);General education sector 
(10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
84.50 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  31.10 
 Education 
For 
All 
70.00 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
98.00 
 FINLAND: 
FINNVERA 
9.60 
 
SWEDEN, Govt. of 
12.30 
 
ITALY: Dev. Coop. Department (MOFA) 
20.40 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 26.40 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
15.00
367.30 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the Federal Republic of Ethiopia General Education Quality 
Improvement Program (GEQIP) is to improve the quality of general education (Grades 1-
12) throughout the country.  To achieve this objective, the proposed Program (an APL) 
will support two phases of the Federal Program, with the first phase focusing on setting 
standards and foundations for quality improvement reforms.  The development objectives 
of the proposed Phase I APL are to: (i) improve the teaching and learning conditions in 
primary and secondary education; and (ii) improve management, planning and budget 
capacity of the Ministry of Education and the Regional Education Bureaus.  Phase 1, 
Page  2
which will be four years in length and national in scope, can be grouped into two broad 
categories: (a) quality of improvement for general education through a full curriculum 
reform for Grades 1-12 in all subjects, followed by a revision of textbooks, new training 
programs for teacher educators and pre- and in-service teacher training and school grants 
to enhance community based management of schools; and (b) capacity development to 
effectively plan, manage and monitor service delivery at the national, regional, woreda 
and school levels, including continued development of education management 
information systems.   
 
3. Project Description 
Phase 1 of GEQIP would consist of the following five components:  
 
Component 1: Curriculum, Textbooks and Assessment (estimated base cost: US$157.9 
million)  
 
The main objectives of this component are to: (a) implement a new school curriculum; 
(b) provide textbooks and teacher guides developed for the new curriculum; and (c) align 
student  
 
assessment and examinations with the new curriculum and reform the inspection 
system.  The component will consist of the following subcomponents.  
 
-Curriculum Reform and Implementation.  This subcomponent would support the 
reform of the curriculum for Grades 1-12 to improve the quality of general education. 
The project will support the following activities: (i) orientation programs about the new 
curriculum; (ii) development of a new strategy for teaching science and mathematics; (iii) 
alignment of the curriculum for the Alternative Basic Education (ABE) with the new 
revised general education curriculum; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the 
implementation of the new curriculum.  
 
-Teaching and Learning Materials.  In the context of available resources and capacity, 
priority will be given to the development and provision of textbooks and teacher guides 
for Grades 9-12 mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics which national and 
international publishers can readily adapt from their market-tested series; provision of 
Grades 9-12 textbooks and teachers guides in the other subjects; and provision of 
textbooks and teachers guides for Grades 1-8. Where the required quantities are small, as 
for books for certain languages of instruction, the project would seek alternative methods 
of provision, including negotiation with contracted publishers for translation and 
publication in those languages. The acquisition of books would be made using open and 
competitive procurement procedures. The books would be delivered to MOE-designated 
woredas.  
 
-Assessment and Examinations.  Under the first phase of the project, this subcomponent 
will focus on detailed review and analyses to develop strategies for implementation 
during the second phase. The analytical work would include identifying measures to 
strengthen the capacity of the MOE General Education Quality Assurance and 
Examination Agency (GEQAEA), including the Inspectorate Department, to ensure that 
Page  3
national examinations and • 
assessments are aligned with the newly developed 
curriculum.  The project may support the expansion of the National Learning Assessment 
(NLA) to include Grades 10 and 12.  
 
Component 2: Teacher Development Program (TDP) (estimated base cost: US$65.6)  
 
The component will support the Government’s efforts to increase the supply of effective 
teacher educators, teachers and facilitators in primary and secondary education through 
the implementation of teacher educator, and in-service and pre-service teacher 
development programs.  MOE has some implementation experience under the Teacher 
Development Program (TDP1), financed through a pooled funding arrangement by a 
consortium of bilateral development partners.  TDP1 closed in June 2008.  Under GEQIP, 
MOE plans to continue to support teacher development activities, including improved 
targeting of access to primary teaching, enhanced practical teaching experience during 
teacher training, expanded in-service professional development opportunities and training 
for the facilitators (or teachers) in the Alternative Basic Education (ABE).  
 
-Pre-Service Teacher Education Quality Improvement.  GEQIP will provide support to 
enhance the pre-service teacher training program for regular and ABE programs.  The 
teacher training program will focus on six elements: (i) improved selection of entrants to 
teacher training, (ii) provision of teaching materials in the teacher education institutions 
(TEIs), (iii) enhanced practicum for teacher candidates, (iv) in-service pedagogical 
training for teacher educators, (v) enhanced English language supports in the TEIs, and 
(vi) provision of a training program for Alternative Basic Education facilitators.  
 
-In-Service Teacher Education Quality Improvement.  The in-service teacher training 
subcomponent includes revision of the following program areas: (i) enhancing the 
provision of continuing professional development at schools, (ii) providing English 
language training for teachers of English and teachers using English as a medium of 
instruction, (iii) developing a teacher career structure and licensing system which 
recognizes professional development and behavior, and (iv) upgrading primary teachers 
with a certificate qualification to diploma level. The MOE Department of Education 
Programs and Teacher Education (EPTED) will take the main responsibility for 
management and implementation of this subcomponent.  
 
Component 3: School Improvement Program (SIP) (estimated base cost: US$160.2 
million)  
 
The objectives of the school improvement program component are to: (i) improve the 
capacity of schools to prioritize needs and develop a school improvement plan; (ii) 
enhance school and community participation in resource utilization decisions and 
resource generation; (iii) improve the government’s capacity to deliverspecified amounts 
of schools grants at the wordea level and (iv) improve the learning environment by 
providing sufficient resources to schools.  
 
Page  4
-School Improvement Program.  The project would build on a pilot program that 
included developing a School Self-Assessment Form (SAF) for schools, through which 
schools identified problem areas, developed priorities based on identified problems and 
ultimately developed a School Improvement Plan (SIP) to address the prioritized needs.  
A
broad revision of the SAF and SIP templates is proposed, to ensure that the instruments 
are appropriate, user-friendly for schools, and result in prioritized operational plans. 
Capacity building at the woreda and school levels will also be delivered through the 
Management and Administration Program (MAP) described below to ensure that the SAF 
and SIP processes are properly implemented.  An ongoing monitoring process through 
the School Grants Utilization Survey, to be conducted every two years, will ensure that 
the instruments and training materials are updated regularly to ensure appropriateness and 
effectiveness.  
 
-School Grants.  The key issue facing the provision of school grants in Ethiopia is not 
related to difficulties in disbursement, financial management or accountability, rather it is 
the acute constraints on woreda budgets which results in a much lower overall level of 
disbursement across the country than is prescribed in the Bluebook.  The project would 
support the implementation efforts at the federal, regional and woreda levels, particularly 
with respect to establishing an effective system to monitor the flow of funds.  The school 
grants component under GEQIP has been designed to address this constraint through the 
provision of a minimum amount of funds based on enrollment rates to all schools and 
ABE Centers.  The grant will be used to finance elements of the school improvement 
plan.  To assist with implementation of the school grants sub-component, School Grants 
Guidelines have been developed. These Guidelines provide guidance on all aspects of 
implementation at federal, regional, woreda and school/community levels and are cross 
referenced with the the SIP guidelines.  The School Grant Guidelines are consistent with 
government’s Bluebook guidelines, but will be implemented asastand-alone document to 
ensure that key responsibilities and outputs are conveyed and understood at different 
levels.  
 
Component 4:  Management and Administration Program (MAP) (estimated base cost: 
US$22.6 million)  
 
This component supports the Government’s initiatives to strengthen the planning, 
management, and monitoring capacity of regions and woredas to implement system-wide 
primary and  
 
secondary education programs effectively and efficiently.  The following objectives will 
be addressed: (i) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of education planning, 
management, resource allocation and utilization through human capacity development; 
and strengthen the linkages between the woreda, regional and federal levels; (ii) design 
and implement a transparent, low-cost and productive system of management and 
administration and (iii) strengthen the EMIS including improved collection and use of 
system data for planning, management, evaluation and policy making.  During the first 
phase of the GEQIP, this component will support capacity development for: (i) education 
sector planning and management (ii) school planning and management; and (iii) EMIS at 
all levels.  During the first year, the predominant activity will be a detailed analytical and 
Page  5
design work (MAP Capacity Development Design Study), followed by a more 
comprehensive implementation program from the second year.  
 
-Capacity Development for Education Sector Planning and Management.  A key priority 
for this subcomponent is to build capacity for regional and woreda level strategic 
planning and budget analysis, and to strengthen systems for resource allocation and 
transfer. This will include analysis of capital and recurrent expenditure needs, including 
salary and non-salary expenditures.  Gender budgeting in education has been identified as 
a
particular planning priority (and MOFED has developed training materials in 
collaboration with the MOE).  The MAP Capacity Development Design Study will be 
located under this priority program.  No other activity will be implemented in Year 1 
(though non-pooled DPs will continue such support); other programs will be developed 
and implemented starting in Year 2, based on the results of the analytical and review 
work.  
 
-Capacity Development for School Planning and Management.  The objective of this 
subcomponent is to contribute towards strengthening participatory school planning, 
management and monitoring for the purpose of greater effectiveness, efficiency and 
accountability in school performance, and improved teaching and learning.  An essential 
aspect of improving quality will be to improve performance through strengthening 
planning and management capacity at the point of service delivery, i.e. the school.  This 
sub-component has two major elements (i) School Improvement Program (SIP) training 
and (ii) the Leadership and Management Program (LAMP), which was started under 
TDP1.  This subcomponent will be closely coordinated with the School Improvement 
Program (SIP), including application of the specific planning and assessment tools to be 
developed under SIP.  Additional programs will be developed and implemented from the 
second year, dependent on findings from the MAP Capacity Development Design Study.  
 
Education Management Information Systems (EMIS).  This subcomponent will support 
MOE and REBs to (i) strengthen the existing education management information 
systems; and (ii) build the capacity for policy analysis and planning of the MOE in order 
to improve education provision. Under the program, the MOE plans to strengthen the 
existing system through a combination of: (i) capacity development for policy analysis 
and planning, and (ii) renewal, renovation, repair and ongoing maintenance of IT 
infrastructure at the federal, regional and woreda levels and (iii) several enhancement 
initiatives that will make education information more accessible and relevant.  
 
Component 5: Program Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated base 
cost: US$11.0 million)  
 
Effective implementation of the GEQIP will be depend on efficient coordination 
mechanisms; proper financial management and procurement practices and the timely 
implementation and effective monitoring of project outcomes.  This component will 
provide the necessary resources for effective coordination and monitoring and evaluation, 
and the implementation of an information and communications strategy at the national 
and regional levels.  This component has two main subcomponents.  
Page  6
-Program Coordination.  The GEQIP will be implemented at the federal, regional and 
woreda levels, and coordinated by the MOE in close coordination with the regional and 
woreda  
 
governments.  At the federal, the Planning and Policy Analysis Department will 
coordinate the implementation of the GEQIP, reporting directly to the State Minister for 
General Education, with inputs from relevant departments and institutions.  The technical 
support for the implementation of the program includes a team of short and long-term 
consultants, specializing in project implementation (including project management, 
financial management and procurement), resident in MOE, and providing regular support 
to regions.  MOE and MOFED will play a key role with procurement and financial 
management processes, respectively.  At the regional level, it was agreed that each region 
will have a similar institutional arrangement as the federal level, and the Planning 
Department will coordinate the implementation of the GEQIP, reporting directly to the 
Head of the Regional Bureau o
f
•
Education. Funds would flow from MOFED to 
BOFED to WOFED as directed andthen directly to the implementing institutions (i.e., 
teachers colleges, schools) while keeping the REBs informed about the transactions.  
 
-Monitoring and Evaluation.  This subcomponent would support the establishment of a 
robust M&E system at the federal, regional and woreda levels to monitor and evaluate 
project outcomes and broader educational trends to provide feedback to improve 
performance. The MOE will continue to update data to facilitate accurate reporting on the 
key progress indicators identified in the Results Framework.Most of the data for 
monitoring project outcomes will come from existing mechanisms such as EMIS, or 
regular project reports, supplemented by project preparatory studies and a baseline survey 
undertaken prior to effectiveness.  Three surveys are planned as part of the M&E 
strategy: (i) baseline survey at the beginning of Year 1, (ii) School Grants Utilization 
Survey at the end of Years 1 and 3; and (iii) exit survey in the middle of Year 3 to assess 
impact of Phase 1 and to plan for Phase 2.  In addition, various policy and evaluation 
studies will be financed to address key issues (e.g., quality, financing, teacher 
effectiveness and utilization); annual reviews and impact  
 
assessments, in coordination with the program coordination team and under the 
supervision of the MOE Planning and Policy Analysis Department.  The M&E sub-
component would oversee the development and implementation of a gender and equity 
needs assessment that covers all of the GEQIP components during Year 1.  Efforts will be 
made to connect education review processes with PBS review processes, including the 
JBARs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be national in scope, covering all regions and woredas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not include land acquisition, construction, or any activities that could 
have a potential environmental or social impact.  Resources will be used in existing 
institutions, schools and administrative offices and will be allocated on the basis of equity 
and implementation capacity and performance.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
As this project is Environmental Category "C", no safeguard related studies are required.  
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Halil Dundar 
11/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
11/20/2008 
Comments:  No SPG Specialist required as there is no land acquisition, construction or potential 
environmental or social impact as a result of the project. 
