Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2974 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P101474 
Project Name: Urban Local Govt Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Rumana Huque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 11, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
39.60
39.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will support the development of the capability and mechanisms for 
Ethiopian urban governments to gradually move to financing medium/long-term capital 
investments through medium/long-term loans secured from local capital finance markets.  
 
The development objective of the project will be to increase basic service delivery in urban 
local government administrations through the sustainable mobilization of resources.  
 
Key inputs to the achievement of this objective will be an increased number of creditworthy 
municipalities that are able to access financing from the domestic financial sector.  The objective 
will be achieved by providing incentives for creditworthy cities to obtain medium-term funds 
from local commercial banks by offering a "matching" longer term IDA-supported grant.  
Recognizing that a number of cities have already received substantial technical assistance and 
have undertaken critical reforms, but are not quite creditworthy, the project will also seek to 
support these "near-creditworthy" cities to become creditworthy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The key feature of the project will be a matching grant fund that will be available to qualifying, 
creditworthy municipalities that secure partial loan financing (from domestic sources) for 
municipal infrastructure investments.  The exact modalities of the matching grants will be 
defined during preparation. Clear design principles include the following: i) the project will not 
support establishment of free standing revolving loan funds or other special purpose vehicles that 
would distort the development of a sustainable municipal finance market and/or incur contingent 
liabilities for GOE; and ii) no federal or regional government guarantees will be issued.  Eligible 
investments will include all legally mandated municipal infrastructure responsibilities, including 
informal settlement upgrading, local roads, water, sanitation, solid waste management, markets, 
terminals, etc.  
 
For cities that may be identified as "near-creditworthy", the possibility of designing an 
incentive structure for them to become creditworthy, without distorting their inclination to seek 
additional funding from domestic finance markets, will be explored.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will initially target about 25 of the largest urban local government administrations in 
Ethiopia, that are creditworthy or near-creditworthy.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will provide a matching grant to urban administrations.  It is expected that the grants 
will be used to increase the delivery of basic municipal services, but it will not be known, a 
priori, which specific investments each city will undertake.  The project will therefore use an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework.  
 
The proposed implementing agency for this project is the Ministry of Works and Urban 
Development (MWUD).  Management and implementation of actual investments will be done by 
the urban administrations in each region.  MWUD is already familiar with an ESMF under an 
on-going project (CBDSD) and it is expected that the 17 cities that have participated in CBDSD 
are also familiar with the ESMF.  However, as some doubts have been raised regarding capacity 
to implement ESMFs in the regions in Ethiopia, the Bank will expect specific, dated targets for 
ESMF implementation to be met as conditionalities in the project documents.  The respective 
responsibilities for ESMF/RPF implementation and checking compliance between MWUD, 
regional authorities and the cities will need to be clearly articulated in the Project 
Implementation Manual.  In addition, capacities of the respective institutions to fulfill their 
responsibilities with regard to safeguards will be assessed, and mitigative measures designed 
during preparation.  
 
Recently, for the preparation of the Local Investment Grant (LIG), a review of existing ESMFs 
and GOE safeguard products was carried out, and an ESMF and Resettlement Action Framework 
prepared which would be common to woredas and municipalities for multisectoral projects.  This 
includes the preparation of user-friendly safeguard guidelines and checklists. The possibility of 
using these same documents for this project will be explored, in an effort to harmonize safeguard 
implementation and compliance at the local government level.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Ms Carolyn Winter (AFTCS) 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The grants under this project are expected to finance investments that will focus on 
increasing the delivery of basic municipal services and will result in improved living conditions.  
The investments under the project will be determined by local level priorities which will differ 
from one urban administration to another, and they are expected to be varied sectorally.  Since 
use of the grant funding will be determined at a later stage, the exact location and potential 
impacts of the investments will not be known prior to appraisal. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the Borrower. The ESMF will outline an 
environmental and social screening process for the identification, assessment, and mitigation of 
potential adverse environmental and social impacts of future investments.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
In view of complaints about inadvertent or deliberate bulldozing of historic buildings in 
Addis Ababa to make room for urban development projects in recent years, and in view of the 
Bank's forthcoming Ethiopia tourism project, in which cultural tourism in Addis Ababa and in 
secondary urban centres is a focus, the applicability of this safeguard policy will be assessed 
during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The use of the grant funds will be demand driven and investments identified during 
implementation.  Therefore, the exact location and potential impacts will not be known prior to 
appraisal.  The Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which will be 
applied for any investments.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF will be drafted for review and disclosure prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rumana Huque 
03/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Matthew D. Glasser 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
