Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3550 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P107139 
Project Name: Sustainable Land Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Herbert Acquay 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P090789 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Climate change (S);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.79 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
8.79 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Sustainable Land Management Project are to: (a) facilitate 
investment in sustainable land management through strengthened land tenure security (b) 
increase and sustain agricultural productivity through improved integrated land and water 
management practices; and (c) protect or restore ecosystem functions in agricultural landscapes.  
 
These objectives would be achieved through operationally-oriented knowledge generation, 
management, and dissemination of innovations in sustainable land management.  The project 
would be implemented through a cooperative arrangement involving an applied research 
institution (to be selected), Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD), and the 
Environmental Protection Authority (EPA).  
 
The indicative cost for this five-year investment project (SIL) is a $15-20 million.  It would be 
financed with $10 million grant from the GEF and co-financing from the government and other 
Page  2
development partners, preferably through pooled funds aligned wit the government's financial 
system.  
 
Expected Outcomes: The expected outcomes of the project are: (a) improved security of tenure 
for land holders; (b) integration of sustainable land and water management practices into 
agriculture and other land uses in local, regional, and federal government planning frameworks; 
(c) sustained increases in agricultural productivity; and (d) restoration and/or protection of 
ecosystem functions in agricultural landscapes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following five initial project components are proposed based on dialogue with the 
Government and potential donor partners.  The final design and components would be guided by 
past and on-going analytical work by the Bank and others; lessons from past and on-going land 
management projects; and a number of studies will be undertaken as part of project preparation.  
 
Project Component 1: Support to integrated development planning  
 
The objective of this component is to enhance existing Woreda planning frameworks to ensure 
integration and linkages between sustainable land management/watershed management activities 
and other enabling and/or supporting development activities such as development of alternative 
energy and improved market access because of their direct or indirect impacts on the integrity of 
land.  
 
Where more than one Woreda are found in a selected micro-watershed, their development 
planning processes would be coordinated to ensure consistency in the implementation of SLM 
activities.  
 
The program would identify the entities that would be responsible for the implementation of 
this component and describe current roles and responsibilities, current capacity; capacity 
enhancements required training or other capacity enhancement details, follow-on activities, and 
implementation and impact monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Project Component 2: Strengthening the enabling environment  
 
Investment in sustainable land management requires a supportive policy environment, 
especially secure land tenure.  There is considerable evidence that land tenure insecurity has 
slowed down investment in sustainable land management practices in Ethiopia. Therefore, the 
overall objective of this component addresses structural constraints in the enabling environment, 
which limit adoption and scaling-up of SLM best practices. It comprises three sub-components - 
strengthening land tenure security, strengthening institutional networks, and creating a 
clearinghouse for best management practices in sustainable land management.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening land tenure security  
 
The objective of this component to strengthen the capacity of regional and woreda government 
in land use planning, land certification, and land administration to provide long-term tenure 
Page  3
security to land holders.  The design team will assess the on-going land certification programs in 
the participating regions and woredas and develop interventions to enhance the cadastral system 
and conflict resolution mechanisms.  The design would build on existing pilots such as the 
SIDA-financed project in Amhara Region, which focused, among other things, on cadastral 
registration, with physical measurement, location, and fixing of boundaries of plots.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening institutional networks  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to develop formal institutional linkages to assist farmers 
and other intended beneficiaries of this program to access important information, technical 
assistance, services, etc. that can directly or indirectly facilitate the adoption and replication of 
sustainable land management practices.  The indirect support may include assistance beyond the 
scope of this program such as access to credit, markets, price information, and efficient energy 
sources.  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Creating a clearinghouse for best practices in SLM  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to provide financial and technical support for 
knowledge management.  It would focus specifically on systematically synthesizing knowledge 
on demonstrated good practices and technologies, including indigenous knowledge on land and 
water management from Ethiopia and other countries, and make them available in a user-friendly 
form (e.g. manuals, websites, searchable databases, etc) to planners, Development Agents, and 
farmers.  
 
Project Component 3: Establishment of mechanisms to scale-up of best practice  
 
This component is aimed at developing mechanisms/protocols for local community groups, in 
partnership with regional government research institutions (through cooperative research 
agreements) at selected micro-watersheds.  The planning unit for the SLM program is the micro-
watershed.  In situations where more than one woreda are found in a selected micro-watershed, 
the woredas will undertake joint micro-watershed planning and management.  
 
In each of the watersheds, systematic and rigorous evaluation, under local ecological, 
economic, and social conditions and constraints, of a menu of recommended best management 
practices and technologies from the clearinghouse and other sources will take place to support 
subsequent widespread adoption.  
 
This objective would be achieved through the following specific interventions: (a) 
establishment of participatory watershed planning and management.  
 
In each of the watersheds, systematic and rigorous evaluation, under local ecological, 
economic, and social conditions and constraints, of a menu of recommended best management 
practices and technologies from the clearinghouse and other sources will take place to support 
subsequent widespread adoption.  
 
Page  4
This objective would be achieved through the following specific interventions: (a) 
establishment of participatory watershed planning and management regime; (b) mechanisms for 
adaptation and evaluation of best management practices; (c) outreach programs to raise 
awareness and facilitate replication of best practices; and (d) development of sustainable 
livelihood options.  
 
The focus of the best practices and technologies would include, where applicable, those aimed 
at increasing agricultural productivity, reduction of soil erosion in vertisols and acid soils, which 
are widespread in Ethiopia, and sustainable livelihood development.  
 
It will not be the role of the project/program preparation team to design in detail every aspect of 
interventions in each of the demonstration areas.  Its role is to develop process or methodology 
by which community based project designs can be approached in each of these areas while, at the 
same time, allowing for the adaptive research proposed.  The final design will be undertaken by 
the communities involved, supported by the implementing institutions.  
 
Project Component 4: Land monitoring system  
 
This component would focus on integrating various existing GIS and other data systems into a 
more coordinated system to produce reports to guide policy makers, resource managers, local 
communities, and other decision makers.  Information from such a system could also be used for 
regional/national environmental monitoring and reporting to monitor land use and land use 
changes, identify ecological hot spots, etc.  
 
Project Component 5: Program coordination and management  
 
This component would focus on providing the organizational framework to support 
coordination and implementation of the sustainable land management programs, including for 
results-based monitoring and evaluating.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The intent is to select specific micro-watersheds in all nine regions of the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
TBD but generally weak.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTQK) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
No negative impacts on indigenous peoples are expected.  A social assessment is planned 
which would ascertain this.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project/program is expected to increase agricultural productivity and sustainability in the 
selected micro-watersheds and thus is not expected to contribute in any way to resettlement 
pressures.  A social assessment is planned to verify this   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
If studies are needed, these will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
10/05/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/05/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Berhane Manna 
10/05/2006 
Comments:  Berhane, as acting SM, please sign the attached ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
