                                                                                                                                                                                                       43993


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 11/21/2007                                      Report No.: AC3120
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Ethiopia                               Project ID: P106559
                                                                                                            Project Name: Protection of Basic Services - Additional Financing
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Trina S. Haque
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2007 Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: AFTH3                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                            Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: General education sector (50%);Health (20%);General water, sanitation and
                                                                                                            flood protection sector (10%);Agricultural extension and research (10%);General public
                                    Disclosure                                                              administration sector (10%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Public expenditure,

                                              Public                                                        financial management and procurement (S);Other communicable diseases (S);Social risk
                                                                                                            mitigation (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):            215.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              1,159.23
                                                                                                                    African Development Bank                                           55.00
                                                                                                                    CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)20.86
                                                              Disclosure                                            UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 136.99
                                                                                                                    EC: European Commission                                           196.04
                                                                        Public                                      GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW)                                14.00
                                                                                                                    NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 7.00
                                                                                                                                                                                    1,589.12
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                           Simple []             Repeater [X]
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                                              Authorized
                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The objective of the project, which would remain unchanged, is to protect the delivery of
                                                                                                            basic services by sub-national governments while promoting and deepening transparency
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            and accountability in service delivery. The proposed additional financing of US$215
                                                                                                            million would address the financing gap largely associated with the completion of core
                                                                                                  Public    activities under Component 1 - Promoting the Delivery of Basic Services by Sub-
                                                                                                            national governments, and Component 2 - Promoting the Health Millennium
                                                                                                            Development Goals, of the Project. In order to enhance the impact and development
                                                                                                            effectiveness of the project, additional financing is also sought to scale up Project

activities through the implementation of a new and complementary activity related to the
delivery of basic services, termed the Pilot Local Investment Grant (LIG). While the
existing Component 1 reimburses Government for recurrent costs related to basic service
delivery by regional and local (woredas) governments, the LIG would finance a pilot
effort to increase both the quality and quantity of capital investments by local
governments.

3. Project Description
The existing project components would be retained, with a new activity, termed the Pilot
Local Investment Grant added as Sub-Component 1(b). The Additional Financing would
support Components 1, 2 and 3 as described below. The implementation of core activities
under Component 4 on Social Accountability of the PBS Project will continue to be
supported via a Multi-Donor Trust Fund administered by the World Bank.

 Component 1: Basic-Services Program, will comprise two sub-components:

 Subcomponent 1(a): Promoting the Delivery of Basic Services by Sub-national
governments, Subprogram A. (ADB: US$55.00 million equivalent; DFID: US$123.99
million equivalent; EC: US$186.54 million equivalent; GoE: US$1,159.23 million
equivalent; KfW: US$14.00 million equivalent; and IDA: US$165.00 million equivalent),
will continue to support the delivery of basic services (in health, education, agriculture
and natural resources, including water) provided by regional and local governments.
Additional resources would be provided to regions and local authorities (rural and urban)
via the Federal block grant transfer system based on agreed plans for delivery of basic
services to help address resource requirements for sub-national delivery of basic services
for the period EFY 2000 (IDA FY08) through the second quarter of EFY01 (IDA FY09).

 Subcomponent 1(b): Pilot Local Investment Grant (LIG), Subprogram D. (IDA:
US$20.00 million equivalent) would support the scaling-up of the Program's impact
onlocal service delivery. This new subcomponent would support the introduction, on a
pilot basis, of a Federal Specific Purpose Grant (SPG) to regions to be used exclusively
for capital investment implemented by local governments in support of the delivery of
basic services. The definition of basic services will be consistent with the definition
currently used under PBS. It will include investments in health, education, agriculture,
water, and additionally roads (which was not included under PBS due to the high capital
content of spending in this sector).

 The objective of the Pilot LIG would be to better understand the constraints to more and
better capital spending at the local level and to support the development of mechanisms
and policies to address these constraints. In the process, the Pilot LIG will test a number
of new national systems in selected woredas, particularly related to local-level
participatory planning and budgeting, to determine how effective these are in increasing
the quality of investment in the context of significant increases in the funding available
for capital expenditure. This learning exercise will also focus on assessing the
effectiveness of capacity building exercises designed for the purpose of improving local
level capital investment.

 The proposed additional financing of US$20 million would be transferred to regions
according the existing Block Grant Formula (as is currently the case under
Subcomponent 1(a). Regions eligible to participate in the pilot program will be those that
have implemented the national accounting and procurement reforms under the
Government's Expenditure Management and Control Program as of the start of EFY
2000. These reforms are deemed importance for effective fiduciary control of the
program at local and regional level. The regions would then provide funds to
approximately 50 local governments, over an initial period covering one fiscal year.
Local Governments would be selected for the pilot to represent the diversity of conditions
found in Ethiopia, maximizing the opportunity for learning from the pilot. The funds
transferred to local Governments would allow them to significantly increase their level of
capital spending. The results of the pilot, to be monitored through complimentary
activities under Component 3, will be used to develop a National LIG Program, as part of
the SIL that will follow PBS. It is envisaged that the National LIG Program will be a
performance-based SPG, with access criteria being established in areas relevant for
improving the quality of capital investment at the local-level. The pilot LIG will be used
to determine the appropriate access criteria and to effectively calibrate them.

 For this new Subcomponent, additional institutional arrangements and implementation
procedures have been designed and will be available in an Operational Manual. The SPG
is a standard fiscal instrument in Ethiopia so the funds will flow through regular fiscal
channels managed by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and will be
monitored through existing systems established to report on public spending. The
reporting already required for PBS will be augmented in order to track capital spending at
the local level.

 Component 2: Promoting the Health Millennium Development Goals, Subprogram B.
(CIDA: US$20.86 million equivalent; DFID: US$10.00 million equivalent; EC: US$6.80
million equivalent; IDA: US$29.00 million equivalent; and the Netherlands: US$7.00
million equivalent) will continue the thrust of the PBS Project towards accelerating and
sustaining malaria control, reducing infant mortality through vaccines, improving the
delivery of primary health services, strengthening of family planning, as well as capacity
building and strengthening the health system.

 Component 3: Strengthening Governance Systems on Financial Transparency and
Accountability, Subprogram C. (DFID: US$3.00 million equivalent; EC: US$2.70
million equivalent; and IDA: US$1.00 million equivalent) will continue to support
activities at the Region/City Administrations, woredas and sub-woreda levels to enhance
transparency around public budget procedures (budget preparation, expenditure and
audits); and foster broad engagement, strengthened "voice" and client power of citizen
representative groups and citizens more broadly on public budget processes and public
service delivery. This component will also continue to support various institutional
capacity building/training activities, including M&E-related activities, a three-pronged
investment process review, and an assessment of the technical quality of infrastructure
for the new Pilot LIG Subcomponent.

 Component 4: Social Accountability. This component supports capacity building for,
and the piloting of, selected approaches to strengthen voice of citizens and civil society
organizations in the context of decentralized service delivery, and to also build the
capacity of citizens to engage in public budgeting processes. This component is financed
by a Multi-Donor Trust Fund administered by the World Bank and implemented using a
non-government Management entity.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented throughout the country by local government authorities
in collaboration with respective sector specialists operating at the local and regional
levels. For the Pilot LIG Subcomponent, it is expected that approximately 50 woredas in
five regions will be selected. The exact number of woredas will be determined by the
woredas selection process.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Kenneth M. Green (AFTH3)
   Mr Gebreselassie Okubagzhi (AFTH3)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
For Component 1: The new Pilot LIG Sub-component 1(b) would support construction of
small-scale civil works through the multi-sector specific purpose grant (SPG) from the
Federal Government. These works would be identified and managed by woreda and are
expected to be similar in scale and scope to those implemented in a number of other Bank
projects in Ethiopia. A PHRD funded consultancy identified possible environmental and
social safeguard requirements for these public work subprojects. An Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
have been completed and disclosed. The safeguard procedures will be inputs to the
Project Implementation Plan and will include a set of innovative Technical Design

Guidelines for about twenty types of investments. These Guidelines will serve as a
common practical tool at the local government level to improve technical implementation
of the eligible public works inclusive of environmental and social considerations. The
Ministry of Health has a standard health center and health post designs with the essential
structure and facilities to allow proper handling of wastes and avoid environmental
contamination.

 The ESMF and RPF described above are new. The parent project did not have an
ESMF/EA or a RPF. The Project only had a health care waste management plan which
was disclosed in the Info Shop as the EA. The original project did not have any
involuntary resettlement issues, however, the LIG subcomponent does trigger the
safeguard policy on involuntary resettlement, for which the Resettlement Policy
Framework has been completed.

 For Component 2: Promoting the Health Millennium Development Goals. Project
implementation will involve medical waste and use of insecticides which raise safeguard
issues. The physical design of health centers and health posts have provisions for proper
disposal of liquid and solid waste in addition to small incinerators for burning
contaminated materials used by health centers. Insecticides are used indoor and the
potential for contaminating the outside environment is limited in scope. The malaria
control program has developed four guidelines namely a) Guidelines for Malaria Vector
Control in Ethiopia; b) Guidelines for Indoor Residual Insecticide Spraying; c) Storage
and Responsible Handling of Insecticides for Malaria Vector Control; and d) IRS training
manual. These vector management guidelines have been distributed and are in use since
2002-2006 and the malaria control supervisors in each spray site has the responsibility to
ensure adherence to the guidelines and supervisors from regional malaria control offices
regularly check on the proper implementation of the guidelines. The guidelines have been
updated to capture the recent developments. No significant negative impact is anticipated
as long as agreed safeguard measures are implemented.

 The Guidelines for Malaria Vector Control (March 2002) and Guidelines for Indoor
Residual Insecticide Spraying (April 2007) have been disclosed.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long-term impacts are anticipated as long as the provisions for minimizing impacts
are implemented as designed and the provisions of the guidelines are fully adhered to.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The focus on local decentralized service delivery has been recognized with subsequent
challenges in improving capacity for planning, construction and supervision at this local
level. Through synergy with several other Bank projects, the team has identified national
level capacity building needs for woreda and local planning through appropriate
institutions and these will be solidified over the next year. Regular supervision to ensure
adherence to the safeguard guidelines help minimize the possible adverse impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the new Pilot LIG Subcomponent 1(b):

 Main environmental and social impacts of the Pilot LIG. The main environmental and
social impacts associated with the project will result form the construction and/or
rehabilitation of small-scale investments in the transport, waste, health, education, and
irrigation sectors. Impact and mitigation checklists are provided in the ESMF as a
reference guide for identifying and managing these impacts.

 Subproject preparation, screening, review and appraisal process. The LIG Operational
manual of which the ESMF is a part outlines the screening procedures, reporting systems,
and responsibilities to be adopted by the MoFED during LIG implementation. The tools
and mechanisms provided include: (i) steps to be taken for screening subprojects; (ii)
terms of reference for an annual environmental and social audit of the LIG; (iii)
Technical Design Guidelines on the environmental and social impact of potential sub-
projects; (iv) compliance mechanisms; and (v) descriptions of roles, accompanied by
terms of reference.

 Mitigation plans. As part of the assessment process, the Technical Design Guidelines
have been prepared for over two dozen subproject types. These will assist local planners,
officials and contractors to implement appropriate mitigation measures for small-scale
works. If identified as a requirement for small-scale works through the screening process,
a Resettlement Action Plan will also be prepared.

 Legislative framework. The key environmental policies exist which provide the
overarching framework for environmental management include: the Constitution of
Ethiopia, the Environmental Policy of Ethiopia, and the National Conservation Strategy.
A number of proclamations and supporting regulations are also applicable: Proclamation
No.295/2002 for the establishment of Environmental Protection Organs; Proclamation
No.299/2002 for Environmental Impact Assessment; Proclamation No.300/2002 for
Environmental Pollution Control; and Proclamation No. 455/2005 on expropriation and
compensation.

 For Component 2:

 Measures adopted as part of the PBS Project will continue to be implemented. The
original Amharic version of the Government's Guidelines on the Handling and Disposal
of Waste in Health Facilities (September 1997) has been distributed widely to health
facilities providing such services, while an English translation has been disclosed in the
World Bank's Infoshop (February 2006). The Government has also prepared and adopted
the following guidelines: (i) Injection Safety Guidelines to reduce infections through
contaminated needles; (ii) Vector Management Plan, in response to the significant scaling
up of IRS activities addressed in the ongoing PBS project as well as a prerequisite to
insecticide procurement; and (iii) Guidelines for Malaria Vector Control. Regular training

on IRS is provided to ensure proper implementation of the guidelines to staff and
supervisors. In addition, as part of their mandates the Drug Administration and Control
Authority and the Environmental Protection Agency supervise the management of
chemicals and environmental contaminations, respectively.

 The health facility construction designs include provisions for proper handling of liquid
and solid wastes generated by health units and small burning facilities are installed for
taking care of contaminated and hazardous materials. Health facilities are provided with
autoclaves to sterilize medical instruments and other materials. Environmental sanitation
experts recruited for health centers have the responsibility for supervising the
implementation of safety policies by health facilities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Local governments and communities are the major stakeholders. The civil works funded
under the LIG subcomponent are vetted through the local government planning process
that engages in direct community participation for identifying potential projects. Local
woreda authorities, through sector specialists scope the potential projects and include
them in annual workplan requests. Disclosure of the ESMF and RPF will be in country,
via notices in the media regarding the availability of these documents at the country
Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/20/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/17/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/29/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/20/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/17/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/29/2007
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/20/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/17/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/29/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
-For Component 2, Safeguard Policy OP4.09 on Pest Management is triggered with the
use of indoor residual spraying (IRS). While insecticides are used indoor, the potential
for contaminating the outside environment is limited in scope. The Ministry of Health has
developed Guidelines for Malaria Vector Control (March 2002) and Guidelines for
Indoor Residual Insecticide Spraying (April 2007). These Guidelines, which have been
updated to capture recent developments, address the requirements of Safeguard Policy
OP4.09. These Guidelines have been distributed in-country and disclosed in the World
Bank Info Shop in August 2007.

 -For Component 2, the English translation of the Government?s Guideline on Handling
and Disposal of Waste in Health Facilities was disclosed in the World Bank Info Shop on
February 2006.



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      No
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?

  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                  Ms Trina S. Haque                           11/21/2007
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Kenneth M. Green                         11/21/2007
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                    Ms Laura Frigenti                           11/21/2007
 Comments:

