Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/12/2009 
Report No.:  AC4070
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P106872 
Project Name:  ET-Road Sector Dev. Stage IV Proj (APL4) in Support of Govt.'s RSDP 
Program 
Task Team Leader:  Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (96%);Central government administration (4%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
245.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
66.11
66.11 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of APL4 are in line with the preceding stages:  to assist the Government in 
(i) strengthening and increasing its road transport infrastructure and its reliability; and (ii) 
strengthening the institutional efficiency in road sector management. These objectives 
should lead to improved road conditions by strengthening the existing road pavement 
structures, expanding road access to regional rural areas, and improved maintenance 
works so as to enhance the efficiency of the existing main road network.   
 
3. Project Description 
As the basis for the Road Sector Development Program, the Government of Ethiopia and 
the Ethiopia Roads Authority (ERA) carried out a road network needs study that led to 
the development of a coherent network-based approach to federal road planning and 
management in the country. The proposed project has the following components:  
 
Component 1: Upgrading of Federal Link Roads: This comprises upgrading of three link 
roads from an existing gravel/earth surface to asphalt surface. These are: (i) Upgrading of 
Page  2
the Mekenajo-DembiDolo Link Road (181 km asphalt); (ii) Upgrading of the Welkite-
Hosaina Link Road (121 km asphalt); (iii) Upgrading of the Ankober-AwashArba Link 
Road (89 km DBST); and (iv) Construction supervision of these three roads.  
 
Component 2:ERA Modernization/Sector Capacity Building: Based on the lessons 
learned, various institutional strengthening/ reform and capacity building activities will 
be provided comprising (i) a preparatory study toward establishing a Highway 
Engineering Research Center; and (ii) Technical advisory services to prepare and conduct 
Harmonized "Comprehensive Capacity Building.  
 
Component 3: Network Management Studies: Based on lessons learned, various studies 
will be conducted comprising (i) Maintenance needs assessment and updating of the road 
financing study; (ii) Transport and poverty observatories; and (iii) Preparatory studies for 
the next phase of the Road Sector Development Program and the Universal Rural Access 
Roads Program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The roads are located in the (i) Amhara and Afar Regions (Ankober-AwashArba Road); 
(ii) Southern Nations Nationalities and People's Region (Wolkite-Hosaina Road); and 
(iii) Oromia Regional State (Mekenajo-Dembiodolo Road). These are existing roads 
which will be upgraded, and new alignments will be constructed to connect additional 
towns to the transport system as requested by the respective communities. Environmental 
contract clauses and bio-engineering measures will mitigate, for example, potential 
adverse environmental impacts such as soil erosion, water, soil and air pollution due to 
construction activities, the establishment of quarries, borrow pits, camps, and access 
roads. Furthermore, the design for the Ankober-AwashArba Road will ensure that (i) 
appropriate measures are taken to protect the Ankober Serin and the Yellow Throated 
Serin; and (ii) rivers are not mined for sand and gravel. Since no environmental and 
cultural heritage studies have been carried out for the other two roads, precautionary 
measures will be applied through environmental contract clauses and appropriate training 
on how to deal with chance finds and wildlife will be carried out under ERA's 
supervision.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main safeguard issues under APL 4 are adverse environmental and social impacts 
such as soil erosion, water and soil pollution, loss of livelihoods, and potential adverse 
impacts on the Ankober Serin and the Yellow Throated Serin if appropriate protective 
measures are not implemented during construction. In addition, potential mining of rivers 
for sand and gravel could have negative impacts on the ancient conglomerate sediments 
associated with ancient channel systems and early hominoids.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given that the EIA reports make extensive recommendations for the mitigation and 
monitoring of potential adverse environmental and social impacts along the three roads, 
there will be no potential indirect and/or long-term impacts arising from the planned 
upgrading activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the course of public consultations the communities requested that the existing roads be 
upgraded and additional towns be connected to the transport system to improve their 
access to markets and social facilities.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared (a) three EIA reports (one for each road) to determine the 
potential adverse environmental and social impacts and how best to mitigate and monitor 
these impacts; and (b) three Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to ensure that potential 
adverse social impacts due to land acquisition are mitigated prior to the commencement 
of civil works.  
 
Page  4
Experience gained under previous APLs has shown that there is a need to include 
qualified environmental and social specialists in the design team. Through these 
specialists ERA would be able to incorporate environmental and social issues at the 
design stage of each road, taking into account the recommendations of the relevant EIA 
reports as well as its experience on the ground. Towards this end, ERA will revise the 
current terms of reference for the design consultants requesting them to include qualified 
environmetnal and social specialists on the design team. This measure will strengthen 
ERA's ability to focus more on environmental monitoring in the field and the 
enforcement of environmental contract clauses and Environmental Management Plans 
(EMPs).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities living along the three roads, ERA, local 
administrations, contractors, design and supervision consultants, Regional Environmental 
Protection Authorities, and regional representatives of the Authority for Research 
Conservation and Cultural Heritage. The afore-mentioned stakeholders have been 
consulted during the preparation of the EIA reports and their recommendations were 
incorporated. The initial draft EIA reports and draft RAPs were disclosed in Ethiopia in 
publicly accessible places and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal. The revised final 
EIA reports and revised final RAPs will be disclosed  in Ethiopia in publicly accessible 
places and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to negotiations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/04/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  6
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
03/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
03/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
03/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
03/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
