Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3437
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P101474 
Project Name:  Urban Local Govt Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Rumana Huque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
39.60
39.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support improved performance in the planning, 
delivery and sustained provision of priority municipal services and infrastructure by 
urban local governments, thereby contributing to achieving the objectives of the 
government’s Urban Development and UrbanGood Governance Programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
Through this project, grants will be provided to eligible urban local governments (ULGs) 
to promote positive change in their overall institutional/organizational performance. The 
grants will be provided based on access and performance criteria which are designed to: 
(i) provide incentives for urban local governments and regions to complete the 
implementation of the proposed reforms under the Urban Good Governance Program, 
which are needed for sustainable urban services and growth; and (ii) enable ULGs, as a 
result of enhanced performance, to more effectively address urban infrastructure backlogs 
which have received little attention in the past.  
 
The access criteria are aimed to provide assurances that: (a) funds will be managed 
adequately; and (b) investments undertaken by the cities respond to the priorities of 
citizens, can be implemented, and can be operated and maintained adequately (an Asset 
Page  2
Management Planning Framework is currently being implemented in the ULGs through 
the Ministry’s Urban Good Governance Program which will assistin determining these 
factors).  Funding envelopes for cities will be determined based on a transparent formula, 
and cities can access this envelope once they meet the access criteria.  However, cities’ 
performance in the use of the funds and in the implementation of the reforms being 
promoted through the Urban Good Governance Program will be continually assessed.  To 
encourage good performers, and to ensure that funds are not “locked” by poor 
performers, reallocations will be carried out periodically.  The criteria for assessing 
performance will be based on measures related to: (a) fund utilization; (b) financial 
performance; (c) procurement and safeguards compliance; and (d) performance on 
participation and accountability.  
 
As part of the access criteria, ULGs will prepare a 3-year rolling capital investment 
plan.  The capital investment plans are expected to contain the full range of services and 
infrastructure for which ULGs are legally responsible, including rehabilitation and new 
investments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will operate in 19 of the larger urban centers in Ethiopia.  The specific 
locations of any sub-projects that will form part of the capital investment plans will not 
be known a priori.  As a result, the project has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework, which also captures the potential impact on any Physical 
Cultural Resources, and a Resettlement Policy Framework.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will provide performance grants which will constitute the vast majority of the 
project funds and will be disbursed as per the access and performance criteria.  Given that 
the specific locations of individual investments willnot be known a priori, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) have been prepared to address the potential negative environmental 
and social impacts.  Anticipated ULG investments include roads, integrated infrastructure 
and land services, sanitation, solid waste management, water supply, and urban drainage 
in the 19 participating local governments.  
 
The potential direct environmental impacts associated with the investments include: 
damage/destruction to cultural heritage, soil erosion, exploitation of natural resources, 
and depletion and pollution of surface and ground water resources. Potential social 
impacts include:  road safety, disposal of medical waste, increased prevalence of water-
borne diseases, communicable diseases, vector-borne diseases and land acquisition 
resulting in resettlement and/or compensation.  The cumulative impacts of the 
investments will also be addressed through mitigation, careful planning based on 
location, size, and material requirements.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an ESMF and RPF to address the negative environmental and 
social impacts.  The MWUD will assign specific responsibility for the day-to day 
management of the Ministry’s responsibilities to the Urban Development Capacity 
Building Office (UDCBO).  UDCBO will serve as the coordinating body across federal, 
regional, and local agencies.  UDCBO will hire an environmental and social specialist 
whose responsibility will include supervising the overall implementation of the ESMF, 
providing support to those agencies who have a role to play such as the Environmental 
Council, the Ethiopian Environmental Protection Agency, BWUDs/Regional Urban 
Planning Institutes and ULGs.  
 
Furthermore, the Borrower will carry out ESMF and RPF training in a phased approach 
targeted at various audiences.  Training and sensitization will be undertaken for the 
following groups:  
Page  4
a) BWUDs, Regional Environmental Bureaus, and other key desk officers (water, roads, 
health, education, etc.);  
 
b)
ULG executives (Councilors, Mayor, and City Manager), Heads of Bureaus, 
professional staff in key line bureaus, environmental staff and Infrastructure Office staff.  
 
c) Line agencies at regional levels;  
 
d)
MWUD / UDCBO staff involved in ULGDP implementation   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In compliance with World Bank guidelines and in the EIA proclamation, before a ULG 
investment project is approved, the applicable documents (EIA, EMP, CRMP and/or 
RAP) will be made available for public review at a place accessible to local people (e.g. 
at a local government office like kebele council, ULG and regional bureaus, the EPA, 
etc), and in a form, manner, and language they can understand, prior to the start of any 
physical works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/13/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/14/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rumana Huque 
04/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
04/02/2008 
Comments:   
