Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4025 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P106872 
Project Name: ET-Road Sector Dev. Stage IV Proj (APL4) in Support of Govt.'s RSDP 
Program 
Task Team Leader: Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (96%);Central government administration (4%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
243.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
92.80
92.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Government of Ethiopia is currently implementing its second PRSP, named as “Plan for 
Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty” (PASDEP) set forthe period 2005/06 – 
2009/10. One of the eight pillars underpinning PASDEP is strengthening the infrastructure 
backbone of the country.  
 
Since 1997, in the context of PASDEP, the Government has concentrated on improving and 
extending the main road network under Road Sector Development Program (RSDP) to restore 
inadequate main and regional (classified) roads while developing plans for wereda level 
development. The current classified road length is 44,359km (which was 24,970km in 1997), yet 
Ethiopia remains among the countries with lowest road density in SSA.  
 
From 1997, the IDA, together with other donors, provided grants/credits to support the RSDP, 
and since June 2003 road sector APL has started in 3 overlapping stages bringing the total IDA 
support to RSDP to $1.1 billion. IDA’s participation has therefore been instrumental in the 
implementation of the long-term national program.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1 Upgrading and Construction of Federal Link Roads: This comprises (i) upgrading 
of two federal link roads with estimated length of 308 km from an existing gravel surface 
standard to asphalt surface standard (Mekanejo-D/Dollo: 181km; Wolkitea-Hosaana: 127km); 
(ii) construction of a new gravel link road to (Ankober-AwashArba Jct: 92km); and (iii) 
associated supervision of the civil works contracts.  Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) 
prepared from the EIAs, and which have been cleared with ERA’s Environmental Monitoring 
and Safety Branch (EMSB) and the Bank, will be executed by contractors under the civil works 
contracts with direct onsite oversight by supervision consultants and regular monitoring by 
EMSB.  Under Component 1, the project will continue supporting the social development 
initiatives launched under the previous APLs: i) HIV/AIDS prevention; ii) emergency health 
access with focus on reproductive health and fistula; and iii) road station development to 
facilitate safety in the trading of local produce along the roads. In addition, building on the 
analytical work pilot execution experience of the Ethiopia Rural Travel and Transport Project 
(RTTP), APL 4 will support small social infrastructure investments (culverts and footbridges) in 
communities in the road corridor to enhance access.  
 
Component 2 Institutional Strengthening/Capacity Building of ERA: This comprises (i) support 
to prepare and conduct Harmonized “Comprehensive Capacity Building”; (ii) preparatory study 
toward establishing Maintenance Engineering Research Center; (iii) support to Ginchi Training 
Center for road maintenance training, to strengthen the ongoing trainings; and (iv) preparatory 
study toward promoting small labor-based local contractors at the wereda level.  
 
Component 3 Network Management Studies: This comprises (i) update of road maintenance 
financing study; (ii) road safety study to follow up road safety management review to be 
conducted by GRSF toward preparation of cross-sectoral and comprehensive road safety action 
plan; (iii) preparatory study toward establishing a nationwide Road Traffic Census Program; and 
iv) transport and poverty observatories (TPOs) to assess the poverty impacts of the road 
investments. TPOs are panel surveys started that under APL2 and will be carried out for five 
years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
(i) 
Mekanejo-D/Dollo road (181km asphalt) connects weredas of West Wollega zone and 
zonal capital towns like Gimbi and Nekemte. This section is a continuation of Gedo-Nekempt-
Mekenajo road rehabilitated under APL1 and APL3 which leads to Gambella region.  
 
(ii) 
Welkite-Hosaina road (127km asphalt) connects agricultural hinterlands of the SNNP 
region. This road links the Addis-Jimma road with Addis-Sodo-AlabaMinchi road to 
accommodate agricultural traffic. A part of his road (67km) received heavy maintenance works 
(2002/04) under IDA Emergency Rehabilitation Project.  
 
(iii) 
Ankober-AwashArba road (92km gravel) will link the two major roads, Addis-Weldia-
Mekele road and Addis-Djibouti road, providing access to highland/agricultural area of Amhara 
and lowland/nomadic area of Afar region.  
 
The Ankober-Aliyuamba-Awasharba junction road which mainly traverses the Afar Region, 
was selected by representatives of the Afar Regional in consultations with the Amhara  regional 
authorities to: i) enhance access to agriculture markets and public services; ii) facilitate 
motorized connectivity between larger Afar settlements and iii) induce and diversify sources of 
Page  3
livelihood for the Afar Region. Building on the experience of RSDP1, civil works operations will 
facilitate access to water resources and convert detours to cattle trails as well as water harvesting 
and redirection from culverts to improve irrigation for adjacent small scale farmers.  These will 
be done in consultation with Regional Water Bureaus and Agriculture and Rural Development.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under RSDP1, 2 and 3, the borrower laid the foundation for sound environmental and social 
management within the roads sector. At the institutional level, an Environmental Monitoring 
Branch (EMB) was established in the ERA, as a result of the EA recommendations of RSDP I. 
An Environmental Procedures Manual (EPM) serves as guidelines for implementation and 
individual EMPs serve as basis for environmental mitigation under each contract.  Under RSDP 
II, the continuous safeguards dialogue with the client, resulted in a new law (July 15th/05), 
governing compensation and involuntary resettlement; Proclamation No.455/2005. In the same 
period, the mandate of the EMB was extended to address road safety issues on the road projects. 
The Branch was renamed Environmental Monitoring and Safety Branch (EMSB). The EMSB 
consists of 8 permanent staff: two environmentalists, three sociologists, one ecologist, one 
hydrologist and a health officer. The health officer and one of the sociologists work on 
HIV/AIDS prevention. The HIV/AIDS prevention program has been a best practice for Ethiopia, 
and the ERA approach to HIV/AIDS prevention at workplace was adopted by the Ethiopian 
Parliament. The APLs have sponsored two ESMB staff environmental masters degrees abroad, 
and a PHD for the geologist.   
 
The central mandate of the EMSB has been to ensure environmental and social safeguards 
performance in all the national and regional trunk road projects. At operational level, this has 
translated into: i) inclusion of environmental and social clauses, including HIV/AIDS prevention 
into the works contracts; ii) reviews of EIAs and RAPs prepared by design and EA consultants 
and iii) monitoring and supervision of safeguards performance of the works contracts by the 
contractors and supervising engineers. Environmental mitigation actions by the contractor have 
been monitored against the contractual provisions and the EMPs to ensure compliance with 
standard road environmental engineering practice spelt out in the EPM. Supervision of project 
operations under APL1, 2 and 3 included environment specialists and social scientist in the Bank 
team as well as on the team of EMSB.Construction supervision firms have also been required to 
include social scientists to monitor the implementation of the social safeguard issues such as 
HIV/AIDS clauses.  These actions will continue under APL4.  Monthly Project progress reports 
usually prepared by the supervising consultants and also by ERA have reported on EMP 
implementation and include environmental and social development outcomes.  
 
The borrower has laid a solid institutional foundation for piloting a country system, the 
challenge, however, has been the high turnover of staff and the absence of formal, university 
degree training of environmentalists in Ethiopia.  A potential piloting of the country system in 
the road sector has to take into account, the challenges raised by the limited and volatile social 
capital in the sector and the need to extend training to cover environmental engineering, 
mitigation and social assessment and mitigation.  
 
Individual Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) including Environmental Management 
Plans (EMPs), and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared for the first year work 
Page  4
programs of the three road projects: Mekanejo 
–
D/Dollo, 181km (upgrading to asphalt road); 
Wolkitea – Hosaana, 127 km (upgrading asphalt road), and Ankober – Awash Arba Jct, 92km 
(construction of new gravel road). The EIA, including the EMPs, and the RAPs will be reviewed, 
cleared and disclosed in-country and at the Bank prior to Appraisal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy has been triggered due to the potential adverse environmental and social impacts 
of the planned road construction operations, including the potential spread of HIV/AIDS. To 
identify and mitigate potential adverse impacts, the project has prepared separate EA reports for 
the afore-mentioned roads, and will apply HIV/AIDS prevention guidelines as was the case 
under previous APL operations.  
 
At the time of project preparation, it was decided to assign the environmental category A to 
all APLs given the potential adverse impacts on natural habitats, affected populations, physical 
cultural properties, water resources, and soils. To the extent that potential adverse environmental 
and social impacts were identified under previous APLs, these were mitigated in compliance 
with national environmental legislation as well as the Bank's safeguard policies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The EA report for the Wolkite-Hosaina road has identified a graveyard that is located in the 
Right of Way (ROW) of the road alignment, and the recommendations will be implemented 
accordingly. To ensure that physical cultural resources are not negatively affected, the project 
includes guidelines for chance finds in its contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy has been triggered due to land acquisition to be induced by the road project’s 
investments. Consistent with this policy, the project has prepared Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) which will be implemented prior to the commencement of civil works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/09/2008 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft safeguard studies (EIAs and RAPs) have been prepared and will be completed 
12/23/2008, for the three road projects.  For the Ethiopia Rural Travel and Transport 
(ERTTP), Bank support to date, has been limited to covering execution of the studies. Under 
APL4, the same support will continue for ERTTP.  Potential civil works support under 
Component 1, will be subject to Bank’s safeguards policies and for disclosure and mitigation. 
The EIAs and RAPs of these roads under Component 1 will be disclosed in the country and 
at the Bank's InfoShop before the project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
11/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/26/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
11/26/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
