Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/02/2009 
Report No.:  AC4491
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P113220 
Project Name:  Productive Safety Net APL III 
Task Team Leader:  William David Wiseman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 22, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTSP 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);Public administration- Other social services 
(40%);Central government administration (5%);Sub-national government administration 
(5%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (60%);Natural disaster management (20%);Vulnerability 
assessment and monitoring (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
530.90 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)81.80 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 287.30 
 
EC: European Commission 
69.60 
 
IRELAND, Govt. of 
71.30 
 
NETHERLANDS: Netherlands Development Association 
63.20 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
23.00 
 
World Food Program 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1,020.20
2,197.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The aim of the overall Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) APL series is to contribute 
to improving the productivity and efficiency of transfers to chronically food-insecure 
households, reducing household vulnerability, improving resilience to shocks, and 
promoting sustainable community development.  
 
Page  2
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) for APL III is: #Improved 
effectiveness and efficiency of the Productive Safety Net Program and related Household 
Asset Building Program supporting chronically food-insecure households in rural 
Ethiopia.#  
 
The higher-level goal to which the PSNP aims to contribute is sustainable graduation 
from food insecurity for a large number of the chronically food insecure households in 
the program . The PSNP is necessary but not sufficient for this to happen. Thus a critical 
assumption to reach this higher-level goal is that the necessary complementary programs 
and investments are in place, as well as that linkages exist to a broad-based rural 
economic growth process.   
 
3. Project Description 
APL III will continue implementation of current program components, including the 
various modifications already underway or planned in order to further strengthen core 
performance. APL II currently comprises three components: (i) Safety Net Grants for 
activities including Public Works and Direct Support (ii) Risk Financing, which provides 
additional resources for these activities to allow the program to scale-up in response to 
shocks, (iii) Institutional Support to the PSNP, focused on capacity building and 
management, M&E, and program governance. As indicated at the time of APL II World 
Bank Executive Board approval, a new component will be added under APL III; and, (iv) 
Support to Household Asset Building, which provides support to parts of the Government 
Household Asset Building Program with the aim of improving the effectiveness and 
sustainability of this intervention.  
 
The PSNP and HABP are targeted to 7.57 million chronically food insecure citizens, 
roughly 10% of the population, who reside in 290 rural woredas (out of 710 nationwide) 
in eight of the ten Regions. Woredas continue to be selected based on historic 
vulnerability. Households within these woredas are selected based on relative wealth 
ranking to select the poorest of the poor.  
 
An overview of each of these components is as follows:  
 
Component 1: Safety Net Grants (IDA US$260 million; DFID US$217.0 million; EC 
US$66.6 million; CIDA US$69.2 million; Irish Aid US$64.7 million; USAID US$457.0 
million equivalent; WFP US$50 million equivalent; SIDA US$22.0 million; RNE 
US$61.2 million)  
 
Labor-intensive public works will provide transfers to households whose adults 
participate in public works. Sub-projects are determined locally through an annual, 
participatory planning process that focuses on integrated watershed management. Public 
Works are timed such that resources are available to households when needed and works 
are undertaken at the most appropriate time in terms of weather conditions and when 
labor demand from alternative agricultural activities is at its lowest.  
 
A
budget line for capital inputs will be allocated to woredas alongside the financing for 
the unskilled labor costs (i.e. the transfers to households). Financing will continue to be 
Page  3
transferred from the federal level to regions and woredas before the start of the PSNP 
implementation season to ensure that tools and materials are procured to start activities in 
a
timely way. Technical guidelines and work-norms have been developed by MOARD 
for different types of labor-intensive public works. These are made available to PSNP 
implementers and supported through an extensive training program.  
 
Public works will continue to focus on soil and water conservation, with significant 
investment in roads, irrigation and social infrastructure. As agreed under APL II, the 
Government has established Public Works Focal Units in the Natural Resources 
Department of the Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Development (BOARD) in each 
implementing Region. These are coordinated by the NRMD in MOARD. NRMD has 
established a unit specifically mandated to provide close follow-up and oversight of 
public works, as well as improve coordination with other key line ministries. For this, 
NRMD will be given a dedicated management budget. Under APL III, NRMD will work 
with the regional Focal Teams to ensure (i) strengthened woreda and regional support to 
public works; (ii) improvements to the annual training on Community-Based 
Participatory Watershed Development Planning; (iii) improved monitoring of public 
works; and (iv) better national coordination to address policy or sector-wide capacity 
gaps.  
 
It is expected that this will lead to improvements in the overall sustainability of the 
public works, notably strengthened implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework, improved technical quality of projects, particularly in areas that 
have previously been identified as relatively weak (such as roads and water) and clear 
arrangements for operations and maintenance of all sub-projects to ensure appropriate 
ongoing management.  
 
Direct Support (DS) will provide grants to households who are labour-poor and cannot 
undertake public works. Beneficiaries include, but are not limited to, orphans, pregnant 
and lactating mothers, elderly, labor-poor households with sick individuals and female-
headed households with no other available adult labor. While work is ongoing to design a 
safety net appropriate to pastoral communities, payments to the chronically food insecure 
population in Afar are also being made via Direct Support.  
 
Performance incentives: Under APL III an additional budget will be made available to 
all woredas meeting minimum performance standards for use as part of their 
administrative budget. The objective is to improve the timeliness and predictability of 
transfers to households, but other performance areas may be added over time. It is 
envisaged that payments will be made to any woredas achieving the performance targets 
for timeliness and predictability as set out in the PSNP performance standards and 
payments will be equivalent to 50 percent of the existing administrative budget. 
Payments will be determined annually as part of the budgeting cycle based on the 
previous year#s performance. Underpinning this will be a renewed focus on accurate 
performance measurement across the program and effective dissemination of 
performance results to all implementing woredas. There will also be closer follow-up 
with woredas that encounter problems in improving their performance.  
Page  4
The PSNP currently includes a pilot program in 18 woredas in pastoral areas (Afar, 
Oromiya, Somali, SNNP). The aim of the pilot is to test a range of methods, including 
targeting, public works and types of transfers, to determine how to effectively deliver a 
safety net program for pastoral livelihoods. Based on the lessons learned under the pilot 
program, the PSNP will be scaled-up in pastoral areas in 2010 and 2011.  
 
Component 2: Risk Financing (IDA US$50 million; DFID US$29.5 million; USAID 
US$73.9 million equivalent)  
 
While Component 1 focuses on chronically food insecure households, Component 2 
seeks to provide timely resources for transitory food insecurity in response to shocks 
within existing program areas. This Component will be financed using a contingent grant, 
which will provide resources for scaling up activities under Component 1 in response to 
localized or intermediate drought in PSNP woredas. This component is seen as central to 
the sustainability of the overall PSNP by providing an early response that can more 
effectively prevent household asset depletion and increased levels of destitution.  
 
Risk Financing can be used to either extend support to current PSNP beneficiaries or 
support new beneficiaries who have transitory needs . This activity will focus exclusively 
on PSNP woredas because of the established presence of institutions and systems for 
delivering risk financing. Strong linkages between risk financing and the emergency 
response system are required to ensure a coordinated response to shocks over time. In 
order to ensure that PSNP systems can be taken to scale on demand, additional support 
for capacity building will be channeled through the Institutional Support component (see 
below).  
 
The main activities for Risk Financing are: (i) contingent financing through a contingent 
grant from the World Bank as well as additional in-principle commitments from 
development partners to be mobilized on the basis of need; (ii) the early warning system 
will provide ongoing analysis that can trigger the Risk Financing budget in a timely 
fashion at any point during the year; and (iii) contingency planning will be developed at 
woreda level to expedite implementation once the early warning system confirms the 
likely occurrence of shocks and the release of Risk Financing resources.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Support to PSNP (IDA US$5.0 million; DFID US$4 million; 
EC US$3 million; CIDA US$12.6 million; Irish Aid US$1.0 million; SIDA US$1.0 
million; RNE US$2.0 million)  
 
This Component will support institutional strengthening activities. Support will be 
provided for: (i) program management at woreda, regional and federal levels to ensure 
effective management of the Program; (ii) capacity building to fill any remaining gaps in 
general and those specific to the Risk Financing facility; (iii) monitoring and evaluation 
to ensure regular monitoring data, with a specific focus on upgrading the monitoring 
system for public works; and (iv) transparency and accountability measures to further 
strengthen widespread understanding of the Program among key stakeholders and greater 
accountability of decision-makers.  
Page  5
Component 4: Support to Household Asset Building (IDA US$35.0 million, DFID 
US$36.8 million; Irish Aid US$5.6 million)  
 
The Household Asset Building Program (HABP) is designed to assist food insecure 
households in PSNP woredas to transform their productive systems by diversifying 
income sources, improving productivity and increasing productive assets. The Program 
has been designed to reorient the extension system and rural service providers to deliver 
demand-driven and market-oriented assistance to food insecure households. It intends to 
achieve four outputs: (a) improved identification and development of on- and off-farm 
investment and income generating activities for food insecure households; (b) enhanced 
access by such households to sustainable and multiple financial services; (c) enhanced 
systems for input sourcing, production and delivery; and (d) increased access by food 
insecure households to product and labor markets. This component will provide support 
to the Program as follows:  
 
Strengthening the delivery of demand-driven and market-oriented advice for household 
investments: Financing will be provided for capacity building within the Government 
agricultural extension and micro/small enterprise development programs for the provision 
of demand-based and market-oriented advisory services for food insecure households, 
including development of education materials/curricula and training on facilitation, TA 
on market and technical analyses, technical backstopping for local level experts and 
methodologies for supporting household business plan development and 
entrepreneurship.  
 
Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of financial service delivery to food insecure 
households: Development partners will provide assistance to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of credit delivery to food insecure households to bring it in line with 
internationally accepted norms and best practices. This will include (i) supporting the 
development and field testing of multiple financial products (savings, different types of 
credit) that respond to the needs and capacities of food insecure households, (ii) the 
dissemination of these products to service providers, complemented by a rolling training 
program, (iii) the development of financial literacy materials, and (v) capacity building of 
both Rural Saving and Credit Cooperatives (RuSACCOs) and MFIs to expand coverage 
and enhance outreach. Government resources only will directly finance credits to food 
insecure households to be channeled through RuSACCOs and MFIs.  
 
Supporting program management: This will provide resources to ensure the effective 
management of the HABP. Management budgets will be provided to each of the key 
implementing agencies at all levels (including FSCD, ED, micro and small enterprise 
development agencies and cooperative promotion agencies). Given that many of the 
above initiatives are new to Ethiopia, study tours and experience sharing events will be 
organized to facilitate implementation and to create awareness of international best 
practices. In addition, this will support monitoring and evaluation and the procurement of 
physical inputs.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The PSNP and HABP are targeted to 7.57 million citizens residing in 290 rural woredas 
located in eight of the ten regions of Ethiopia. The concerned woredas account for around 
one-third of the area of Ethiopia, forming a band stretching across the country from north 
to south. As the Pastoral roll-out plan is implemented during the first two years of 
implementation, the project will also cover a significant proportion of Eastern Ethiopia.  
 
The salient physical characteristics of the Project location relevant to the safeguards 
analysis are: (i) The highly dispersed pattern of beneficiary communities, which are 
spread over a very wide area, (ii) The high degree of variability between agro-climatic 
zones, almost all of which are covered, from cool highlands to arid and semi-arid 
lowlands, and (iii) The high degree of fragmentation of the Public Works activities, 
which are expected to comprise some 35,000-40,000 separate sub-projects each year, and 
tens of thousands of individual household-level HABP activities. For these reasons, the 
approach to safeguards is through an ESMF, in which PW Sub-projects and HABP 
interventions are screened by trained local staff, and the potential cumulative impacts of 
the large number of household-level HABP activities are tracked and managed by trained 
woreda and regional specialists.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Carolyn Winter (AFTCS) 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTSP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the proposed operation is a 
Category B project, since impacts of the project, for the most part, will be minimal, site-
specific and manageable to an acceptable level.  
 
Productive Safety Net Program  
Page  7
One of the key objectives of the PSNP is to address the underlying causes of food 
insecurity, to which land degradation is universally agreed to be a major contributor, 
particularly in highland areas. Thus the design of the PSNP public works program is 
intended to have environmentally positive impacts. Under Phase II these activities, which 
include, for example, soil and water conservation and improvement of community 
infrastructure, have already been shown to constitute a vehicle for significant positive 
environmental transformation and enhanced productivity.  
 
Nonetheless, negative impacts may occur if the locations or designs of the community 
activities do not follow good environmental practice, or if they are incompatible with 
optimum overall management of the watershed. Such impacts, which would be limited in 
scale and site-specific, could include, for example:  
 
Community Road Construction and Rehabilitation Impacts  
 
-
Alteration of drainage patterns and increased flooding and soil erosion from road 
construction and materials excavation sites  
 
-
Right of way removal of vegetation and natural habitats  
 
-
Sedimentation of aquatic systems from soil erosion and runoff  
 
-
Impact of increased human use on adjacent habitats and wildlife  
 
-
Voluntary displacement or loss of lands and resources normally used by individuals or 
the community for cultivation, livestock grazing, fuelwood, etc.  
 
-
Stagnant pools at excavation sites that create breeding sites for mosquitoes  
 
-
Potential for disturbance of cultural and historic sites and resources  
 
-
Increased in and out population migration due to improved access  
 
-
Unplanned, haphazard land use development created by improved access  
 
-
Temporary displacement or loss of access or livelihood due to construction detours  
 
Note: Projects requiring relocation of residents or any other form of involuntary loss of 
assets will not be included in the PSNP.  
 
Small-scale Irrigation Development Impacts  
 
-
Changes in natural drainage patterns upstream and downstream  
 
-
Depletion of surface or groundwater sources  
 
-
Deterioration in soil quality due to poorly managed irrigation; potential waterlogging 
and salinisation of soils, leading to agricultural abandonment and land degradation  
 
-
Runoff from irrigated fields and potential for agricultural chemicals to pollute water 
bodies  
 
-
Abstraction effects on source streams and related aquatic ecosystems  
 
-
Lowering of water quality due to agricultural runoff  
 
-
Increased pest and disease control problems due to the promotion of monoculture  
 
-
Reduced biodiversity due to focus on cash crops  
 
-
Potential for disturbance of cultural and historic sites and resources, and damage to 
nearby sites resulting from changes in the water table or salinisation.  
 
-
Stagnant waters and disease vectors arising from poorly managed irrigation systems  
 
-
Increased use of agricultural chemicals with related human health concerns  
Page  8
Watershed Treatment and Water Harvesting Impacts  
 
-
Increased access can aggravate soil erosion problems, especially in higher gradient 
topography  
 
-
Poorly maintained drainage controls and in-stream structures can lead to eventual 
failures and increased flooding problems  
 
-
Reduced downstream nutrient levels from dams that reduce stream transport of organic 
material and sediment  
 
-
Social tensions arising from issues and rights of water allocation  
 
-
Mosquito and related health concerns arising from stagnant pools  
 
-
Impacts on cultural and historic sites and resources through changes in the water table  
 
-
Social problems arising from poorly managed regenerated catchment areas  
 
Afforestation and Revegetation Impacts  
 
-
Effects of some tree species (e.g., eucalyptus) in reducing groundwater levels  
 
-
Long term effects of forest harvesting on hydrologic systems and stream 
characteristics  
 
-
Possible reduction in tree and plant species diversity arising from the introduction of 
new plantations and re-vegetation schemes   
 
-
Effects of monocultures on ecosystem diversity, function and sustainability  
 
-
Changes in habitat characteristics and potential effects on endemic wildlife species  
 
-
Social problems arising from issues related to the ownership and user of new forests  
 
-
Effects of grazing bans on the cost of rearing livestock and shift of grazing pressures to 
other areas  
 
Livestock, Pasture and Water Points Development Impacts  
 
-
Compaction of soils from increased activity around new water sources  
 
-
Potential contamination of water sources and needs for controls on human use  
 
-
Concentrations of livestock at specific watering sites/routes that result in overgrazing 
of vegetation and related land degradation  
 
-
Potential social tensions over access to pastoralists water sources  
 
Drinking Water Sources Development Impacts  
 
-
Increased water withdrawals could exceed groundwater recharge rates in some areas  
 
-
Development of springs may affect availability of downstream water supply  
 
-
Physical impacts of increased human traffic near water stations  
 
-
Potential contamination of open wells by livestock and human uses  
 
-
Reduced availability of aquatic ecosystems due to water abstraction  
 
-
Increased dependence on new water supply systems that prove to be unreliable  
 
-
Sanitation and health concerns associated with the operation of new drinking water 
sources  
 
-
Land use and social issues and tensions over the siting of and access to new water 
sources  
 
School and Health Facilities Rehabilitation Impacts  
Page  9
-
Site disturbance and potential drainage alterations from construction activities and 
expansion of facilities  
 
-
Water shortages due to increased demands on existing sources  
 
-
Increased production of human and medical wastes and potential for contamination of  
waterbodies and groundwater  
 
-
Increased timber harvesting on nearby lands for construction materials  
 
-
Construction impacts on sensitive wildlife habitats and aquatic systems  
 
-
Increased pollution from site development and operations, including medical waste  
 
-
Sanitation and health issues related to increased human presence and medical waste 
disposal  
 
-
In-migration and settlement generated by rehabilitated facilities  
 
Household Asset Building Program  
 
Since each household-level activity will be at micro-scale, and as the procedures under 
the Household Asset Building Program will include the assessment of the agro-ecological 
suitability of the activity, including screening for potential negative environmental 
impacts, no significant site-specific negative impacts are expected from the household-
level activities under the Household Asset Building Program. The only environmental 
concerns might be potential cumulative negative impacts in the longer term of large 
numbers of households adopting new activities in fragile environments over a number of 
years. This might include, for example, an increase in livestock ownership with resultant 
potential over-grazing and environmental degradation, or a falling water-table in a 
woreda due to large numbers of households adopting shallow-well irrigation.  
 
Safeguards Issues  
 
This project triggers four safeguard policies: The Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 
4.01), related to the possible impacts mentioned above; the Pest Management Policy (OP 
4.09), predicated on the possibility of small quantities of pesticides being employed in 
small, community-level irrigation projects; the Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 
4.11), because although deemed unlikely in view of the small scale of the sub-projects, 
the possibility of #chance-finds# cannot be ruled out; and the International Waterways 
Policy (OP 7.50), because of small-scale irrigation projects that may be implemented in 
watersheds of international waterways.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Activities under APL III are expected to include watershed development interventions 
and improved farming and land-use management systems, under the community 
watershed development approach of the government. These are expected to make 
contributions to positive environmental regeneration and transformation, which is one of 
the objectives of the PSNP. As stated above, any potential long-term or cumulative 
impacts that might have been caused by PSNP PW activities such as infrastructure will be 
detected through the Screening and mitigating procedures, and addressed. At the same 
time, potential long-term impacts that might have been caused by the implementation of 
Page  10
large numbers of similar HABP activities will be managed by monitoring the programme 
and its impacts, and corrective action taken. In view of this, no indirect or long-term 
negative impacts are anticipated from the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project is a reformed version of emergency food aid distribution. The principal 
project alternative considered was to provide the cash or food on a predictable basis, but 
as direct support, ie., not to undertake physical Public Works. This would have avoided 
incurring any negative impacts from infrastructure sub-projects. However, this option 
was rejected, due to (i) potential large-scale dependency, with attendant negative social 
impacts; and (ii) because it would not offer the opportunity to carry out environmental 
rehabilitation of the watersheds through Soil and Water Conservation (SWC) sub-
projects. In addition, the creation of new community assets, which was essential to meet 
the objectives of the project, would not be achieved.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and 
management framework in Ethiopia: the Proclamation on the Establishment of 
Environmental Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); the Proclamation on Environmental 
Impact Assessment (No. 299/2002); and the Proclamation on Environmental Pollution 
Control (No. 300/2002).  
 
There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for monitoring 
environmental compliance: the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) and Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD), which have decentralized to the 
regional level. In the case of MoARD, decentralization has gone further to the woreda 
and kebele levels. There exists a critical mass of capacity within the (MoARD) and EPA 
at the federal and decentralized levels to manage environmental and social safeguard 
issues.  
 
Productive Safety Net Program  
 
To meet the requirements of the above national regulatory framework and the 
safeguards policies of the World Bank, the approach to the environmental performance 
and sustainability of the public works program is three-pronged:  
 
(i) Public works are derived from a community-based approach to integrated watershed 
development, a process which forms the basis of the awareness-creation and training 
program, supported by a budget to provide technical and material inputs.  
 
(ii) Standards to be followed in the design and implementation of the individual public 
works are established in Community-Based Participatory Watershed Development 
Guidelines published by the MOARD. These are made available to concerned woreda 
staff and Development Agents, who are trained in the techniques set out in the 
Guidelines. These Guidelines include detailed provisions for area closure, which are 
Page  11
based on participatory community planning of all activities. This provides for community 
management of the closed areas to allow farmers and families whose traditional access 
may have been voluntarily reduced to have continued access to the closed area for the 
collection of fodder and other forest products, in order to ensure that there is no reduction 
in livelihoods.  
 
(iii) The process of selection and screening of public works through the ESMF for 
possible negative environmental impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating 
measures are incorporated in the design as appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia's 
Environmental Impact Assessment proclamation. In addition, although sub-projects are 
not subjected to EIA unless they are identified as being of Environmental Concern, all 
sub-projects are required to be screened under the ESMF procedure.  
 
The environmental safeguards procedures are documented in the ESMF produced by the 
Government and disclosed under APL III. Responsibility for their implementation and 
monitoring are designated at federal, regional, woreda and kebele levels.  In addition, 
joint government-donor monitoring of ESMF implementation will be conducted, 
followed by corrective measures if required. This monitoring is undertaken through (i) 
The PW component of the Project M&E system, which tracks the nature and extent of 
implementation of the ESMF, and (ii) Twice-annual joint Government-donor PW 
Reviews, in which samples of PW sub-projects countrywide are examined for quality, 
sustainability, impact and ESMF compliance. Any rectification works (both labour and 
non-labour) required are conducted using Project resources in the form of repair and 
rehabilitation works under the next annual PW programme of activities. Ensuring that 
this happens is the responsibility of the DA involved in the community PSNP PW 
planning process, and the NR Expert in the NR Woreda Case Team.  
 
Public Works Reviews during APL II implementation showed that while the ESMF 
system was in use, and some 6,000 Development Agents (Agricultural extension staff) 
were trained in its implementation, there remained room for improvement, due mainly to 
staff turnover and the administrative difficulties in ensuring and documenting screening 
of some 34,000 separate activities each year. In order to strengthen government#s 
capacity to apply the ESMF to a higher standard, the PW Coordination Unit (PWCU) was 
strengthened, as of April 2009, by the addition of five EC- and CIDA-financed Technical 
Advisors, whose mandate includes improving the capacity of the regional PW Focal 
Units (PWFU) to manage the M&E and ESMF screening of the PW activities. One of the 
TAs is a specialist in Infrastructure and Environment, whose mandate includes oversight 
and streamlining of the ESMF system, and in addition, the PWCU includes a 
Government-hired Advisor on Environment, and a TA specializing in capacity-building, 
whose mandate includes upgrading of the ESMF training packages.  
 
Staff of the Regional EPAs and the woreda Environmental (Natural Resources) focal 
persons will participate in the awareness-creation and training courses for the PSNP 
Public Works, which includes ESMF training of NR Experts in the Woreda NR Case 
Team. These training courses, which were upgraded by the expanded federal PWCU, will 
be provided by teams drawn from MoARD at Federal and Regional level, with technical 
assistance from the Natural Resources Management personnel of MoARD, the regional 
Page  12
EPAs and agencies such as WFP. The woreda-level trainees will in turn train the DAs at 
the local level. The cost of implementing the ESMF training are covered partly by the 
Project Management Budget at federal, regional, woreda and kebele levels, and partly by 
the regular government staffing and overhead budgets at all levels. A Project budget of a 
around $300,000/annum is estimated for the annual training, which includes ESMF 
training.  
 
The PW Reviews during APL II also indicated the desirability of streamlining the 
ESMF procedures. Thus the ESMF as disclosed for Phase III has been modified to 
incorporate the following changes:  
 
(i) Improvements have been made in the guidance provided on screening SWC sub-
projects; further work on making this guidance region-specific will be carried out during 
the first year of implementation by the PWCU).  
 
(ii) Clearer guidance is given to ensure that any proposed sub-projects that might 
involve large dams, large irrigation schemes, land use changes potentially affecting 
natural habitats or forests, or having the potential for involuntary loss of assets or access 
to assets, and other projects ineligible under the PSNP, are eliminated by the screening 
procedure.  
 
(iii) Explicit guidance is provided on how the kebele and woreda authorities should 
address the issue of voluntary land loss, in the event that it may occur, in the form of a 
Voluntary Land Loss Procedure (see below).  
 
(iv) More specific guidance is given on the location of disputed areas in which no sub-
projects are allowed to be implemented.  
 
(v) More detailed guidance is provided on the roles and responsibilities of each 
concerned party at each stage of implementation of the ESMF procedures.  
 
In order to address projects that might include the renovation or extension of medical 
clinics in the public works program, the Government's Waste Management Guide for 
Rural Health Clinics is published and disclosed, in accordance with OP 4.01.  
 
To address the possible use of small quantities of pesticides in small-scale irrigation 
schemes, the government Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small-Scale 
Irrigation Schemes is published and disclosed under APL II, in accordance with the 
ESMF and OP 4.09.  
 
The Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policy is addressed by being integrated into 
the ESMF screening process at three stages: (i) Any sub-project located within a known 
cultural heritage site is earmarked as a sub-project of Environmental Concern, to be 
referred to the Regional EPA, who will decide if an EIA is required, (ii) Assessment for 
potential disturbance to cultural or religious sites is carried out as part of the site-specific 
sub-project Screening, which also contributes to a decision whether to earmark a sub-
project for possible EIA, (iii) Inclusion of assessment of potential cultural heritage 
impacts in the EIA of sub-projects, where EIA is found to be necessary, and (iv) 
Monitoring of sub-project implementation by DAs and woreda staff, in liaison with the 
Regional Bureau of Tourism and Culture.  
Page  13
The International Waterways policy OP 7.50 is triggered because some of the public 
works are likely to be small-scale irrigation projects located in watersheds of a number of 
international waterways. The World Bank, on behalf of Government, has notified the 
concerned riparian governments in accordance with this policy, covering the five-year 
period of APL III. The Government of Eritrea expressed concern regarding the initial 
estimate of potential water abstraction from the Mereb basin. The World Bank responded 
with a more detailed, basin-specific estimate for the Mereb, which showed that due to the 
unsuitability of the lands of the Mereb basin for irrigation purposes, the expected small-
scale irrigation activities in the Mereb basin will actually abstract only an estimated 
0.006% of the river flows.  The analysis was reviewed and endorsed by technical experts 
within the World Bank country team and the Government of Ethiopia. Despite the revised 
estimate, the Government of Eritrea re-affirmed its objection. Since the accuracy of the 
abstraction estimates provided to Eritrea is not in dispute, this was not considered a case 
that requires the opinion of independent experts. The task team#s assessment is that the 
Project will not cause appreciable harm to any of the Riparians concerned.  
 
Household Asset Building Program  
 
The technical advice and training provided under the Household Asset Building 
Program will include consideration of the agro-ecological suitability of each activity at 
individual household level, and guidelines for simple environmental screening to be 
incorporated in the household-level credit and grant applications procedure. In addition, a 
procedure will be implemented for tracking and mitigating any potential cumulative 
impacts that might arise and the long term, and for taking corrective action if necessary.  
 
The management and monitoring of the implementation of these procedures will be the 
responsibility of the regional Public Works Focal Units (PWFU), overseen by the federal 
Public Works Coordination Unit (PWCU).  
 
For both medium- and long-term potential environmental impacts, appropriate 
mitigating measures covering:  
 
-
Measures to be adopted at household level as either conditions of the credit/loan or 
recommended good practice;  
 
-
Measures to be adopted at woreda level.  
 
The details of the management, monitoring and oversight arrangements for the HABP 
Environmental management system will be finalised by the PWCU when the final design 
of the HABP has been completed.  
 
The joint Regional PWFU environmental specialists will be responsible for ensuring 
that the PW programme and the HABP are fully harmonized in terms of environmental 
impacts and environmental management.   
 
Page  14
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary farmers and their families, and those involved in 
the implementation of the program. The provisions of the ESMF are incorporated into the 
training materials used at woreda and kebele levels, which reach over 1 million 
beneficiary households, and are regularly updated according to community and 
government staff feedback. Consultation on the safeguard policies have taken place 
through the annual training programmes, twice-yearly Public Works Reviews, and the 
participatory community public works planning meetings conducted annually by the DAs 
in over 9,000 watersheds during the five years of APL I and APL II. Apart from the 
World Bank Info Shop and Country Office public-access library, disclosure of the 
safeguards documents has been effected through the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MoARD) making the ESMF available for consultation in MoARD offices 
at federal level, and regional BoARD offices, as well as through the office of the 
Environmental Protection Authority.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/20/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/20/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  15
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  16
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William David Wiseman 
09/03/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
09/03/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Carolyn Winter 
09/03/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
09/03/2009 
Comments:   
