Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/25/2008 
Report No.:  AC44504
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P106228 
Project Name:  ET-Ethiopia Nutrition (FY08) 
Task Team Leader:  Andrew Sunil Rajkumar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.60
9.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve child and maternal care 
behavior, and increase utilization of key micronutrients, in order to contribute to 
improving the nutritional status of vulnerable groups.  
 
Progress in terms of achieving the PDO will be measured by tracking: (i) the percentage 
of infants aged 0-5 months exclusively breastfed; (ii) the percentage of households using 
adequately iodized salt; and (iii) the percentage of pregnant women receiving iron and 
folate supplementation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The government of Ethiopia is embarking on a National Nutrition Program (NNP), with 
the support of donor partners.  The first phase of the NNP spans five years (2008-2013).  
The proposed IDA Nutrition Project is a self-contained project that would finance critical 
activities in support of the NNP.  The success of these critical activities is expected to be 
the foundation for the development of the rest of the NNP program. The proposed project 
will consist of two main components: a Supporting Service Delivery component 
(Component 1) and an Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building component 
Page  2
(Component 2) to support the service delivery.  The amounts to be provided to these two 
components will be $14 million and $16 million respectively.  
 
The description of activities below applies only to the proposed IDA project.  
 
Component 1 of Proposed IDA Project:  Supporting Service Delivery ($14 million from 
IDA)  
 
1.
Component 1 will support two areas:  Community-Based Nutrition (CBN) and 
Micronutrient Interventions. The focus of the supported CBN activities will be on Health 
Extension Workers (HEWs) and supervisors of HEWs. The government is rolling out a 
program nationwide whereby 30,000 HEWs will be deployed 
–
two in every kebele 
(community) – by the end of 2009.  The government will soon introduce a program 
whereby supervisors of HEWs will be deployed at health centers, totaling 3,200 by year 
2009.  
 
2. 
Providing CBN services is a part of the HEWs’ function, and will be supported by 
HEW supervisors. The project will strengthen and support this role, especially by 
supporting relevant training activities and materials.  The focus will be to provide CBN 
services through outreach to the community and using model households identified in the 
community as an integral part of the HEP. CBN will expand geographically in a manner 
consistent with HEP expansion.  
 
3. 
CBN activities will aim at: (i) building community capacity for assessment, 
analysis and action specific to preventing child malnutrition (Triple-A approach - Assess, 
Analyze and Action - involving sensitization efforts at woreda, kebele and gotte (village) 
levels, followed by community mapping, community-based action and participatory 
assessments of progress); (ii) promoting improved caring practices for children and 
women to prevent malnutrition; (iii) improving referral linkages to relevant child health 
and nutrition services and other linkages for addressing non-health causes of child 
malnutrition; (iv) developing and implementing a strong advocacy and 
communication/mobilization strategy to support all CBN activities; and (v) enhancing 
capacity for CBN implementation at region and woreda levels.  
 
4. 
Component 1 will also support selected Micronutrient Interventions, focusing on 
critical activities to enhance the appropriate utilization of key micronutrients, especially 
iodine, iron, Vitamin A and zinc. Regulation and procedures to prohibit the production or 
distribution of salt that is not iodized, or inadequately iodized, will be enacted and 
enforced.  Zinc will be registered as an essential drug so that health workers and HEWs 
can administer it for therapeutic purposes, especially in conjunction with the use of Oral 
Rehydration Salts (ORS) therapy in cases of child diarrhoea.  The project will also 
support the purchase and operations/delivery costs for key micronutrients. The above 
inputs will be complemented by appropriate technical assistance.  
 
Component 2 of Proposed IDA Project:  Institutional Strengthening ($16 million from 
IDA)  
 
Page  3
Component 2 will Strengthen Human Resources and Capacity Building through various 
means.  First, it will support multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms, addressing both 
policy and technical aspects, including the establishment of a National Nutrition 
Coordination Body (NNCB) with high-level membership from different nutrition-related 
sectors. Implementing entities for the NNP and for the IDA project will also be 
strengthened in line with their additional functions.  The strengthening will take the form 
of human resources strengthening as well as logistics support.  Component 2 also aims at 
strengthening (through training and capacity building) the capacity of frontline workers, 
mid-level managers working on nutrition-related areas (those working at woreda health 
offices and regional health bureaus); clinical nutritionists; and higher-level 
“supernutritionists” (e.g. those working at higher-level institutions).  EHNRI has been 
selected to strengthen the local research capacity, as it is the leading institution for 
undertaking health and nutrition research.  
 
This component will also support Advocacy, Social Mobilization and Program 
Communication activities, with the following overall aims:  (i) generate ownership of the 
country’s nutrition agenda by government and non-government decision makers, 
stakeholders and the public at large; (ii) identify the highest priority nutrition messages in 
need of dissemination and the constraints and resistance points presently limiting changes 
in practices; (iii) incorporate these messages systematically into various communications 
channels including mainstream media, community radio, “community conversations” and 
materials of the health sector and other sectors; and (iv) complement the efforts of HEWs 
and Volunteer Community Health Promoters (VCHPs)/model households to promote 
appropriate caring practices among care providers, communities and service providers 
through CBN with behavior change messages in various communications media.  
 
Finally, this component will support Strengthening Nutrition Information/Surveillance 
(SNI/S), Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Operational Research (OR). These 
activities will provide information for M&E activities regarding the various NNP 
interventions and will also strengthen nutritional surveillance.  They will provide 
information to support other programs and enhance understanding of their impacts on 
nutrition, including the HEP, EOS and PSNP, as well as various food security programs 
and programs affecting disaster/epidemic prevention, preparedness and response. They 
will work by strengthening existing systems including the Health Management 
Information System (HMIS), Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response system 
(IDSR) and Demographic Surveillance Sites (DSS).  The various sources of data 
collected, in particular surveys with national coverage, will be used for the overall 
evaluation of the NNP.  The diverse sources of available data will be consolidated and 
analyzed to produce outputs that will be useful for policymakers and specifically for 
decisions about program design.  In addition, relevant operational research for the NNP 
will be supported.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide in Ethiopia is the project location.  
 
Page  4
The project and the NNP recognize the considerable importance of social and cultural 
beliefs and practices that influence maternal and child care, and eventually nutrition and 
health outcomes.  Culture sensitive information and communication strategies will be 
developed and used for Behavior Change Communication (BCC) activities.  The culture 
sensitive information will include beliefs surrounding breastfeeding behavior and its 
implications for nutritional outcomes.  The adoption of simple implementation strategies 
will encourage participation and inclusiveness and create ownership and sustainability 
through behavioral change.  It is also essential to take into account cultural and social 
beliefs in the promotion of improved diets.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
Page  6
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Sunil Rajkumar 
02/25/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
02/25/2008 
Comments:   
