Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3421 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P103022 
Project Name: Ethiopia Protection of Basic Services - 2nd Phase 
Task Team Leader: Trina S. Haque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 6, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (50%);Health (20%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (10%);Agricultural extension and research (10%);General public 
administration sector (10%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Other communicable 
diseases (S);Social risk mitigation (S);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
650.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2,535.80 
 
African Development Bank 
177.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)69.20 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 340.40 
 
EC: European Commission 
70.60 
 
IRELAND, Govt. of 
54.30 
 
SPAIN, Govt. of 
14.20 
 
ITALY: Dev. Coop. Department (MOFA) 
10.70 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
4.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
49.80 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 11.40 
 
AUSTRIA, Govt. of: Fed Chancellery - Dir Gen Dev Coop. 
11.40
3,348.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Page  2
The main objective of the second phase of the PBS program is to contribute to expanding access 
and improving the quality of basic services in education, health, agriculture, water supply and 
sanitation, and rural roads delivered by sub-national governments, while continuing to deepen 
transparency and local accountability in service delivery. PBS I was built around a set of 
principles or shared commitments by Government and partners, adherence to which was 
r
egularly “tested” through the PBS Reviews. The tests/shared commitments have been re-
focused under PBS Phase II to reflect changes in the risks relative to Phase I and are embodied in 
a
SAFE approach-Sustainability (including additionality), Accountability (including fairness), 
Fiduciary standards, and Effectiveness.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It was agreed that given the multi-sector SWAp nature of the PBS, it should be regarded as a 
Program rather than a narrowly conceived Project. PBS II is proposed to have the following 
program structure with associated IDA financing.  
 
Sub-Programs 
 
Proposed IDA PBS II Financing Amount  
 
(US$ million equivalent)  
 
Sub-Program A. Support to Delivery of Basic Service  
 
Part A1.  Basic Services Block Grant  
 
 
580.00  
 
Part A2.  Pilot Local Investment Grant (LIG)  
 
50.00  
 
Sub-Program C. Transparency and Accountability   
15.00  
 
Sub-Program D. Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
 5.00  
 
TOTAL: 
      650.00 
 
 
The specific sub-programs are highlighted below.  
 
Sub-Program A - Support to Delivery of Basic Services. Two types of support are envisaged 
under this Sub-Program.  
 
Part A1 Basic Services Block Grant ((IDA USD580 million equivalent; DFID USD331.2 
million equivalent; AFDB USD165 million equivalent, EC USD68.2 million equivalent, Spain 
USD14.2 million equivalent, KfW USD49.8 million equivalent, Ireland USD50.5 million 
equivalent, Austria USD11.4 million equivalent; GoE USD2,535.8 million. PBS I included (i) 
education, (ii) health, (iii) agricultural extension, and (iv) water supply/sanitation services 
delivered by sub-national governments as the basic service sectors. It has been agreed by 
Government and the Development Partners that in PBS II rural roads will also be included as a 
basic service sector. As a result of this expanded scope of basic services, the JBAR data and 
analysis will include all (recurrent and capital) spending allocated to rural roads as well as the 
other four services at sub-national levels, particularly woreda level. Results indicators will be 
identified to cover this revised scope, and the Roads Sector will be expected to participate in 
PBS Reviews to discuss issues related to the financing and delivery of rural roads.  
 
Page  3
As with PBS I, sub-
national delivery of basic services would constitute “the Program” with two 
financing modalities: first, only recurrent expenditures (salaries, operations and maintenance) in 
these service sectors will be eligible for re-imbursement from pooled PBS donor and 
Government financing sources, and second, sub-national capital expenditures in the basic service 
sectors would be financed exclusively from Government sources and not World Bank funds 
(except in Pilot LIG woredas, see below).  
 
Part A2: Pilot Local Investment Grant (LIG) (IDA: USD50.00 million equivalent; JICA USD4 
million equivalent).  Part A2 will continue to support the introduction, on a pilot basis, of a 
multi-sector Specific Purpose Grant (SPG) from the Federal Government for capital investment 
in the health, education, agriculture, natural resources (including water), and rural roads sectors. 
The ultimate objective of Government is to introduce a National LIG program, open to all 
woredas, which would be a performance-based SPG with access criteria established in areas 
relevant for improving the quality of service delivery, and capital investment particularly, at the 
local-level. The objective of the Pilot LIG is to better understand the constraints at the local level 
to increased and improved capital spending and to support the development of policies and 
instruments to address these constraints. One area of particular focus for the Pilot LIG under PBS 
II will be to support the role-out of a new national system for local-level participatory planning. 
Additionally, the Pilot LIG will support the rolling-out and testing of new national standards for 
procurement and environmental screening of capital projects.  
 
The financing for Pilot LIG will be transferred to all regions according to the intergovernmental 
Block Grant Formula (as is the case under Part A1). The Regions will then provide funds to a 
total of approximately 60 woredas, over a period of up to three fiscal years. The LIG Grant is 
scaled so that the funds transferred to each local government represent 30% of their total budget. 
The objective is to provide woredas with a substantial increase in their capital budget as 
compared with current trends, within the bounds of increases that might be expected in the 
coming years, while at the same time not overwhelming existing systems and capacity. Eligible 
woredas will use the funds allocated to them in each fiscal year and incorporate them as part of 
their overall resource envelope in their annual planning and budgeting cycle.  LIG resources will 
be used to fund new capital works, major rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, and capital 
equipment that is critical for the effective functioning of this infrastructure.  
 
Sub-Program B-Health MDGs Support Facility (CIDA USD65.5 million equivalent; Italy 
USD10.7 million equivalent; and RNE USD11.4 million equivalent). Support for the health 
sector under PBS II will focus on assisting Government in its efforts to accelerate the attainment 
of health MDGs.  This sector support is designed in line with the goals and targets of Health 
Sector Development Program (HSDP) III and the Government’s vision to move towards better 
harmonization and alignment, working progressively to support “one plan, one-budget, one-
report”, at all levels of the health care system.  Subprogram B of the PBS will provide financing 
for the MDG Fund in support of HSDP goals and targets via a Bank-administered Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund (MDTF). The MDTF for Subprogram B will be established to allow those DPs who 
are not yet able to fully harmonize or to channel their funding directly to the MDG Fund to 
provide support to the health sector. The MDTF will finance priority activities for (i) the 
procurement of critical health commodities; and (ii) health system strengthening.  
 
Page  4
Sub-Program C-Transparency and Accountability (IDA USD15 million equivalent (for C1 
through C3 only; C4 will be financed via an MDTF with donor funds only; donors will finance 
all components), DFID USD8.3 million equivalent (provisional), Ireland USD3.8 million 
equivalent, Canada USD3.7 million equivalent, AFDB USD12 million equivalent, EC USD1.8 
million equivalent).  This Sub-Program will support the following three sets of activities:  
 
Part C1:  Monitoring the broader framework of accountability reforms.  
 
Part C1 of Sub-Program C will monitor, within the PBS Results Framework, the progress of 
selected accountability-related reforms financed and implemented outside PBS, but relevant to 
the effective delivery of services at the local level, including the GG package of the DLDP and 
other activities that are linked with PSCAP.  No funding will be allocated from PBS to Sub-
Program C Part C1.  
 
Part C2:  Targeted support to Public Financial Management  
 
Building on the experience of Component 3 of PBS I, part 2 of Sub-Program C will finance a 
series of activities designed to strengthen public financial management at the Federal and 
regional levels, to help create a system that effectively supports the delivery of high-quality basic 
services.  These will include: (i) support and training for OFAG and ORAGs, to strengthen fiscal 
accounting and reporting capacity; (ii) enhancing PFM capacity at woreda levels (IBEX and so 
forth); (iii) financing the PBS accountants; (iv) Continuous Audits reformed so that (among other 
things) they include “transactions testing” (verification of reported fiscal data); (v) other capacity 
building activities to support PFM strengthening at Federal and regional levels.  
 
Part C3.  Financial Transparency and Social Accountability .  
 
This activity aims to strengthen and deepen Financial Transparency and Accountability (FTA) 
and social accountability initiatives which the government initiated under PBS.  The objectives 
of this activity, and the  initiatives supported under it, are to work further towards significantly 
enhancing transparency around public budget procedures (planning, budget preparation, 
expenditures, and audits), and to further foster broad engagement and strengthened “voice” of 
citizens and citizen representative groups on public planning and budget processes and public 
service delivery.  
 
Consistent with these objectives, funding for Part 3 of Sub-program C will support the 
following: (i) the continued roll-out of FTA tools at the regional, woreda and kebele levels. (ii) 
Budget literacy and media dissemination (social marketing); (iii) strengthening local 
accountability structures and Woreda Community Planning and Budgeting (WCP&B); (iv) 
capacity Building on FTA and Social Accountability; and (v) benchmarking FTA Progress.  
 
Sub-Program D-Monitoring and Evaluation (M and E) (IDA USD5.0 million equivalent 
equivalent; DFID USD0.9 million equivalent; EC USD0.6 million equivalent).  
 
This sub-program will strengthen M&E systems in various PBS sectors. Periodic Data Quality 
Assessments (DQAs) supported via Lot QAS methods will be conducted. A series of activities to 
strengthen the existing monitoring tools of the PBS program itself will also be conducted, 
Page  5
including household surveys, the next round of the Financial Transparency and Perceptions 
Survey (FTAPs), field visits, social impact assessments, Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys, a 
PEFA, an Accountability Baseline survey to trace “trajectories of change in 25 woredas, and a 
number of studies to enhance effective monitoring and evaluation of the various PBS 
components. Data collected as part of the Woreda Benchmarking Surveys will be drawn upon 
and analyzed, alongside the data and information collected from the other initiatives already 
mentioned.  This sub-program will also provide targeted support to the Central Statistical 
Agency (CSA) in strengthening the various surveys that the CSA conducts (e.g. the agricultural 
sample surveys.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed operation will be implemented throughout the country by local government 
authorities in collaboration with respective sector specialists operating at the local and regional 
levels.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
From an environmental and safeguards point of view, the proposed operation will support the 
federal budget that in turn funds these local investments. This project is rated “B” and investment 
specific safeguard issues are addressed as described below. This includes application of the 
principals from both the ESMF and RPF from PBS I and the development of the LIG Operations 
Manual which contains specific technical guidance for all sector civil works at the woreda level. 
The Government has also embarked on an extensive capacity building program for 
decentralization and the safeguard provisions are incorporated into the training as part of the 
Operational Manual.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Kenneth M. Green (AFTQK) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Safeguard Policy for Environment Assessment is triggered in the context of support for the 
construction of small-scale civil works to be implemented through multi-sector Specific Purpose 
Grants under the Local Investment Grant Subcomponent.  An Environment and Social 
Management Framework was prepared to screen sub-projects for PBSI and will be used for 
PBSII. Government Guidelines for Health Care Waste were also disclosed as part of PBSI and 
will be again used as the basis for PBSII.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
There is the possibility that this safeguard policy will be triggered in the event that the 
Ministry of Health requests additional support for indoor use of insecticides under the PBS2, 
now under preparation.  This is being discussed, reviewed, and will be confirmed during the 
upcoming mission and prior to appraisal.National guidelines for using these insecticides have 
been issued and rolled out by the Ministry of Health. Possible pesticide aspects in agriculture 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
will be addressed through the Government Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small Scale 
Irrigation Schemes.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This Safeguard Policy is triggered due to the planned construciton activities that might lead 
to a loss of livelihoods due to land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/04/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
PBS II will use the products and build upon the safeguard procedures built into PBS 
Additional Financing. These are summarized below.  
 
(1) 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): The ESMF 
addressed Bank safeguards requirements (environmental assessment, cultural property and 
possibly natural habitats and safety of dams) on subproject investments. The ESMF 
established a unified process for addressing these sub-project requirements from preparation, 
through review and approval, to implementation. Attention was paid to additional capacity 
building requirements at the local level and to enable appropriate integration with national 
EA processes. The ESMF has been incorporated into the project Operational Manual.  
 
(2) 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): The RPF, together with guidelines for 
Resettlement Action Plans, were prepared for use in addressing any issues related to land 
acquisition or access to resources due to subproject investments. The RPF addressed 
requirements of the Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement, as well as of national policies 
and practice. The principles of the RPF were also incorporated into the project Operational 
Manual.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
(3) 
Project Operational Manual: The development of an operational manual and 
guidelines for implementation of relevant sub-projects as well as an overall program 
implementation manual for LIG has been successfully accomplished. All aspects of 
incorporating how woreda staff across sectors screen subprojects and follow sustainable 
environmental practices are built into the planning process. There are also a set of  16 
Technical Planning Guidelines (TSGs) which include detailed information and guidance.  
 
(4) 
The purpose of the Technical Planning Guidelines (TPGs) is to aide local 
(woreda) officials in the process of identifying, selecting, and implementing small scale 
infrastructure investments. Each TPG covers one project type in each of the five main sectors 
of woreda responsibility for local service delivery. The TPGs cover a variety of local capital 
projects that are within the mandate of woreda administrations. The TPGs were prepared to 
address two critical aspects of woreda capital planning and project implementation. First, 
they are to provide an elaborated menu of choices so projects in different sectors can easily 
be compared and contrasted. Since the TPGs follow an identical format for all projects, they 
are particularly useful in illustrating choices as part of the participatory planning process. 
Second, once choices are made, the TPGs guarantee that projects are consistent with national 
sectoral policies and standards and serve as a checklist of technical issues to be considered in 
the planning and preparation process. Most importantly they alert local officials to 
environmental and social safeguard issues associated with a particular investment and 
suggest remedial actions to make the projects sustainable and most beneficial. These TPGs 
also take into consideration the rules, regulations and procedures of Ethiopia’s EPA andthe 
woreda planning process. The Guidelines contain practical information that may be used for 
identifying, screening, preparation, appraisal, implementation and monitoring of small-scale 
projects at local level. Understanding the Guidelines doesn’t require specialized professional 
background. Each TPG includes technical specifications, design features, cost elements, 
procurement procedures, notation of the recurrent and O&M cost implications, potential 
impacts, sustainability issues, planning and implementation arrangements and reference to 
GOE reports and standards as well as other useful documents.  
 
(5) 
The Program  involves medical waste and use of insecticides which are likely to 
raise safeguard issues. The physical design of health centers and health posts have provisions 
for proper disposal of liquid and solid wastes in addition to small incinerators for burning 
contaminated materials used by health centers. Insecticides are used indoors and on the 
mosquito nets and the potential for contaminating the outside environment is limited in 
scope. No significant negative impact will be anticipated as long as agreed safeguard 
measures are fully implemented.  The incorporation of these issues will be evaluated as part 
of appraisal.  
 
The ESMF and RPF approved and disclosed for PBS Additional Financing have been 
deemed acceptable safeguard products for PBS 2 and will be again submitted and disclosed 
prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
Page  8
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Trina S. Haque 
10/09/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/09/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
10/09/2008 
Comments:   
