Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC3465
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P108932 
Project Name:  Pastoral Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ingo Wiederhofer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);General education sector 
(20%);Animal production (20%);Other social services (20%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (S);Natural 
disaster management (S);Decentralization (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
35.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
45.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of phase II of the Pastoral Community Development Project 
is to increase the resilience of Ethiopian pastoralists to external shocks and to improve the 
livelihoods of targeted communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Sustainable Livelihoods Enhancement  
 
This component will further strengthen decentralized and participatory planning at the 
community/ kebele (sub-district) and woreda levels, operating within the Regional 
government structure.  Women and men in pastoral communities will identify, prioritize, 
design, and implement micro-projects that reflect their development priorities.  Regions 
and communities will be supported by Project-financed Mobile Support Teams (MSTs), 
who will work with woreda administrations and their technical and social services 
Page  2
support offices.  The MSTs will employ Participatory Learning and Action (PLA) tools to 
facilitate participatory situation analysis and to help communities develop modest, local 
investment and livelihood development projects.   
 
The experience in planning, implementing and evaluating these micro-projects will 
build up local capacities to develop integrated Community Action Plans (CAPs).  Using 
simple micro-project application forms, communities will clearly define their objectives, 
and propose activities and budgets, while taking into consideration the environmental 
implications of their projects.  Community capacity-building around community-based 
conflict management will also be emphasized, with training provided to a range of actors 
with a voice within their communities (including not only local officials (kebele, 
woreda), but also clan and ethnic leaders, leaders of customary institutions, pastoral 
associations and community-based organizations) to empower these actors and to help 
them develop the tools they need to be effective peace advocates within their 
communities and mitigate against inter-community resource conflicts. 
 
Sub-Component A:  Community Investment Fund (CIF): Proposed community 
investments will be forwarded to woredas for funding through the Community 
Investment Fund (CIF) sub-component.  A Woreda Development Committee (WDC), 
comprising representatives of the woreda administration and community representatives 
will appraise and endorse CIF requests.  In order to preserve the multi-sectoral nature of 
the Project and to respect the diverse priorities of the pastoral communities, giving 
particular attention to poorer subgroups and to women, investments covered under the 
CIF will not be limited to specific sectors, with the exception of a short negative list and 
income-generating activities.  This component could finance micro-projects related to 
water supply, micro-scale irrigation, health care, education, rangeland management, etc.  
CIF proposals will be judged at the woreda level against transparent criteria known in 
advance to all stakeholders, and evaluated in accordance with technical standards of line 
ministries.  The development plans, which will require at least a 15 percent community 
cash or in-kind contribution to demonstrate commitment, will be implemented directly by 
communities to build capacity, ensure correspondence of investments to needs, and 
guarantee accountability to the community. 
 
Sub-Component B:  Rural Livelihoods Fund (RLF): This sub-component will finance 
income generating activities identified by beneficiary community groups utilizing the 
approaches tested by Rural Savings and Credit Cooperatives (RUSACCOs), with 
appropriate modifications to respond to pastoral social and economic environments and 
characteristics.  Capacity-building will be extended to existing IGA groups established in 
phase I of the Program and provided to new groups in selected woredas.  Funding would 
be available on the basis of a revolving loan to new IGA groups. The existing IGAs in 
phase I will not be eligible for at least first round of financing of the PCDP II. However, 
the project will provide capacity building support to these groups to activate revolving of 
the initial grant within the groups received in the first phase of the Program. These groups 
could then provide savings and credit services in accordance with the legal cooperative 
system of the country.   
 
Page  3
PCDP II will also pilot the formation and establishment of new RUSACCOs and 
capacity-building of associated support services in beneficiary communities at Woreda 
and regional levels as required. Implementation of formation and establishment of 
savings and credit cooperatives will be led by the federal cooperative promotion agency, 
regional cooperatives promotion bureaus and relevant Woreda cooperative promotion 
desks. The PCDP will provide the necessary financial support and be responsible for IGA 
group formation, mobilization and supervision. As a first step, this sub-component will 
also finance the preparation of a Pastoral Savings and Credit Cooperatives manual in 
collaboration with the Federal Cooperative Promotion Agency.  The Project may also 
pilot support to pastoral Rural Savings and Credit Groups in areas where rural micro-
finance institutions are present. 
 
Component 2:  Pastoral Risk Management  
 
Sub-Component A:  Community-Based Early Warning and Response Program: A 
Community-based Early Warning and Response Program will build on and deepen an 
ongoing woreda and livelihoods zone based early warning process.  The program will be 
managed by Early Warning and Response Department of MoARD under a Memorandum 
of Understanding with the Ministry of Federal Affairs. It will be implemented by regional 
DPPB/EWRD bureaus and woreda representatives with the support of partner NGOs, 
who will help to collect and analyze basic household welfare data for the early 
identification of the onset of disasters.  In the medium term, using part-time data monitors 
at community levels, woredas will compile and analyze trends in household, 
environmental, economic and social (including conflict) conditions in discrete livelihoods 
areas.  This data will flow to regional DPPBs and the federal EWRD/MoARD, on a 
regular basis, providing information to trigger early non-food responses to declines in the 
welfare of pastoralist communities.   
 
The early warning system will provide the information to assign each participating 
woreda to one of five "disaster stages", with appropriate responses corresponding to each 
stage. Early response will be financed through a pilot Disaster Preparedness and 
Contingency Fund (DPCF), which will be held, proportionally, at regional level under a 
EWRD/DPPB management system. The DPCF will have separate “windows” for early 
response and disaster preparedness investment financing. The project will build sector 
capacity at woreda, zonal and regional levels to prepare DPCPs that identify both disaster 
mitigation and early response activities.  Early response activities will be prepared in 
advance and held as 'shelf plans' for timely implementation at the appropriate disaster 
stage.  Woreda Disaster Preparedness Investment Proposals (DPIPs) will be aggregated at 
zonal and regional level and, under the management of an empowered regional pastoral 
development office, integrated into a long-term disaster preparedness strategy and 
prioritized investment plan.  DPCPs will be prepared with the support of qualified NGOs 
for all 132 lowland woredas during the first three years of Phase II. The plans will be 
developed in conjunction with the Productive Safety Nets Program planning process at 
the woreda level, with a particular focus on identifying vulnerable communities and 
households.  
 
Page  4
Sub-Component B:  Disaster Preparedness Investment Program: A Disaster 
Preparedness Strategy and Investment Program (DPSIP) will identify community and 
woreda needs for long-term regional disaster preparedness and mitigation.  These 
proposals will be aggregated at zonal and regional level and, under the management of 
the regional pastoral development office, integrated into a long-term disaster 
preparedness strategy and prioritized investment plan. PSNP catchment management 
proposals will be integrated into this plan to the extent possible.  The disaster 
preparedness strategy will be approved by the regional PCDP/PSNP steering committee 
and implemented in accordance with available funding by the pastoral development 
office, supported by PCDP financial and procurement staff.   
 
Under the DPCF, each region will receive DPSIP grants to finance strategic disaster 
preparedness investments. It is expected that these investments will include, inter alia, 
small feeder roads, improved water supply and catchment management, fodder banks, 
and range improvement.  The Project will provide technical assistance and staff capacity 
building to support the development of the regional disaster preparedness strategies and 
prioritized investment plans and associated strategic investments.  Additional funding for 
strategic disaster mitigation investment is also likely to be available through the EU 
Disaster Preparedness II program, other donor programs and, for more labor intensive 
disaster preparedness investments, through the PSNP. 
 
Component 3:  Knowledge Management and Participatory Learning  
 
Sub-Component A: Participatory Action Learning: Participatory Action Learning pilots 
will be undertaken in selected woredas to apply and further develop methodologies for 
demand-driven approaches to participatory knowledge generation and innovation 
development.  This will start on a small scale with one Participatory Action Learning 
(PAL) facilitator per region working with pastoral communities to help them explore 
community-identified issues, with advisory support from other research and development 
partners.  A small budget will be available for pastoral communities to support their PAL 
activities, and for researchers from regional institutions to respond to pastoral 
communities’ research priorities. Where appropriate, these activities will involve existing 
Farmers Research Groups. 
 
Sub-Component B: Knowledge Management and Information Exchange: Knowledge 
management and information exchange/networking will be supported at federal and 
regional levels; including through the establishment of small resource units on pastoral 
research and development in Ethiopia and strengthening of the EPaDGoN network and 
similar fora at regional level.  This sub-component will also support peace-building 
meetings and exchanges between communities by promoting dialogue around pastoral 
research and policy studies of interest to conflicting communities. 
 
Sub-Component C: Policy Studies: A modest budget will be made available to the 
Ministry of Federal Affairs (MoFA) and the Regional Pastoral Development 
Commissions/ Bureaus to commission studies that they regard as necessary to inform 
policymaking for pastoral development issues. 
Page  5
Component 4: Project Management  
 
As during PCDP I, project coordination and central financial management will be 
carried out by the Federal Project Coordination Unit (FPCU), which is housed in the 
Ministry of Federal Affairs.  The FPCU's will continue to be responsible for overall 
project management, annual planning, fiduciary management, liaison with stakeholder 
groups at federal level, project communication, overall project monitoring and 
evaluation, strategic staff capacity-building and mobilization of technical backstopping.  
Given the decentralized structure of the PCDP, the project will be managed more 
substantially at the Regional and woreda levels. At Regional level, the Pastoral Bureaus 
will house the Regional Project Coordination Units (RPCUs), with chief responsibility 
for PCDP management and coordination of project activities, including the activities of 
the Mobile Support Teams (MSTs), who provide Project technical support at the local 
level. 
 
The PRM component will be coordinated by the FPCU PRM coordinator and supported 
at regional level by RPCU PRM officers located in RPCUs.  The early warning and 
response sub-component will be managed by the MoARD Early Warning and Response 
Department under a Memorandum of Understanding with the FPCU/MoFA.  The disaster 
preparedness planning and investment program will be managed by regional PDO/Cs 
with the support of the FPCU/RPCU DRM officers.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The primary target population for PCDP II is poor pastoral and agro pastoral 
communities in the Afar, Somali, Oromia, Southern and Gambella regions of the 
Ethiopia. Other, small concentrations of pastoralists in locations in Benshangul-Gumz 
Regions would be engaged in the later phases of project implementation.  
 
Range land degradation, driven by rising human and livestock populations, is 
increasing in these pastoral areas of Ethiopia as evidenced by soil loss, bush 
encroachment, reduced bio 
–
diversity and deforestation close to urban and refugee 
concentrations. Traditional range management systems, based on indigenous knowledge, 
mobility, reciprocity agreements, fluid boundaries and traditional law are facing new 
pressures, which require different institutions, technologies and systems for their redress. 
Grazing lands in Ethiopia have, since the early 1900’s, been regarded as property of the 
State. The 1994 Constitution provides for pastoralist “not to be displaced without their 
wish”. It does not, however, providethe by-laws for the protection of the rangeland or for 
compensation land and remains underpinned by a strong State sentiment for voluntary 
pastoralist settlement.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
PCDP environmental and social safeguard issues may arise from community-level project 
investments through the CIF, RLF and DPSIP. These small-scale, geographically 
dispersed investments are expected to create little to no adverse impacts that will anyway 
be largely avoidable through informed, common-sense sub-project planning.  Pest 
management issues may arise through PCDP promotion of rainfed and/or small-scale 
irrigated farming, or of the use of animal pesticides (e.g. livestock dips).  The ESMF of 
PCDP II will ensure that sub projects having involuntary resettlement will not be eligible 
for financing under this project. However, involuntary resettlement is unlikely due to the 
vast amounts of land available to pastoralists, and land's low marginal cost.  Large scale, 
significant and/or irreversible impacts are highly unlikely.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The planning of sub-projects will actively involve the beneficiary communities too, 
among other things, consider alternatives to avoid adverse environmental and social 
impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on the Environmental Assessment Management Framework (EAMF), the PCDP I 
prepared an Environmental and Social Screening List for Community Sub-Projects.  
Project staff and implementing agencies were trained to use it, but gained little 
implementation experience.  Based on this work, a PCDP II Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, and further training, implementation 
support and M&E will strengthen institutional capacities to meet safeguards 
Page  7
requirements.  The ESMF specifies subproject screening; the preparation of 
environmental and pest management plans as required; and implementation supervision 
to ensure that adverse impacts are avoided or minimized.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In compliance with World Bank guidelines and the Ethiopia EIA proclamation, before a 
sub-project is approved, the applicable screening documents will be made available for 
public review at a place accessible to local people (e.g. at a local government office (i.e. 
kebele council, woreda offices and regional bureaus, at the EPA), and in a form, manner, 
and language they can understand.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ingo Wiederhofer 
03/31/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
03/31/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
03/31/2008 
Comments:   
Page  9
