Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4246 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/30/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P113220 
Project Name: Productive Safety Nets III 
Task Team Leader: William David Wiseman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 1, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (98%);Central government administration (1%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Vulnerability assessment 
and monitoring (S);Other social development (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
0.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
0.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
0.00 
 
IRELAND, Govt. of 
0.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Netherlands Development Association 
0.00 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
0.00 
 
World Food Program 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The aim of the overall PSNP APL series is to contribute to improving the productivity and 
efficiency of transfers to chronically food-insecure households, reducing household 
vulnerability, improving resilience to shocks, and promoting sustainable community 
development.  
 
Page  2
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) for APL III is: “Improved effectiveness 
and efficiency of the Productive Safety Net Program and related Household Asset Building 
Program supporting chronically food-insecure households in rural Ethiopia.”  
 
The higher-level goal to which the PSNP aims to contribute is sustainable graduation from food 
insecurity for a large number of the chronically food insecure households in the program . The 
PSNP is necessary but not sufficient for this to happen. Thus a critical assumption to reach this 
higher-level goal is that the necessary complementary programs and investments are in place, as 
well as that linkages exist to a broad-based rural economic growth process.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
APL II currently comprises three components: (i) Safety Net Grants for activities including 
Public Works and Direct Support (ii) Risk Financing, which provides additional resources for 
these activities to allow the program to scale-up in response to shocks, and (iii) Institutional 
Support, focused on capacity building, M&E and program governance. APL III would continue 
implementation of these program components, as well as ensure implementation of the various 
modifications planned or already underway to further strengthen core performance.  
 
Under Phase III a new component would be added: (iv) Household Asset Building, which 
would provide support to the Government Household Asset Building Program with the aim of 
substantially improving the effectiveness and sustainability of the intervention.  
 
Lessons learned to date, along with the resulting design issues, are detailed below:  
 
Improving the technical quality and sustainability of public works.  
 
The evidence suggests that for the most part, the public works program is meeting its objective 
of developing productive, sustainable, community assets in program areas, with generally high 
rates of return to the investments made. At the same time issues have clearly emerged that 
require attention in order to ensure that the progress to date is consolidated and the potential of 
the program is fully realized:  
 
•
Due attention must be given to ensure adequate technical quality of the assets created and 
that appropriate arrangements for operations maintenance for those assets are put in place.  
 
•
While investments on private land that are necessary for the treatment of thewatershed 
are already envisaged under APL II, the modest investments in this area to date suggest that the 
policy has not been fully internalized. Progress on this front is essential, to achieve the objective 
of environmental rehabilitation at scale.  
 
•
Finally, further upgrading of the M&E system for public works is needed in order to 
ensure the program can monitor and report on the overall quality, sustainability, and 
developmental outcomes/impact of public works effectively.  
 
Strengthening program governance around payments.  
 
Page  3
Strengthening bottom-up local-level accountability is at the heart of the governance approach 
within the PSNP. Individuals’ ability to hold local implementers to account is directly related to 
the extent to which they understand how the program is supposed to function and their rights and 
responsibilities within that framework. Re-doubling efforts on systematic information 
dissemination in general, but particularly with regard to payment issues, will be central to APL 
III.  
 
Related to this is the need to strengthen key monitoring tools. The Financial Roving Audit, 
which should be performed on a quarterly basis, will have the task of auditing transactions and 
payments from the program to beneficiaries, reconciling household information with 
administrative data. This will provide regular information on the soundness of one of the 
program’s critical fiduciary control instruments at the local-level; the attendance and pay-roll 
system. Ensuring that the newly computerized payroll system, which has already been rolled out, 
is used systematically will be closely related to this.  
 
Building program management.  
 
The PSNP is implemented by three government agencies, which include the Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development, the Food Security Program Directorate, and the Natural 
Resource Management Department. While implementation is focused at the local-level, the role 
of the Federal Government in coordinating and managing the program is often underestimated 
and these agencies remain under-capacitated. Further work will be needed as part of APL III to 
build the capacity of all agencies at the federal level to manage and coordinate the program 
effectively, particularly in areas relating to financial management, procurement, and monitoring 
and evaluation.  
 
A
new regional level Capacity Building facility (to be financed by CIDA) will be established as 
part of Phase III, which will focus sizable and dedicated resources on building human resource 
and management capacity at sub-national levels. Efforts to move towards a system of 
performance benchmarking, regular dissemination of performance results, and non-monetary 
incentives for improving performance (participating in training, missions, or leading cross-
regional learning exercises) will be developed.  
 
Consolidating risk financing and links to the early warning system.  
 
2008 was in many ways a proof of concept for risk financing in the PSNP and for moving 
towards a model based on a scaleable program. In the face of a localized drought and 
unprecedented food price inflation the program managed to scale up to provide additional 
resource to existing as well as new program beneficiaries. For beneficiaries that received these 
resources it was a system that was substantially more effective than alternatives under the 
emergency appeal. Notwithstanding this, the response suffered from delays and 
miscommunication, problems that were exacerbated due to limited grain supply availability in 
the Ethiopian Food Security Reserve Administration (EFSRA).  
 
The Government is currently concluding a comprehensive design process that will seek to 
ensure closer coordination and integration between the emergency system and the PSNP, so that 
Page  4
the problems experienced in 2008 are mitigated and the productive principles of the PSNP are 
safeguarded, even in response to shocks. Central components of this will be the implementation 
of a system of contingency planning at all levels, which should be implemented as part of the 
Government’s new National Disaster Management Policy, as well the use of new early warning 
triggers, such as the LEAP index , within a nested system of early warning indicators to ensure a 
timely response. APL III will ensure the finalization and implementation of this new system. It 
will continue to provide resources for the Risk Financing component as well as financing for the 
necessary capacity building through the Institutional Support component.  
 
Creating linkages to maximize synergies across programs.  
 
Building human capital remains a critical component of breaking the inter-generational 
transmission of food insecurity. The public works activities are increasing access to school and 
health facilities for program communities, and program transfers are in some cases being used to 
meet the cost of using these facilities. Furthermore, it was envisaged that some Direct Support 
beneficiaries could participate in community activities such as adult literacy classes and growth 
promotion activities. Due to limited guidance and the fact that there were few appropriate 
interventions at local level with which to link, this has not been implemented.  
 
The Government has now launched a new National Nutrition Program which offers the 
opportunity to link the PSNP to a large-scale local-level outreach program. Two potential 
linkages are envisaged. Firstly, the delivery of nutrition education at PSNP payment sites, given 
the large congregations of food insecure beneficiaries who gather to receive their monthly 
transfers. Secondly, the participation of Direct Support beneficiaries, specifically pregnant and 
lactating mothers, as community volunteers for the delivery of nutrition education. These 
approaches will be piloted in the coming months to assess feasibility and to determine what 
additional support and guidance might be needed. In order not to overburden either program the 
proposal would be to explore opportunistic linkages and where beneficiaries are involved 
participation would remain voluntary.  
 
Reforming the Household Asset Building Program to improve effectiveness and sustainability.  
 
Over the last 5 years an estimated US$400 million has been invested by Government in this 
activity. This sizable investment demonstrates Government’s commitment to addressing food 
insecurity and its belief that this program, in coordination with the Safety Net Grants, offers a 
pathway to sustainable graduation. The Government has now confirmed its intention to continue 
to invest at a similar level over the coming five years.  
 
There is some evidence to suggest that the combination of the PSNP with household asset 
building activities can, for some households, provide a pathway to food security. At the same 
time recent reviews of the program suggest that there are major inefficiencies and design flaws 
within the current program and that the possibilities of larger scale graduation will ultimately 
remain limited under the current program design. The chief concerns are that:  
 
(i) There is insufficient differentiation of financial products for beneficiary households. The 
financial support provided is limited to a one-time credit that ranges from 2,000-5,000 Birr, 
Page  5
depending on the region. While for some households, this is what is required to pull them out of 
food insecurity, for others the loan size is too large.  International experience suggests that 
households, unaccustomed to taking credit, will need to start with loans of a much smaller size 
before they are willing to risk taking a loan that would allow a substantive change to their 
livelihood systems; 37% of households surveyed in food insecure woredas in Ethiopia indicated 
that they did not want to take on credit for fear of not being able to repay it. Moreover, rather 
than repayment over long periods, more frequent and smaller repayments that maximize the 
opportunity for interaction between the financial service provider and the client are highly 
beneficial.  
 
(ii) Credit dos not promote broader livelihood opportunities. The menu of activities promoted 
by Government tends to be focused on agriculture with limited consideration of diversification to 
other potential off-farm activities.  
 
(iii) Critical support services tend to be weak. This is manifested in a menu of activities that are 
overly supply driven with not enough consideration of local conditions, actual beneficiary 
demand or market opportunities and inadequate in relation to skills training at the household 
level 
–
including training that helps to build an understanding of how to invest and save for the 
long-run.  
 
(iv) Provision of credit is not through specialized financial service providers, which tend to 
have low capacity. Instead it is often being provided through the kebele or through multi-purpose 
cooperatives. However, such institutions are ill-equipped to manage a credit portfolio or 
relationships with clients. This has lead to loans not being repaid or collected and repaid loans 
not being effectively revolved. Low repayments rates, currently not known for the Government 
program, but estimated to be under 70% across regions, not only undermine the sustainability of 
this program but also the possibility of sustainable credit provision to the same communities in 
the future. At the same time, despite the fact that savings are often considered to be the first and 
most basic step in building the practice of financial management within poor households, 
opportunities to link households to other financial services, particularly savings, are missed.  
 
(v) Subsidies are provided on the interest rate rather than on other elements of the service. The 
implication of such an interest rate subsidy is that the credit service is not sustainable on 
commercial terms. International experience would suggest that while subsidies are acceptable 
(even desirable in cases such as this program), it is best to separate the subsidy out and make it 
explicit (i.e. through the provision of a grant or through providing goods for which only a 
reduced amount has to be repaid on commercial terms), rather than provide an interest rate 
subsidy.  
 
(vi) Compounding all of the above is poor implementation, a lack of program guidelines or 
manuals, and little systematic oversight or monitoring.  
 
APL III preparation will be used to dialogue with Government on all of the above issues. 
Additionally, both the Bank and the Government have the experience of the Food Security 
Project, which has been implemented alongside the Government’sFood Security Program 
without some of the pitfalls highlighted. The Food Security Project provides important 
Page  6
experience to draw upon. As part of the current reformulation process of the FSP, Government 
has shown a willingness to reconsider many of these design choices.  
 
CGAP   has reviewed the Government program in Ethiopia and has suggested a model that 
could guide the redesign of the Household Asset Building Program. This is illustrated below. It 
addresses many of the concerns raised above, whilst also suggesting a sequencing of the program 
that provides a ladder approach to graduation. Households are provided an asset transfer along 
with skills training, market opportunities, and access to savings services as a precursor to 
entering the formal credit system. This has been shown in other countries to be a much more 
effective approach for preparing households to take on credit on a sustainable basis.  
 
It is proposed that the Bank focus its support to the Household Asset Building Program by 
addressing the constraints identified above and by providing financing to the package of 
necessary support activities required to make the credit effective and sustainable. The 
Government will continue to provide the majority of the financing for the credit itself, with 
additional resources possibly being provided by the Bank as well as other donors.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Public Works activities and activities related to household asset creation will comprise an annual 
programme of several thousand small-scale and micro-scale sub-projects carried out in food-
insecure rural areas of Ethiopia. Although the types of sub-projects will fall within identified 
categories, the specific location and design of the individual sub-projects are not known in 
advance.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Ethiopia has adequate EIA legislation covering individual projects with significant impact. Since 
the community projects are determined during the course of the project, for the purposes of the 
first phase of this project (APL I), an ESMF was produced by Government for APL I and 
disclosed. However, it was noted that although woreda staff had in many cases received ESMF 
training, not all projects were being screened as required by the ESMF. It was also noted that 
monitoring of ESMF implementation had not yet been instituted by woreda or Regional 
authorities. Thus during APL II, staff of some of the Regional Environmental Protection 
Authorities participated in the awareness-creation and training courses for the PSNP Public 
Works, which included ESMF training. It was intended that the provisions for monitoring 
implementation of the ESMF would be reviewed jointly with MoARD and re-designed to ensure 
implementation in APL II, taking into account existing capacities and any capacity-building 
requirements.  
 
While significant improvements were noted in APL II in the implementation and monitoring of 
the ESMF, the comprehensive review of the ESMF and its implementation arrangements was not 
completed, due to capacity problems in the federal PW Coordination Unit charged with that 
responsibility.  
 
Following the APL II MTR, Government renewed its commitment to the agreed institutional 
arrangements for PW coordination and management, and arrangements have been put in place to 
employ specialists in environmental management in the federal and regional units concerned. It 
Page  7
is considered that with enhanced roles and responsibilities, and support for awareness-creation 
and training in ESMF implementation and monitoring, the woreda technical staff will have the 
capacity to undertake the basic environmental screening required by the ESMF for individual 
sub-projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Many of the sub-projects, though intended to impact the environment positively, will have 
some potential for negative environmental impacts if not designed and implemented following 
good practice. Thus given that there will be a large number of such projects, OP 4.01 is 
triggered. The Environmental and Social management framework (ESMF) Screening process 
refers for Special Attention any sub-project with potentially one or more of the following 
features: (i) Involves disposal of medical waste, (ii) Likely to use pesticides or other agro-
chemicals, (iii) Incorporates a dam, (iv) involves land acquisition, or loss of assets or access to 
assets. For sub-projects with medical waste, a GOE Medical Waste Management Guide for Rural 
Health Clinics will be applied, and has already been disclosed under APL II. For sub-projects 
likely to use pesticides, see OP 4.09 below. Sub-projects with a dam are required to be designed 
by a qualified engineer, and constructed by a qualified contractor under the supervision of a 
qualified engineer. Dams in excess of 15m are ineligible (see OP 4.37 below). For sub-projects 
involving land acquisition, see OP 4.12 below.   
 
After this initial screening, the ESMF procedure further screens the principal features of 
each sub-project to ascertain whether it is of Environmental Concern. This is then followed by 
preliminary environmental and social screening to identify any site-specific potential impacts 
that might warrant an EIA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
All sub-projects that might trigger OP 4.04 are eliminated at Screening stage.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
All sub-projects that might trigger OP 4.36 are eliminated at Screening stage.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This policy is triggered under the assumption that successful small-scale irrigation projects 
might lead to greater agricultural activity which may require pest control management efforts. 
For this purpose, the GOE Integrated Pest Management Plan Guide has already been disclosed 
under APL II.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
OP 4.11 is triggered, since it applies whenever OP 4.01 applies, and because although 
deemed unlikely in view of the small scale of the sub-
projects, the possibility of ‘chance-finds’ 
cannot be ruled out. The policy is addressed by being integrated into the ESMF screening 
process at three stages: (i) Any sub-project located within a known cultural heritage site is 
earmarked as a sub-project of Environmental Concern, to be referred to the Regional 
Environmental Protection Authority, who will decide if an EIA is required, (ii) Assessment for 
potential disturbance to cultural or religious sites is carried out as part of the site
-
specific sub
-
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project Screening, which also contributes to a decision whether to earmark a sub-project for 
possible EIA, (iii) Inclusion of assessment of potential cultural heritage impacts in the EIA of 
sub-projects, where EIA is found to be necessary, and (iv) Monitoring of sub-project 
implementation by DAs and wereda staff, in liaison with the Regional Bureau of Tourism and 
Culture.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
It is considered unlikely that the PSNP weredas will include any communities likely to be 
classified as IPs (Indigenous Peoples). However, this possibility will be investigated during 
project preparation, and for this reason this concept ISDS is marked TBD.  
 
Furthermore, the ESMF will be expanded to incorporate a Social Screening Process, to be 
implemented during project implementation (at the beginning and whenever new weredas are 
added). This Social Screening Process, which will identify the possible existence of such groups 
within each beneficiary community, will be based on the WB criteria for IPs, and will be 
formulated during project preparation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Activities involving involuntary resettlement are not eligible for the PSNP PW programme. 
Thus the ESMF Screening process, applied to every sub-project, specifically eliminates any sub-
projects that might potentially involve the physical location of residents, or involuntary loss of 
assets or access to assets.  
 
During further ESMF Screening, any sub-project that involves potential voluntary land 
acquisition, or loss of assets or access to assets, is automatically earmarked as a Sub-project of 
Environmental Concern, and referred to the REPA for a decision on EIA. Such cases also trigger 
a
Voluntary Land Acquisition Procedure, which will allow the sub-project to go forward only if 
and when the WB conditions for voluntary land acquisition are met. In such cases, the need to 
monitor complete implementation of the Voluntary Land Acquisition Procedure is incorporated 
in the procedures followed by the supervising DA. All of these procedures will be incorporated 
in the ESMF for APL III. While it is thus intended that OP 4.12 will not be triggered, it is 
marked TBD at concept stage, to allow for any issues that might arise in finalizing these 
procedures and integrating them into the ESMF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Any sub-project that might incorporate a dam more than 15 metres in height is ineligible for 
the PSNP PW programme, and is specifically eliminated in the first stage of the sub-project 
Screening process. The safety of smaller dams is covered by the provisions set out under OP 
4.01, above.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
This policy is triggered because of the small-scale irrigation projects expected in watersheds 
of three international waterways. For APL I and II, Government and the Bank notified the 
concerned countries in accordance with this policy. Further notification will be provided to cover 
the period of APLIII. This issue will be addressed in the course of project preparation.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Any sub-project either in, or adjoining, a disputed area is ineligible for PSNP funding and is 
specifically eliminated by the Screening process.   
Page  9
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/30/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF disclosed for APL II will be modified for APL III, reflecting the following:  
 
(i)   Any procedural changes required arising from a review of the APL II ESMF 
Operational Summary;  
 
(ii)  Any additional sections or versions of the ESMF required for extending the PW 
programme into pastoralist areas; and  
 
(iii) ESMF implementation monitoring procedures will be reviewed, roles and 
responsibilities clearly identified, and re-designed as needed.  
 
The modified version of the ESMF for APL III will be completed and disclosed prior to 
appraisal in the country and as well as in the Bank Infoshop.  
 
In addition, for the Household Asset-Building component, there will be a simple ESMF 
procedure for screening individual household micro-sub-projects, built into the credit 
application. This will be designed based on the experience of the ESMF used for the Bank’s 
Food Security Project, and on the experience of the Government’s OFSP (Other Food 
Security Project), both of which focused on building the resource base of poorer households.  
 
The principle environmental concern of the Household Asset-Building component would be 
the potential cumulative negative impacts of large-scale adoption of new household asset 
structures, for example, significant increases in livestock ownership and resultant potential 
over-grazing. Thus, a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) will be conducted during 
project preparation to (i) identify such potential issues; (ii) develop guidelines for project 
design; and (iii) produce an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for monitoring, 
managing and mitigating such potential cumulative impacts.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  10
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William David Wiseman 
03/30/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
03/30/2009 
Comments:   
