Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC2728
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P101556 
Project Name:  Electricity Access (Rural) Expansion Project Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz T. A. Maurer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's development objective is to establish a sustainable program for expanding 
access to electricity in rural communities, thus supporting broad-based economic 
development and helping alleviate poverty.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would have four components: (a) expansion of grid based access to 
electricity in rural towns, (b) support to development of energy access through mini-grid 
schemes c) develop pilots on productive use of energy and on the provision of basic 
electricity services in very remote areas; and (iv) capacity building on energy efficiency, 
grid-off grid integration, and syndication of donor resources.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The national grid is being extended to approximately 300 towns and villages scattered 
across Ethiopia.  Mini-grid and off-grid schemes, in various locations, will be 
implemented as well.  Thus, many towns and villages throughout the country will be 
Page  2
impacted by the project.  Towns selected for inclusion under component 1 are included in 
Annex 4 of the PAD.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential negative impacts of project implementation include:  soil erosion, loss of 
vegetation, including loss of strips of farmland or urban plots, and noise and dust during 
construction work; there will also be an impact upon air quality from the power plants, 
particularly diesel generation. HIV/AIDS control will also be addressed through 
deployment of an HIV/AIDS prevention strategy Environmental and social protection 
clauses will be included in the contract documents and implementation of these clauses 
and safeguards measures will be monitored by EEPCo and ERDPC.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The safeguards impacts identified are not expected to have any long term or cumulative 
impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In keeping with good practice established under the Energy II Project, transmission line 
alignments, the substation and plant locations will be designed to reduce adverse 
environmental and social impacts.  The right of way requirements will be reduced in 
town sections where adverse social impacts are presumed to be severe.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In keeping with good practice established under the Energy II Project, transmission line 
alignments, the substation and plant locations will be designed to reduce adverse 
environmental and social impacts.  The right of way requirements will be reduced in 
town sections where adverse social impacts are presumed to be severe.  
 
As part of the Energy II Project's Environmental Assessment (EA) recommendations, an 
Environmental Monitoring Unit (EMU) was established in EEPCo.  At the outset, the 
Unit consisted of three local consultants and was assigned only the monitoring of the 
social and environmental issues of the Gilgel Gibe hydro-power project operations being 
constructed under the Energy II Project. The experience of Gilgel Gibe resulted in 
EEPCo management making the EMU a permanent unit within EEPCo, with the mandate 
to manage social and environmental issues of all EEPCo operations.  Furthermore, the 
Unit has prepared an HIV/AIDS strategy for the sector, funded by the Bank through the 
Multi Country HIV/AIDS program (MAP).  The Unit, now headed by a Coordinator and 
staffed by one environment specialist, one biologist/forester and four social scientists, is 
responsible for monitoring the application and implementation of environmental and 
social safeguards for all grid-extension projects and EREDPC for mini-grid and off-grid 
projects. Under the project,  EEPCo's EMU will continue to report to Corporate Planning 
and the General Manager; EREDPC will use its to-be-appointed Environment Specialist 
to be positioned in the REES.  Clear TORs are stipulated for the functions of EEPCo and 
are being completed for EREDPC. Project Officers and the EMU are responsible for the 
preparation and implementation of EIAs, EMPs and RAPs and conduct selected site visits 
to check on the implementation of technical specifications, environmental and social 
clauses and help resolve issues.  The Universal Electrification Program (UEAP) under a 
Deputy General Manager of EEPCo will have an Environment Section to monitor day to 
day operations at the field level. Regional Energy and Mining Bureaus are expected to 
apply their environmental training in project initiation where safeguards may play a 
deciding role in site selection and in the choice of appropriate technology. REES will be 
responsible for environmental screening and the implementation of EIA 
recommendations. For both EEPCo and EREDPC, the implementation of environmental 
protection clauses by contractors is to follow current practice and be monitored by site 
engineers overseen by the relevant environmental staff. Provisions are in place for 
consultation with Local Committees and Regional Bureaus and other stakeholders; the 
Federal Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) oversees all environmental and social 
safeguards activities related to the project, contractors and site engineers having to report 
to EEPCo/EPA for comments/recommendations before clearance by the investments 
office.  
 
Both EEPCo and EREDPC are to develop a Work/Action Program specifying the short 
and long term aims, work areas (including policy), staffing and budget.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The location of works is participatory at several levels.  Public consultations will be held 
prior to the electrification or generation works.  The stakeholders will include:  local 
governments and administrations, rural cooperatives, community-based organizations 
(CBOs), community-based facilitators (CBFs), NGOs, regional governments, and 
sectoral administrations and federal authorities.  The consultations will focus on assessing 
the impacts of project operations (socio-economic and environmental), identifying 
potential areas of conflict, and defining areas of collaboration.  A pocket-sized social and 
environmental operational guideline for contractors will be prepared by EEPCo's EMU 
and EREDPCs Environment Specialist.  Consultations with local communities will be 
conducted during the implementation of civil works, to minimize conflicts, enhance 
cooperation, and improve social benefits and performance of the works contracts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz T. A. Maurer 
04/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/17/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/17/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/17/2007 
Comments:   
Page  6
