Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4404 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/20/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P116788 
Project Name: Additional Financing for Productive Safety Net Project (APL II) 
Task Team Leader: William David Wiseman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
25.07
25.07 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) is to contribute to reducing 
household vulnerability and improving resilience to shocks.  This will be achieved through 
reform of the humanitarian emergency system to a development-oriented program which 
provides timely, predictable and adequate transfers to beneficiary households, thus allowing 
effective, consumption-smoothing and avoiding asset depletion; creates productivity and 
sustainable community assets; contributes to large-scale rehabilitation of severely degraded 
areas; stimulates local markets through demand linkages; and establishes more effective 
responses to drought shocks to avoid increasing destitution among affected households.  
 
The objective of this financing from the European Union Food Crisis Rapid Response Facility 
(EUFCRRF) is to ensure that the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) has adequate resources 
to continue to function effectively, thereby mitigating the impact of recent price shocks on the 
poorest and most vulnerable in Ethiopia. Resources from EUFCRRF would allow the PSNP to 
continue to operate in 2009 as designed, while a rapid response would ensure that there are no 
delays in the distribution of transfers to beneficiaries. Funds would be channeled as Additional 
Financing through the existing World Bank APL II Project.  
Page  2
The project activities consist of a public works program, the objective of which is to contribute 
to watershed development, environmental transformation, improved farming and land-use 
management systems and community infrastructure, under the community watershed 
development approach of the government.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed instrument is being processed under OP/BP 8.00. Since such instruments can make 
funds available quickly, it is well suited to respond to Ethiopia's short-term needs for additional 
support to the PSNP.  
 
The proposed Project consists of additional financing to fill the PSNP financing gap that has 
emerged as a result of food price inflation. Specifically, financing would be used to provide cash 
and in-kind transfers to food insecure households. Financing would be channeled through the 
existing World Bank APL II project, allowing it to continue to meet its development objectives. 
The funds provided would allow the program to cover for one year an estimated 632,556 
chronically food insecure beneficiaries.  
 
Around 80% of beneficiaries would participate in labor-intensive public works, building 
productive community assets that are planned within a watershed management framework. These 
community activities will include micro- and small-scale area closures/woodlots, agro-forestry, 
soil and water conservation measures such as hillside terracing and soil bunds, mulching of 
degraded areas, gully control, community roads, stream diversions, shallow wells, spring 
development, small dams, water ponds, drainage canals, vegetative fencing, fodder system 
collection, multi-purpose nurseries, construction and repair of classrooms, health posts and 
latrines, and the construction of child care centres.  
 
Around 20% of beneficiaries would be from labor-poor households including elderly, 
chronically sick or otherwise incapacitated households and these would receive transfers as 
Direct Support.  
 
The current World Bank APL II Project is supporting the PSNP with a consortium of partners 
including CIDA, DFID, IrishAID, EC, RNE, SIDA USAID, and WFP, who together have 
committed cash and in-kind resources valued at around US$1.2 billion during the current phase 
of the Program from 2007-2009.  All partners pool resources and provide on-going financing to 
the Program, which has an established track record of providing transfers on a timely basis.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be country-wide.  Public works activities under the PSNP will be carried out in 
some 290 woredas in Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR and Tigray Regional States, selected on specific 
criteria outlined in the Government's PSNP Program Implementation Manual.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and 
management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the establishment of Environmental 
Page  3
Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); The Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 
299/2002); and The Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).  
 
There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for monitoring environmental 
compliance: the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) and Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development (MoARD), which have decentralized to the regional level. In the case of 
MoARD, decentralization has gone further to the woreda and kebele levels. There exists a 
critical mass of capacity within the (MoARD) and EPA at the federal and decentralized levels to 
manage environmental and social safeguard issues.  
 
The process of selection and screening of public works for possible negative environmental 
impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are incorporated in the design as 
appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia's Environmental Impact Assessment proclamation. 
The process is documented in the ESMF produced by the Government and already disclosed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Already disclosed under PSNP PHASE II   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Already disclosed under PSNP PHASE II   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Already disclosed under PSNP PHASE II   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/14/2009 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The additional financing will use the ESMF prepared by the PSNP PHASE II dated 30 
October 2006 and already disclosed.  
 
The SMU (AFTH3) has agreed to accept the transfer of safeguard responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William David Wiseman 
05/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
