Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3251 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Gabon 
Project ID: P096375 
Project Name: ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE 
Task Team Leader: Kingson Khan Apara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Other economic management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
15.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project would be to reduce congestion on Libreville's only road outlet to the 
rest of the country and to improve road maintenance efficiency.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Libreville Road Access Improvement  
 
Libreville is an estuary city whose land link with the rest of the country is limited to a single 
road and a railway. In the last ten years, traffic to and from Libreville has been seriously 
undermined by rapid demographic growth characterized by massive encroachment into the right 
of way of the road. Cars take up to 4 hours during peak times to cover the twelve kilometer 
section leading into the capital city. This component of the project is a priority in the 
Government's Road Network Construction Program (PARR).  
 
The activities targeted by the component would include (i) widening and reinforcing the 10 km 
road outlet from Libreville, from the current single two lane carriage way to a four lane dual 
carriage way; (ii) improving access into living quarters along the outlet; (iii) constructing a lorry 
park and a market on a new sight to accommodate activities and vendors to be displaced from the 
Page  2
existing road; and (iv) implementing social safeguard measures relating to displaced persons and 
businesses along the outlet.  
 
Component 2: Road Maintenance Efficiency Improvement (US$ 20 million)  
 
The objective of this component would be to improve road maintenance efficiency through a 
pilot Output-Based Road Maintenance (ORM) contracting concept and strengthening the 
managerial capacity of the Road Maintenance Fund (RMF) and the General Directorate of Road 
Maintenance (DGER) to meet the requirements outlined in Paragraph 15 of the PCN.  
 
Sub-Component 2.1: Road Policy Development and Implementation (US$ 3 million estimate)  
 
The focus of this sub-component would be to support the preparation and implementation of a 
road maintenance strategy and its supporting action plan. Its purpose would be to endow the 
RMF and the DGER with adequate managerial capacity. The component would include:  
 
•
Road Policy Development: Technical assistance for the conduct of the strategic studies  
identified during project preparation and the preparation of a Road Master Plan (RMP)  
 
•
Road Policy implementation: Technical support, workshops, training and study tours for 
RMP implementation.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2: Road Maintenance and Management Support (US$ 20 million estimate)  
 
This sub-component would focus on implementing the road maintenance strategy prepared 
under Sub-component 2.1. Its objective would be to improve the efficiency of road maintenance. 
It would include:  
 
•
Pilot Output-based Road Maintenance: Co-financing to the RMF for works and 
supervision of such works in support of a pilot output-based road maintenance program, on 700 
km of the paved road corridor from Libreville to the Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea boarders;  
 
•
Road Planning and Program Management: Equipment, short/long term advisory support 
to road agencies in the areas of data collection and analyses, management information systems, 
budget management, procurement project and program implementation and oversight.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be located in Libreville city and along the main highway linking Libreville to 
the Cameroon and Equatorial Guinean borders.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies has not been assessed. It will be done 
in the first preparation mission. However, the capacity of the ministry of Equipment and 
Construction to handle safeguards matters is very weak. There is no capability to undertake EIA 
or any other environmental assessment instrument study. There is need for training and 
institutional strengthening in this ministry; especially in the areas of environmental assessments, 
environmental laws and policies, satellite remote sensing and geographic information systems 
(GIS). This will form part of the project.  
 
Given the dimension of social safeguards on the road section to be widened, GoG undertook 
during the identification mission to establish a special Enlarged Consultative Committee (ECC) 
composed of membership from ministries. The ECC would be empowered to engage in early 
consultations with the affected persons and NGOs. The work of the ECC and supporting 
technical assistance will be financed by the GoG.  The project team's proposal for the Bank to 
Page  3
finance part or all social costs relating to the displacement of persons and property was not 
endorsed during the PCN review.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project entails major rehabilitation works and up-grading from 2 lanes to 4 lanes. 
Potential impacts will include dust and noise. Since the roads are known, an environmental 
impact assessment (EIA) study will be done by the borrower with international technical 
assistance. This will have to be disclosed in-country and the Info shop prior to appraisal. The 
terms of reference for the EIA include the assessment of alternative locations for the market and 
lorry park  as well as provision for the assessment of the legal and institutional framework, 
including capacity building needs.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Visual inspection during identification did not point to any cultural resources on the right of 
way. However, this policy will be cross checked during the safeguard studies and triggered if 
necessary).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will involve displacement of vendors and land take, thereby triggering the policy. 
Compensation cost associated with the displacement of persons and property will be assessed as 
part of project preparation studies. A resettlement action plan (RAP) will have to be prepared by 
the borrower for Component 1, and disclosed in-country and the Info shop prior to appraisal. 
Road "maintenance" activities under Component 2 will also require at least a Policy Framework 
before appraisal, and possibly a RAP (if reconstruction of any road segments will be identified 
by the design studies   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/30/2008 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Request for Expression of Interest launched in October 2007  
 
Start of safeguard studies: January 2008  
 
Completion of safeguard studies: May 15, 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kingson Khan Apara 
02/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/26/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/26/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
