Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4363 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/21/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Gambia, The 
Project ID: P115427 
Project Name: The Gambia EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund 2009-2011 
Task Team Leader: Meskerem Mulatu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (75%);General education sector (25%) 
Theme: Education for all (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund 
28.00
28.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall project development objective is to improve conditions for teaching and learning in 
basic education including early childhood development, in alignment with the ongoing IDA 
project, which in turn is consistent with the overall objectives of the G
overnment’s Education 
Sector Strategy Plan and the Medium-Term Plan for 2009-2011.  This will be done by (a) 
improving performance of students, teachers and schools;  (b) strengthening capacity building 
and performance management, and enhancing monitoring and evaluation; and  (c) continuing 
expansion of effective access to under-served communities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The program will have three components:  
 
Component 1: 
Increasing access to and equity in basic education;  
 
Component 2: 
Improving the quality of teaching and learning; and  
 
Component 3: 
Strengthening Management and Institutional Capacity at central and 
regional levels.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide, urban and rural.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Environment Agency (NEA), and in particular its unit in charge of Environmental 
Impact Assessments, have been involved in the finalization and disclosure of the ESMF and 
RAP for the ongoing IDA Third Education, Phase 2 project, and would oversee that construction 
planned under both that project and the Catalytic Fund program are conducted in line with those 
framework documents.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has triggered OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment due to potential negative 
environmental impact related to the construction and rehabilitation of schools and staff quarters.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project has triggered OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement due to potential negative social 
impacts related to the construction of schools and staff quarters.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/21/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
The ongoing IDA education project has both an ESMF and an RPF, prepared in FY07 and 
disclosed in line with Bank guidelines.  ASPEN agreed that this is EA category B and 
triggers OP4.01 and OP4.12.  Transfer of safeguard management to the sector unit is normal 
in these cases.  The appraisal stage ISDS will indicate how the Project Coordination Unit has 
performed so far in the implementation of the existing RPF and if the institutional 
arrangements need strengthening.  Although there is no need to prepare new instruments, as 
there are no changes needed in the ESMF or RPF, Government will redisclose the original 
documents with a cover letter indicating that their provisions will be applicable to the new 
EFA FTI CF program.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Mulatu 
04/21/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/21/2009 
Comments:   
