Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3322 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Georgia 
Project ID: P110126 
Project Name: REGIONAL & MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 19, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (30%);Sanitation (30%);Roads and highways (30%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Other financial and private sector development (P);Municipal 
governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.20 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
1.80 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
3.60
5.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the efficiency and reliability of selected 
municipal services by rehabilitating high priority infrastructure, and building the capacity of 
participating local governments to provide sustainable services.  
 
Performance indicators may include (subject to final design at appraisal stage):  
 
For infrastructure investments:  
 
•
Percentage reduction in unaccounted-for water.  
 
•
Percentage reduction in cost per cubic meter of water provided.  
 
•
Wastewater improvements meet national environmental standards.  
 
•
Percentage of population in participating municipalities that are connected to wastewater 
services.  
 
•
Percentage reduction in vehicle operating costs due to local roads rehabilitation.  
Page  2
For institutional development:  
 
•
Percentage increase in tariff collection rate.  
 
•
Number of executed local budgets based on a transparent and predictable fiscal transfer 
system.  
 
•
Participating local governments initiate strategic programs for improved financial 
management and investment planning.  
 
•
Number of requested investments which pass feasibility studies and meet appraisal 
criteria based on ex-ante review by MDF.  
 
•
Improved performance benchmarks of MDF (to be defined during preparation).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would aim at i) strengthening the capacities of selected local government to provide 
adequate public services to their constituents through financing rehabilitation and expansion of 
infrastructure, along with development and implementation of plans for sustaining services, and 
ii) continue and expand support to MDF to administer and coordinate financial and technical 
assistance to local governments within the context of the ongoing program in Georgia supporting 
effective local government and territorial reforms.  
 
Similar to the Municipal Development and Decentralization Project II (MDDPII), closing date 
December 30, 2007, the follow-up project will make financing available, through the Georgia 
Municipal Development Fund (MDF), to creditworthy Local Government Units (LGUs) to 
implement their high priority municipal services and infrastructure projects. The project will 
provide technical and institutional support to MDF in order to increase the capacity of 
municipalities to provide services in a sustainable manner, including the support for the ongoing 
water utility reforms in Georgia. Particular attention will be given to planning and 
implementation of fiscal reforms for improved service delivery and tariff restructuring.  
 
Selection of local governments for participation in the project would be limited to about five, 
selected on the basis of measurable eligibility criteria including the eligibility to borrow, 
availability of viable action plans or strategies to move to sustainable service provision through 
tariff restructuring and collection, etc.  
 
The preparation of this project will benefit from the experience gained during the 
implementation of two successive municipal development projects. Furthermore, a 
comprehensive beneficiary survey is currently being conducted to inform the ICR of MDDPII 
and the preparation of this project.  
 
COMPONENT 1: INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT ($9.0 million IDA)  
 
•
Provision of financial resources to creditworthy local governments in order to finance 
rehabilitation and expansion of priority municipal services and infrastructure needs on a 
sustainable basis through access to credits.   Selection of local governments for participation in 
this component would be based on transparent and quantifiable criteria related to execution of 
decentralization reforms and local administrative capacity, including their capacity for planning 
and managing sustainable services. It is expected that the subprojects to be supported would be 
mainly in infrastructure services (water supply, wastewater and drainage), but could also include 
other municipal functions such as local roads, street lighting and urban transport, or 
refurbishment of facilities under municipal provision.   The broader development objective of the 
project would be to promote continued strengthening of local self governance.  
 
Page  3
COMPONENT 2: TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
($1.0 m)  
 
•
Component 2.1: Support the Municipal Finance Framework by further developing the 
policy framework for municipal finance, including the intergovernmental fiscal relationship.  
 
•
Building on MDDPII and the Poverty Reduction Support Operation (PRSO) 
achievements to enact a new Law on self-Government Budget in 2006 with clear procedures for 
inter-government finance, further TA support will be provided to the Local Budget Unit, 
Ministry of Finance, to monitor the newly enacted budget rules that are being implemented in 
developing the 2008 budget, and improve the formula-based expenditure transfer mechanism.  
Follow-up TA will also be provided to support the mechanism for reporting and monitoring local 
budgets.  
 
•
Component 2.2: Technical Assistance to LGUs  
 
•
Support to improve the capacity of municipalities and utilities in operation and 
maintenance of infrastructure and utility services, including support for fiscal reforms related to 
selected utilities services and support to increase the capacity of municipalities in road 
maintenance (e.g. tariff restructuring for water supply and sanitation services, financing 
strategies for municipal road management).  
 
•
Support to strengthen the fiscal management and participatory strategic planning capacity 
of newly consolidated LGUs, inter alia through the development of local government 
development strategies and investment plans.  
 
Since the project can only work with a limited number of municipalities, the approach under 
this component will be to work with the national regulatory bodies, e.g. the electricity and water 
regulatory body, in participating municipalities, and disseminate results and tools to other 
municipalities through workshops and other media.  
 
•
Component 2.3: Institutional Support to MDF  
 
•
Support to strengthen the financial and institutional performance of MDF to a) become 
the technical vehicle of support municipal development sector in Georgia, b) leverage additional 
financial resources for LGUs, c) initiate dialogue with commercial banks to promote municipal 
lending, and d) manage the lending portfolio efficiently. This would include an institutional 
assessment of MDF’s financial model and performance, and based on this, the development of a 
package of capacity building interventions that may include training on LG credit assessment 
and finance, support to attract additional funds from international financial institutions and local 
banks, and development of monitoring and evaluation tools to track local services performance 
(e.g. through participation in the International Benchmarking Network for water and sanitation 
services) and MDF effectiveness.  
 
•
Strengthen the technical capacity of MDF to design and appraise infrastructure projects in 
accordance with international standards and specifications, and development in collaboration 
with donor agencies of unified standard procedures for managing external funds from all sources.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will provide financial resources, through the Municipal Development Fund, to 
creditworthy local governments for the rehabilitation and expansion of priority municipal 
services and infrastructure needs.  The list of beneficiary municipalities, as well as the type of 
civil works that will be supported under the project, is not known at the time of project 
identification, however, given the limited IDA resources, only a few local governments will be 
supported, and mostly for the rehabilitation of water supply, sanitation and urban roads systems.   
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Municipal Development Fund (MDF) is the implementation agency.  The MDF has 
implemented a number of Bank projects, including two predecessor projects to the proposed 
project (MDDPI and MDDPII), and has developed a sufficient capacity to comply with Bank 
safeguard policies.  The Bank has also supported the capacity development of the MDF in 
safeguard compliance as part of the partnership between the Bank and the Millennium Challenge 
Corporation (MCC).  Nevertheless, the capacity of the MDF in the compliance of environmental 
and social safeguards will be reviewed during the project preparation, and measures for capacity 
development will be provided should the capacity is found to be insufficient.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environment chapter of the Operations Manual (OM) prepared for the MDDPII has been 
updated based on a review of experience during the first two projects and will be disclosed both 
in country and in Infoshop before appraisal.  The Operational Manual will include procedures 
and implementation arrangements to ensure that all civil works supported under the project will 
comply with the Bank’ environmental safeguard policies.  Sub-projects with environmental 
category A will not be eligible for financing.  
 
Project is not expected to have any resettlement, land acquisition, or limitations on access to 
income.  OP 4.12 is not triggered. Sub-projects triggering any of these will not be eligible for 
financing.  The Operational Manual includes a checklist that should be looked into in the 
feasibility study for each subproject, to verify the absence of land acquisition and other social 
impact that may trigger OP 4.12.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared:  May 1, 2007  
 
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS:  
 
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  
 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:  
 
The specific subprojects will be prepared and prepared during the project implementation as 
per the procedure and principles set up in the Operational Manual.The environmental section 
of the OM will be prepared before project appraisal.Specific subprojects proposed to the 
MDF for funding will be screened as per the OM, and necessary environmental assessment 
will be carried out as part of the feasibility study of respective subprojects.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
01/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
01/09/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
