Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4056 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/19/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Georgia 
Project ID: P112523 
Project Name: THIRD EAST-WEST HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 27, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (94%);Central government administration (4%);General 
transportation sector (2%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%);Administrative and 
civil service reform (20%);Trade facilitation and market access (20%);Regional 
integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
160.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
38.83
38.83 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
(i) 
To contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and improve access, ease of 
transit, and safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West corridor, through upgrading a 
segment of the East-West Highway from Tbilisi to Rikoti, including the Rikoti tunnel; and  
 
(ii) 
To strengthen the capacity of the government, RDMRDI and related entities to plan and 
manage better the road network and to implement a traffic safety pilot project   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Building a four-lane road from Sveneti to Ruisi along the existing and a new 
alignment, including the rehabilitation of the two-lane Rikoti tunnel lanes, design and 
supervision;  
 
Component 2: Providing technical assistance and goods to deepen the institutional capacity 
building initiated in previous road projects specifically in road maintenance and traffic safety;  
Page  2
Component 3: Providing technical assistance to support project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Areas between Sveneti and Ruisi for the construction of a four-lane road on existing and new 
alignment, as well as rehabilitation of the existing Rikoti tunnel.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementation agency, the RDMRDI, has implemented Category A and B projects with 
environmental impact assessment and land acquisition over a number of years, and gained 
significant experience in Bank safeguard policies. The Task Team will continue to provide 
hands-on support to the RDMRDI on safeguard issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is rated as Category A. There are two sub-projects with civil works: (i) upgrading 
of the highway section between Sveneti and Ruisi; and, (ii) rehabilitation of the Rikoti tunnel.  
Since the highway upgrading entails expansion of the existing two-lane road into a four-lane 
road, as well as construction of four-lane sections on a new alignment where re-routing is 
necessary, there are major environmental impacts and it is classified as Category A. The 
rehabilitation of the Rikoti tunnel will consist of civil works inside the tunnel to restore 
waterproofing and the structural integrity, as well as improved ventilation and lighting. This sub-
project is considered Category B.  
 
A
draft Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was prepared and disclosed for the 
Sveneti-Ruisi sub-project which will see several bridges reconstructed, some new bridges 
constructed, road embankments and the construction of an 800 m tunnel. The EIA (i) established 
the scope of the work; (ii) collected detailed baseline data; (iii) assessed expected impacts; (iv) 
outlined mitigation measures; and, (v) developed environmental monitoring and management 
plans. A detailed Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for each of the three construction 
contracts is under preparation. The EIA and EMPs will be finalized prior to appraisal.  
 
The Rikoti tunnel rehabilitation project design work is being prepared by a specialized 
tunnel consultant. Owing to the specialized nature of the works, and its Category B rating, the 
EIA and EMP will be prepared by the same design consultant. This is expected to cover the key 
aspects of the tunnel works, with particular attention to traffic management during construction 
and the potential presence of materials such as asbestos. It is anticipated that the Rikoti Tunnel 
EIA and EMP will be completed and disclosed by the fourth quarter of 2009. Owing to the 
specialized nature of the tunnel activities, the Bank team includes a tunnel specialist to ensure 
proper preparation and supervision.  
 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
A
Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) is also under way to provide an outline of the 
program from Sveneti to the Rikoti tunnel, a corridor of some 64 km in length. The next road 
section for upgrading will be Ruisi-Rikoti tunnel, but the alignment is unknown. It is not part of 
the current project. This REA will describe the existing environmental and social issues, discuss 
and compare project alternatives in terms of their individual as well as cumulative environmental 
implications, identify baseline data gaps and needs for environmental studies required for the 
preparation of the expected projects. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) is also 
being prepared. The REA and EMF will cover the entire scope of the corridor.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The EIA identified known cultural property sites and site specific environmental 
management plans will include procedures to address any concerns identified as well as any 
chance finds that occur during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Sveneti-Ruisi section will build a four-lane road on existing and new alignment. 
Acquisition of private land will be necessary. The RDMRDI has hired a consultant who assessed 
the scale and scope of land acquisition and potential relocation of households for different 
alternative alignments. The RDMDI has prepared the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
which has been cleared by the Bank and disclosed. A draft Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for 
the Sveneti-Ruisi section has been prepared and disclosed. The final RAP will be disclosed 
before appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/03/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The RPF has been cleared and disclosed. For Sveneti-Ruisi the draft RAP, EIA and EA 
Summary have been disclosed. The final versions and the Sveneti-Ruisi EIA and EMPs will 
be disclosed prior to appraisal. For the Rikoti tunnel there will be no RAP. The Rikoti Tunnel 
EIA and EMP will be prepared by the fourth quarter 2009 and disclosed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
04/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
05/19/2009 
Comments:   
