Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3880
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P110126 
Project Name:  REGIONAL & MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (30%);Housing construction (25%);Sanitation (20%);Roads and 
highways (20%);Sub-national government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Other financial and private sector development (P);Municipal 
governance and institution building (P);Conflict prevention and post-conflict 
reconstruction ( 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.80 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
7.90 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
6.70
15.40 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the efficiency and reliability of selected 
municipal services by rehabilitating high priority infrastructure, building the capacity of 
participating local governments to provide sustainable services, and supporting urgent 
post-conflict investment needs.  
 
Key performance indicators include:  
 
i. 
Improved living conditions of population living in investment-impacted areas as a 
result of increased access to basic infrastructure and services.  
Page  2
ii. 
Participating local governments developed strategic programs for improved 
budgeting financial management and investment planning.  
 
iii. 
Number of people benefitted from completed urgent post-conflict investments.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Infrastructure Investment  
 
1.1.  Provision of financial resources to creditworthy Local Self Governments (LSGs) to 
finance rehabilitation and expansion of priority municipal services and infrastructure 
needs on a sustainable basis.  
 
1.2.  Provision of grant financing for municipal services and infrastructure projects in 
small and none creditworthy LSGs.  
 
Component 2:  Emergency Rehabilitation and Construction  
 
Rehabilitation of conflict damaged regional and municipal infrastructure services, and 
construction of durable housing Internally Displaced People (IDPs).  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Development  
 
Enhancing the capacity of the Ministry of Finance, MDF, LSGs, and utilities; and 
provision of goods, including computers and other equipment   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The scope of the project is nationwide.  The Project will make financing available to 
creditworthy LSGs on an on-lending basis, and grants to small LSGs and non-
creditworthy LSGs, to implement their high priority municipal services and infrastructure 
sub-projects. The project will also provide grant financing for rehabilitation of LSG 
infrastructure damaged in the conflict and construction of durable housing for IDPs.  The 
project will include technical and institutional support to LSGs to provide services in a 
sustainable manner, including the support for the ongoing water utility reforms. Particular 
attention will be given to planning and implementation of fiscal reforms for improved 
service delivery and tariff restructuring.  
 
Since the project is designed in a demand-basis, the full list of beneficiary LSGs, and 
their requested sub-projects, that will be financed under the four year duration of the 
project are not known ex-ante.  However, the list of potential sub-projects to be financed 
under the first year of Project implementation is known and first phase sub-projects are 
currently under feasibility study and engineering design.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 is triggered because the project involves civil works (mainly rehabilitation, 
possibly some new residential construction). In accordance with the FI Category, an 
Environmental Assessment and Management Framework has been prepared and 
incorporated into the project Operational Manual, outlining the screening criteria, 
requirements and procedures for preparation of appropriate level environmental 
assessments and environmental management plans for sub-projects to be financed under 
the project.  The Framework is carried over from the previous project (RMIDP II) and 
has been updated in accordance with the current project requirements.  
 
Part of physical works to be financed under the first component of the Project will be 
limited to rehabilitation or reconstruction of the existing infrastructure. Therefore, no 
large scale or irreversible environmental impact is expected to result from them. Sub-
projects to be financed under component (1) are not likely to be of the environmental 
Category A.  
 
Emergency rehabilitation and construction component (2) of the Project would includes 
rehabilitation of LSG infrastructure damaged in the conflict and the construction of 
durable housing for IDPs..   While no investments requiring Category A-level EIA are 
anticipated, the Environmental Framework covers screening criteria and procedures for 
Category A sub-projects.  In accordance with OP 8.00 (Rapid Response), a flexible 
approach is being taken to mobilize emergency investments as quickly as possible.  
Emergency sub-project proposals will be subjected to environmental screening by 
environmental specialists to filter out any carrying high risk to public health and 
environment. Such high risk proposals may be subjected to regular environmental 
assessment and approval procedures applicable to sub-projects under component (1), or 
be dropped from the Project portfolio. For the sub-projects recommend for emergency 
financing, a quick environmental review will be carried out and simple adaptation of the 
EMP in the Operations Manual will be made.  
 
Page  4
The rehabilitation of infrastructure and services to be supported under the Project is not 
expected to require acquisition of private land, physical relocation of households or 
permanent loss of income.  Nonetheless, as by virtue of good practice, OP 4.12 is 
triggered and the Municipal Development Fund (MDF), the implementation agency of 
the Project, has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) so that the project 
would be able to support possible viable sub-projects that may require land acquisition.  
This is also good practice for MDF, which is becoming a leading financial intermediary 
in Georgia dealing with municipal infrastructure in both on-lending and grant basis using 
financial resources extended by the World Bank, several other IFIs and Government of 
Georgia.  Public consultation and the disclosure of the draft RPF have been completed 
(http://www.mdf.org.ge/).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The MDF has prepared an Environmental Framework for processing sub-projects from 
the entry point of proposals throughout their review, approval, engineering design and 
implementation.  This Framework is in line with guidelines provided in OP 4.01 and it is 
part of the general Operations Manual of the MDF.  Prescribed procedures include 
mandatory environmental review of all incoming sub-project proposals, their 
environmental categorization, and subsequent EIA as required.  Environmental 
Framework also calls for preparation of EMPs for sub-projects and their incorporation 
into the civil works contracts.  The Environment Framework has been updated to reflect 
the additional activities (Component 2).  Public consultation and the disclosure of the 
Environment Framework have been completed (http://www.mdf.org.ge/).  
 
Simplified quick environmental review may be applied to sub-projects for emergency 
rehabilitation, which would involve screening to eliminate  high risk proposals and 
preparation of EMPs for sub-projects selected for financing.  Sub-project monitoring 
scheme is in place to track compliance with EIA requirements and EMPs at the sub-
project implementation phase. MDF has extensive experience, gained during two 
previous IDA-finance projects, in applying environmental due diligence to its operations.  
It is expected that the MDF's human resource capacity will be reinforced by hiring an 
environmental consultant to ensure that environmental oversight remains sufficient, 
especially during emergency rehabilitation.  
 
The MDF has also developed the Resettlement Policy Framework, which adequately 
addresses the OP 4.12.  The MDF does not have experience in resettlement and land 
acquisition.  The Bank task team has been working closely with social and environmental 
Page  5
specialist of the MDF in developing such capacity, and will continue to provide advice 
and technical support.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental Framework has been disclosed through publicizing and discussing 
environmental chapter of the Operations Manual among key stakeholders. As part of the 
sub-project appraisal, public consultations on individual sub-projects will be conducted 
with the affected communities and the interested NGOs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  6
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
09/18/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
09/18/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
09/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Kanthan Shankar 
09/17/2008 
Comments:   
