Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/15/2009 
Report No.:  AC4629
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P117152 
Project Name:  Kakheti Regional Roads Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  George A. Banjo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 22, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (95%);General transportation sector (5%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%);Injuries and non-
communicable diseases (20%);Regional integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.50
7.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objectives are to:  
 
(i) reduce transport costs and improve access between Vaziani, Gombori and Telavi; 
and  
 
(ii) improve traffic safety along the Vaziani-Gombori-Telavi road and along the Telavi-
Gurjaani-Bakhurtsikhe-Sagarejo-Vaziani road.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1. Improvement of Vaziani-Gombori-Telavi road: The secondary two-lane 
Vaziani-Gombori-Telavi (VGT) road, currently in poor condition, will be rehabilitated 
along its existing alignment with small areas (in total about 3.80 km) of minor 
realignment to straighten curves.  
 
Component 2. Road safety improvements and institutional strengthening: Assistance 
will be provided to implement road safety improvement measures along the VGT road 
and the Vaziani-Sagarejo-Bakhurtsikhe-Gurjaani-Telavi road and for increasing the 
Page  2
operational effectiveness of the Regional Office of the Roads Department(RD) in 
Sagarejo.  
 
Component 3. Project Implementation: Institutional support will be provided to the 
Roads Department and the Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Center to facilitate 
Project implementation, audits and Project monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The VGT road is a secondary road providing the shortest route between Tbilisi and the 
Telavi and Akhmeta district areas of the Kakheti region. Vaziani lies 27 km from Tbilisi 
and is about 65 km from Telavi. Along the VGT road are small towns and villages which 
depend on it for access to Tbilisi and Telavi. The route has challenging terrain which is 
prone to landslides and crosses several rivers and large streams, as well as the 
geologically sensitive Gombori pass. The Project is expected to have the most 
environmental impact around the town of Ujarma, where realignment of a road section 
and construction of a bridge would require clearing of forest vegetation and conduct of 
earth works close to a historical site with a high likelihood of encountering 
archaeological artifacts. Within the first 27 km of the VGT, some quarrying activities 
exist. The road is also one of the options for travelling to the important resort town of 
Sioni from Tbilisi via Sasadilo village. This has given the route two different traffic 
characteristics with the first section up to Sasadilo (of about 27 km) having a higher 
traffic volume and significantly more heavy goods vehicles due to the quarrying 
activities, with the second section carrying mainly passenger vehicles which pass through 
the center of the many small towns and villages along the route.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Rehabilitation of the VGT road is not expected to cause significant or irreversible 
impacts on the natural environment. The Project will mostly rehabilitate existing road 
within the current Right-of-Way (ROW). However, a partial realignment will be 
necessary in order to ensure road safety and meet the higher design standards. It is 
expected that the total length of re-aligned sections will be around 3.80 km. Realignment 
will include construction of a new 53 m long bridge near Ujarma. Works for replacement 
and reconstruction of several shorter existing bridges will be of a much smaller scope and 
carry minimal threats to water quality and aquatic life.  
 
Re-alignment of several sections of the road, especially near Ujarma, will require 
clearing of small stripes of land from the forest vegetation. Total area of forested land 
plots to be cleared is estimated at around 30ha. Length of the individual strips of forested 
plots to be cleared is 100-200m, and their width (counted from the edge of the existing 
motorway) does not exceed 100m, in most locations being considerably narrower. These 
plots are not included in any type of protected areas and do not represent virgin or high 
value forests. These plots are not in commercial use and are not critical for supporting the 
livelihood of local communities.  
 
Given proximity of the existing gravel and sand quarries to the Project site, it is 
expected that these construction materials will be purchased from nearby operating 
licensed suppliers, eliminating a need for opening new quarries by the Project 
contractors. Common risks associated with road rehabilitation, such as those coming 
from deployment of construction machinery, operating of work camps, extraction of 
gravel and sand, and accumulation of waste will be mitigated through adherence to the 
Environmental Management Plan(EMP) and application of general good construction 
standards.  
 
The VGT road passes through areas having several historical, architectural, and 
archaeological monuments. The most important of these monuments is the ancient 
fortified town of Ujarma, within the vicinity of the VGT road. The first historical data on 
Ujarma date back to the 3rd century AD. Although construction works will not affect any 
of the known monuments, including Ujarma, there is a high likelihood of chance finds 
during earth works. The EMP, which will be a part of the contract, contains a chance find 
procedure.  
 
The exact alignment has been determined for the first 27km section, which will be 
rehabilitated under the first year program. It is expected that 66 land plots would be 
affected under the first year program. All land plots are used for farming or residential, 
except for one land plot that is used for commercial purposes. Two households will lose 
more than half the total landholding, whose livelihood is not based on the land that will 
be acquired and from whom the RD plans to acquire the entire land if so wished by the 
land owners.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect and long term negative impacts are anticipated due to future activities in the 
Project area. Private land may be temporarily occupied to store construction materials. 
Contractors must negotiate with land owners on terms of land use, and reinstate the land 
to the original condition once the civil works have completed. The road improvement will 
lead to increased traffic volumes and speeds and measures to mitigate their impact have 
been identified as part of the road safety audit of the design.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Three alternative alignments of the VGT road were considered, including the existing 
one. Two new alignments would imply construction of a tunnel to avoid crossing of the 
landslide-prone Gombori pass. The alternative of rehabilitating the road within its current 
alignment was considered with and without an option of constructing a new, higher 
capacity bridge over river Iori. The current alignment without a new bridge over river Iori 
has been finally selected. This alternative has a higher economic rate of return compared 
with the other options. At the same time it has considerably lesser impact on the 
ecosystem of the river Iori. Engineering solutions, cheaper than construction of a tunnel, 
will be applied to the section of the road at the Gombori pass, significantly decreasing 
amount of excavated material to be disposed off during construction.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower carried out initial environmental and social overview of the proposed 
Project as a part of its feasibility study. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was 
prepared following the requirements of OP/BP 4.01. The EIA report, including the EMP, 
was reviewed and cleared by the Bank. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was 
developed, setting out policies and procedures to mitigate impact due to the Project over 
the entire corridor. The RPF has been reviewed and cleared by the Bank. A Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) was prepared for the first 27km section where exact impact is known, 
according to the policies and procedures set out in the RPF and the Bank OP 4.12, as well 
as existing Georgian legislation. The final RAP has been disclosed in country and sent to 
InfoShop. The design for the second section of the VGT road from km 27 to km 65 is 
under preparation. Once it is available, the RAP for this section will be prepared and the 
EMP revised to outline the detailed mitigation measures for this section of the road.   
 
The Borrower's implementing agency for the Project is the Roads Department of the 
Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure (RDMRDI), assisted by the 
Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Center (TRRC). These agencies are experienced 
and well performing in the implementation of the World Bank financed operations (First 
and Second East-West Highway Improvement Projects and the Secondary and Local 
Roads Project). RDMRDI has received technical assistance aimed at strengthening 
institutional capacity for better handling environmental and social implications of 
planning, construction, management and maintenance of roads and is provided with 
Page  5
technical guidebooks, though its current in-house environmental capacity is weak and the 
role of environmental supervision of works is mostly delegated to external consultants. 
Environmental compliance of the ongoing projects is generally satisfactory, with some 
identified shortfalls, currently being addressed by the RD.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the RD, local authorities of Kakheti, and the people residing in 
small towns and villages along the VGT road, which will experience both negative and 
positive impacts of the project. The Bank commissioned a road safety audit which 
identified a number of safety improvements, particularly within villages. These 
recommendations will be incorporated into the design documents. Potential negative 
impacts include a need for land take, and temporary inconvenience during rehabilitation 
works caused by deployment of construction machinery as well as transportation and 
storage of construction materials and waste. The participatory process of developing 
RAPs carries the mechanism of informing local communities of the resettlement issues 
and finding solutions acceptable for them. Impacts of the construction works and 
measures for their mitigation were disclosed to the affected communities through 
publication of EIA report and the EMP, and through holding of public consultation 
meetings in convenient locations near the Project site.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/26/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/26/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George A. Banjo 
09/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
09/03/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
09/09/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
09/15/2009 
Comments:   
