Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/30/2009 
Report No.:  49329
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P112523 
Project Name:  THIRD EAST-WEST HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 27, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (94%);Central government administration (4%);General 
transportation sector (2%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%);Administrative and 
civil service reform (20%);Trade facilitation and market access (20%);Regional 
integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
147.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
37.12
37.12 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are:  
 
(i) 
To contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and improve access, 
ease of transit, and road safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West corridor; 
and,  
 
(ii) 
To strengthen the capacity of the Roads Department and related government 
entities to plan and manage better the road network and to implement a traffic safety pilot 
project.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Upgrading the existing E60 East-West Highway from Sveneti to Ruisi to 
a
dual carriageway road, design and supervision;   
 
Component B: Providing technical assistance and goods to deepen the institutional 
capacity building initiated in previous road projects specifically in road maintenance and 
traffic safety;  
Page  2
Component C: Support for project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will build a new four lane motorway for the 15km section between Sveneti 
and Ruisi on a new alignment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project has been classified as Category A for environmental assessment 
purposes. The project will build a new four-lane road along existing and new alignment 
for the 15km between Sveneti and Ruisi, including construction of a new two tube 800 m 
long tunnel.  
 
The main environmental impacts are expected at the construction phase and come from 
cleaning of the right-of-way (RoW); establishment/operation of work camps and 
temporary access roads; operation/servicing of construction machinery; sourcing of 
construction materials; earth works and works in waterways. Clearing of the RoW will be 
required for widening of road in the sections where the highway alignment remains 
unchanged, and for cleaning a new route for the re-aligned sections. This would imply 
removal of topsoil, cutting of shrubs and trees, and clearing of some buildings.  
 
The road alignment was selected from several alternatives based on several criteria, 
including its least impact on the vegetation due to construction of a tunnel, though cutting 
of trees will still be required near tunnel portals.  Establishment of construction camps 
and access roads is associated with generation of solid waste and waste water, 
Page  3
compression of soil, and noise disturbance for nearby population as well as animals. 
Parking, operating and servicing of construction machinery will carry the risk of 
operational spills of oils and lubricants and generation of noise, vibration, dust, and 
emissions.  Supply of the highway construction with asphalt, stones, gravel, and send 
may carry the risk of disturbance of landscape as soil as well as of hazardous emissions 
and generation of noise. Construction works will also have important implications for the 
occupational health and safety of workers / personnel.  
 
Impacts of the improvement of the Sveneti-Ruisi section of the highway during its 
operation phase are less significant and diverse. Three environmental aspects of the 
highway operation will be air pollution from automobile emissions, noise, and pollution 
of soil and surface water with litter and drainage from the highway. Finally, traffic safety 
will be an important issue with health, social, and environmental implications. The latter 
will, however, be improved from the current situation by providing a dual-carriageway 
road.  
 
Some 5.9ha of private land will need to be acquired from seventy nine private entities, 
including three businesses.  About 940 trees will need to be removed. No physical 
relocation of households is expected to occur.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Private land may be temporarily occupied to store construction materials. Contractors 
must negotiate with land owners on terms of land use, and reinstate the land to the 
original condition once the civil works have completed, as per requirements spelled out in 
EMP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The feasibility study considered costs and benefits of alternative alignments, including 
the impact on land acquisition and on the environment.  The final alignment has been 
selected so that it requires a smaller scale of land acquisition and a lesser volume of tree 
felling.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The initial environmental overview of the project was carried out at the early stage of its 
preparation and the report with its findings was publicly discussed on September 20, 
2007 in the office of Gori municipality (administrative center close to the project site). 
The meeting was attended by the representatives of the local government, project-
affected communities, and the Ministry of Environment Protection and Natural 
Resources. Feedback received during this consultation was fully incorporated into the 
draft EIA report. The draft EIA report was disclosed through the Infoshop (April 13, 
2009) and in country (April 14, 2009). The Executive Summary of the EIA report was 
also posted in the Infoshop (April 21, 2009). A second round of public consultations on 
Page  4
the EIA report held June 29, 2009 in Gori, and planned for June 30, 2009 in the central 
office of the Roads Department in Tbilisi.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared, setting out policies and 
procedures that will apply to the acquisition of private land and the mitigation of impacts 
that will trigger OP 4.12. The RPF was reviewed and found to be consistent with the 
Bank OP 4.12. It was disclosed in-country on April 6, 2009, and through Infoshop on 
April 9, 2009.  
 
The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was drafted by the borrower in accordance with 
the RPF. A household and market survey was conducted, and the inventory of project 
impact and the applicable market prices to establish compensation were established.  The 
final RAP will be disclosed prior to completion of project negotiations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure (MoRDI), through the Roads 
Department (RD) is responsible for carrying out environmental studies required for the 
project and for ensuring environmental compliance during the project implementation. 
Specifically, MoRDI, through RD, will ensure that (i) national legislation and the Bank 
policies on environment and social protection are followed; (ii) consultation with the 
public, as needed, takes place; (iii) information is disclosed to the public, as needed; and 
(iv) information on environmental issues under the project is shared with the Bank.  
 
Within RD, the Division of the Project Analysis, New Technologies, and Environmental 
Protection under the Office of Technical Policy is responsible for all environmental 
issues related to highway development.  There is one Environmental Specialist in this 
unit, who has undergone training provided through the TA under the first EWHIP. 
Current in-house environmental capacity of the RD needs strengthening to ensure quality 
control of an outsourced function of environmental performance monitoring of works 
providers, as well as adequate and timely action of RD in response to the information 
incoming from works supervisors.  
 
The RD will implement the RAP.  The RD has a special unit responsible for land 
acquisition, which under the first and second EWHIP has gained considerable experience 
in implementing land acquisition as per OP 4.12.  The Bank has hired a local consultant 
based in Tbilisi who has been working closely with RD and provide hands-on support to 
ensure compliance with OP 4.12.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/13/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/21/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/06/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/09/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  6
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
06/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
06/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
06/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/29/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
06/29/2009 
Comments:   
