Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4115 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/19/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P115065 
Project Name: 2nd Additional Financing for Small Towns Water Supply & Sanitation 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Mathewos Woldu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (75%);Sanitation (20%);Sub-national government administration 
(5%) 
Theme: Other human development (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Decentralization (S);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project’s development objective is to increase access to small town water supply and 
sanitation services in six regions in four years, by providing 500,000 people with water supply 
facilities, and 50,000 people with sanitary facilities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project, the second phase of an Adaptable Program Loan (APL), financed by an IDA credit 
of SDR 17.8 million (US$ 26 million equivalent) was approved by the Board in July 2004, and 
became effective on November 17, 2004.  An Additional Financing of SDR 6.6 million (US$10 
million equivalent) was approved on June 21, 2007, to enable the project fully meet the original 
Development Objectives due to an unanticipated cost overrun.  The first phase of the APL 
(Second Community Water and Sanitation Project) which closed on December 31, 2004, 
successfully provided potable water to over 750,000 rural dwellers and helped establish a system 
of decentralized delivery of water and sanitation services through local governments.  
Page  2
The proposed additional financing is required to: (i) meet a financing gap to cover an 
unanticipated cost overrun and complete original project targets, and (ii) finance scaled-up 
activities that would provide water supply systems for an additional 50,000 people. The scaled 
up activities are a continuation of the orginal project and in the same localities as the original 
project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Small Towns in Ghana.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Compliance with fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards for the ongoing project has been 
satisfactory.  As part of the orginal project preparation and design, an Environmental 
Management Plan was prepared in accordance with the Bank’s environmental and social 
safeguard procedures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The additional financing triggers an EA but one has already been done,approved and is being 
implemented as part of the original project.  An additional ESMF is not required for this 
additional financing given that an ESMF was already prepared for the original project, describes 
mitigation measures related to the project activities and was deemed satisfactory- that EA 
assessed potential impacts in the general localities that this additional financing will cover. In 
addition, there are no new components or activities. A very short addendum will be added to the 
existing ESMF that assesses the cost of mitigation/reporting for the expanded area. In addition, 
the ESMF addendum will include an assessment of any new towns if these towns are in 
environmentally sensitive locations. This is unlikely, but a determination will be made and 
included in the addendum as needed. As is required, all sub-projects related to this additional 
financing will have to meet the environmental standards outlined in the ESMF. The ESMF will 
be redisclosed in the new towns.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will require pieces of land for the construction of water pumps and communal 
water point sources. These lands are often released by communal leaders, ascertained and 
endorsed by the appropriate government agency. These are not required to result in involuntary 
resettlement. Nonetheless, the project has an RPF which has guided its activity implementation. 
The new additional financing is not expected to generate new social issues that will require new 
commitment by the borrower. The existing RPF will be used to guide the process of land 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
acquisition and proper documentation. In the event that new social issues that may have new 
implications,the team will do an addendum to the existing RPF. The addendum will be attached 
to the original RPF for re-disclosure. Otherwise the old RPF will be re-disclosed for the benefit 
of the new communities and stakeholders.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/25/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The addendum to the EA will be completed in the next 2 weeks. The ESMF and addendum 
will be disclosed in the 5 districts of the 11 additional towns prior to appraisal and also in the 
infoshop   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mathewos Woldu 
02/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/19/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
02/19/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
