Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2720 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P102000 
Project Name: Ghana Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Ajay Kumar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (75%);General transportation sector (15%);Central 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (P);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The goal of Government’s strategy is to strengthen the provision of transport infrastructure & 
services and improve the business environment to sustain broad-based growth and raise living 
standards through increased access to and affordability of basic social services and income-
generating activities.  
 
The specific objectives are to:  
 
Ensure expansion and maintenance of transport infrastructure(improve road condition mix, 
increase access to market through improvement in feeder road network, fund road maintenance 
gap, develop major highways, establish an asset register for each mode, define and adopt 
standards by type, functionality and development use, strengthen domestic construction 
industry);  
 
Page  2
Develop and strengthen appropriate legal, institutional and regulatory framework (Establish 
National Transport Policy, separate the functionalities for policy formulation, regulatory, asset 
management and implementation for the transport sector, enforce traffic Act and regulation)  
 
Reduce transport costs considering inter-modal coordination  
 
Generate employment through the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads to mitigate 
rural poverty.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposal for a future intervention in the Transport Sector was made by the Government of 
Ghana to its development partners at the 2005 Development Partner’s Conference.  As indicated 
in the GPRS II, transport is a key factor to the Government achieving its Medium Term 
Development Strategy.  The proposal is for a Transport SWAP continuing along the lines of 
RSDP.  As part of the program, the issues identified above will be addressed.  Key program 
components include:  
 
Road Sector:  this sub- sector will continue to be the predominant focus of the Bank’s support, 
in particular upgrading/improving main, feeder and urban roads.Opportunities for performance 
based maintenance contracting and improving service standards (freight transport, rural and 
urban transport) will also be explored.  Regional integration and facilitation of movement to 
landlocked neighbors are also a government and NEPAD priority.  The regional corridors are the 
main network for movement of goods North-South and East-West and are already covered by 
other WB funded projects (West Africa Road Transport Project and Abidjan-Lagos Corridor 
Project).  
 
Aviation Sector: With improvements to its security systems and a restructuring of the Civil 
Aviation Authority into an independent airports authority, KIA will strengthen its place among 
key West African Hubs.  The Regional Air Transport Project will leverage additional funding for 
studies, goods and works and ensure that Ghana is a part of the region-wide program to improve 
airport safety and security.  
 
Railway Sector:  The sub-components include:  a) formulating a strategy and the way forward; 
b) developing reliable financial and market feasibility studies associated with the proposed 
investment; c) conducting studies to examine the context in which the private sector is required 
to participate in rail services.  
 
The IDA envelope as of now is US$100 million.  In addition, there are regional projects under 
preparation.  During preparation, specific interventions in support of the National Transport 
Policy will be identified and prioritized.  It is expected that other DPs will finance elements of 
the agreed prioritized investment program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ghana - The project will include roads, rail, and air transport and cover various regions of the 
country, but which have yet to be selected at current stage.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As part of the recommendations of the Road Sector Development Program (RSDP), 
environmental management desks were established at the three agencies (DUR, GHA, and DFR) 
of the Ministry of Road Transportation. The environmental management desks of the three 
agencies will ensure safeguards compliance through the implementation and internal monitoring 
of the EMPs and the RAPs. The Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (GEPA) will ensure 
the external monitoring.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental category: A - Full Assessment  
 
Infrastructure projects always induce physical and social impacts. The potential adverse 
impacts on the transport program include: soil erosion, temporary and permanent loss of land and 
property, disturbances in the water quality, noise and dust are presumed to induce adverse 
physical environmental impacts during civil works. An Environmental and Social Management 
(ESMF) was prepared in 2006 as part of the Accra Urban Transport Project, and will serve for 
this project as well. In line with the previsions of the ESMF, EIAs will be prepared and disclosed 
prior to appraisal, as need be.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Anticipated adverse social impacts are: land acquisition, inducing resettlement, disruption of 
social and cultural cohesion and HIV/AIDS. A resettlement policy framework (RPF) was 
prepared in 2006 as part of the Accra Urban Transport Project, and will serve for this project as 
well. In line with the previsions of the RPF, RAPs will be prepared and disclosed prior to 
appraisal, as need be.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/26/2008 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
July 01, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ajay Kumar 
03/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
