Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3581 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P111117 
Project Name: Community Based Rural Development Project Supplemental 
Task Team Leader: Sean Bradley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (30%);Water supply (30%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing will enhance the impact of the original project through 
improvements in local level infrastructure that support the social and economic well-being of 
rural populations in Ghana.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Specifically, the additional financing will support: (i) reconstruction of public works affected by 
the floods in northern Ghana, (ii) extend existing support for decentralized service provision 
through the financing of basic infrastructure to all DAs in Ghana for an additional sixteen 
months of operation, (iii) expand and extend capacity building for local, distict, regional and 
national government authorities in relation to (i) and (ii) above, and (iv)cover incremental project 
management and operational costs associated with these additional activities and time frame for 
project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The CBRDP is national in scope, working through all local government District Authorities 
(DAs). Approximately 32% of the additional financing will be focused on the three northern 
Page  2
regions of the north of Ghana in response to flood damage, while the balance of additional 
financing will be used for all DAs throughout the country. Full value of additional financing will 
go toward scaling up of existing project activities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Bank safeguard staff have found the application of the Project's existing ESMF and RPF to be 
satisfactory and no significant negative environmental or social impacts to have taken place 
under the existing project.  A specific review in July 2007 found the project environmentally 
compliant.  Further, the task team agrees to re-review the application of the safeguard framework 
documents (ESMF and RPF) during the first supervision mission following Board approval of 
the additional financing credit.  
 
The project has trained staff at district levels to apply the screening formats, and Government's 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) staff at regional level have undertaken to review sub-
project screenings and follow-up on any potential problem projects. Problems that have arisen 
over borrow pits, improper landscaping leading to erosion, and increased use of fuel-wood 
associated with micro-enterprises have been identified and corrected through regular supervision 
actions.  
 
Issues that have arisen during the on-going project have included improper re-fill of contruction 
borrow pits leading to potential health and other hazards.  This has been corrected by tying final 
contractor payments to refilling such pits.  Poor landscaping around schools have also caused 
some erosion at some sites, but training of District engineers about this specific issue has also 
helped correct this problem, as well as involving communities in helping improve the environs of 
newly constructed works.  Finally, increased demand on fuel wood resulting from clay/pottery 
micro-enterprises has been identified and addressed through the encouragement of wood lot 
planting and the involvement of EPA staff in advising micro-enterprises.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The additional financing credit will rely on the existing ESMF, found to be effective during 
MTR in July 2007, to screen sub-projects.  However, a review of the application of this and other 
safeguard screening documents will be carried out during the first Supervision mission following 
approval.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No instances of IR have been triggered under the on-going project.  Nonetheless, an RPF for 
the project exists and its continued appropriateness and application will be reviewed and 
confirmed during the first supervision mission following Board approval of the Add'l Financing 
credit   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
additional financing for scale up activities identical to original project.  Thus, no changes 
contemplated for ESMF and RPF.  Both will be re-disclosed in country and thru InfoShop   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sean Bradley 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
