Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2009 
Report No.:  AC2724
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P102000 
Project Name:  Transport Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ajay Kumar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (75%);General transportation sector (15%);Central 
government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (P);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00
13.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve mobility of goods and 
passengers through reduction in travel time, vehicle operating cost, and implementation 
of safety strategy.  This objective will be achieved through strengthening the capacity of 
transport institutions in planning, regulation, operations and maintenance. The 
achievement of the PDO will be monitored using the following performance indicators:  
 
i.    Average passenger travel times reduced by about 20 percent on project roads;  
 
ii.   Average vehicle operating cost reduced by over 10 percent on project roads;  
 
iii.  Fatality rate reduced by over 15 percent from 22 per 10,000 vehicles in 2007 by the 
end of the project (EOP); and  
 
iv.   Rural Accessibility Index increased from 53 percent in 2007 to 65 percent by EOP.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total cost of the proposed project is estimated at US$213.0 million of which IDA will 
finance US$200.0 million and the Government of Ghana (GOG) will finance the 
remaining US$13.0 million.  The Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH) and the 
Page  2
Ministry of Transport (MOT) will participate in the project. In addition to the ministries, 
the various departments, agencies, and entities which will benefit from the IDA credit 
are:  
 
•
Ministry of Roads and Highways: Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority 
(DVLA), National Road Safety Council (NRSC), Kwame Nkrumah University of 
Science and Technology (KNUST), Government Technical Training Centre (GTTC), 
Ghana Highway Authority (GHA), Department of Urban Roads (DUR), and Department 
of Feeder Roads (DFR).  
 
•
Ministry of Transport: Ghana Civil Aviation Authority (GCAA), Ghana Airports 
Company Limited (GACL); Ghana Ports and Harbors Authority (GPHA), Regional 
Maritime University (RMU), Ghana Maritime Authority (GMA), and Volta Lake 
Transport Company (VLTC).  
 
The project has the following six components:  
 
Component A – Support to MRH: This is targeted at monitoring and evaluation of 
project outcome activities; preparation of feasibility studies to support MRH’s program, 
policy and institutional reforms (including integration of GIS representing trunk, urban, 
and feeder roads network and associated service activities, development of operating and 
safety standards and axle load control, strengthening management of road fund); 
procurement, financial, and technical audit of TSP; capacity building (strengthening 
management information systems, development of human resource development strategy, 
supporting a donor coordinator, participation in national and international training 
courses); and operations support (vehicles, computers and other equipment, etc).  
Included in the total amount is US$300,000 for logistical support and environment and 
social safeguards training for the staff of the environmental desks of the agencies as 
stated in the EIAs.  
 
Component B – Support to road departments and agencies: This component will support 
the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA) includes technical advisory 
services to develop improved licensing methods, standardization of licensing procedures, 
permits, and collection of associated revenue, improving enforcement procedures; 
development of test grounds, operations support (including supervision vehicles, 
equipment, etc).  
 
(ii) 
National Road Safety Commission (NRSC): includes (a) provision of road safety 
equipment, production of handbills, production and distribution of road safety 
information materials, information and publicity material to raise awareness of road 
safety issues; (b) provision of facilities for emergency response services; and (c) training 
of staff in identifying black spots, conducting road safety audits, etc.  
 
(iii) 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) This 
component would finance laboratory equipment, computers, construction of class rooms, 
visit of specialists and scholars to support training programs.  
Page  3
(iv) 
Government Technical Training Centre (GTTC) to develop and expand its 
facilities to enhance training of artisans for the transport sector including the construction 
and furnishing of modern class rooms, hostel and workshop. In collaboration with NRSC, 
pilot a model driving academy and educate garages and mechanics on standards.  
 
Component C - Improvement of trunk roads: This will be implemented by the GHA and 
consist of rehabilitation of a major trunk road from Ayamfuri-Asawinso (52 km) to 
establish a South-North transport corridor in the west of Ghana, linking the timber and 
mineral rich areas and neighboring countries located west and north of Ghana, to the deep 
water port of Takoradi.  Support to GHA will also cover supervision of construction, 
including supervision of environmental and social safeguards, capacity building, goods 
and equipment, and a limited amount of logistical support.  
 
Component D - Improvement of urban roads and infrastructure: This component will be 
implemented by DUR and consist of rehabilitation of arterial roads and public transport 
infrastructure as follows:  
 
•
Rehabilitation of the Burma Camp Road;  
 
•
Rehabilitation of Giffard Road; and  
 
•
Financing urban transport infrastructure in Accra (including investments along 
tributaries to the Bus Rapid Transport corridor under implementation in the urban 
transport project, bus stations, terminals and depots.  
 
The component would also cover cost of consultancy for construction supervision, 
including supervision of environmental and social safeguards, and some logistical 
support.  
 
Component E - Improvement of feeder roads:  The roads to be financed in year one have 
been identified based on a criteria agreed with the GOG.  A total of about 50 feeder road 
sections with a total length of 350 km will undergo minor rehabilitation and spot 
improvements in all ten regions of Ghana.  
 
The roads to be financed during second year would be identified during the first year of 
implementation.  The investments will be focused in selected regions to support 
commercial agriculture around growth poles. Support to DFR will also include 
consultancy for supervision of construction (including supervision of environmental and 
social safeguards) and for operations support (including vehicles for supervision, 
operating cost).  
 
Component F – Support to MOT, Departments, and Agencies: This component would 
finance: capacity building and studies to support PPP in the sector (MOT); detailed 
design, environmental and social studies for Takoradi airport expansion and preparation 
of master plan for rehabilitation of regional airports (GACL); aviation industry entry and 
development of aviation study (GCAA); feasibility study to improve transport on Volta 
Lake (GMA); capacity building support to assist establishment of Ghana Railway 
Development Authority (GRDA) in MOT;  feasibility studies for development of 
Page  4
navigational channels and landing stages in Volta Lake (VLTC); feasibility studies for 
dualization of Meridian road in Tema (GPHA); upgrading of training capacity in GMU, 
including procurement of computers and other equipment (GMU); and capacity building 
in the Ministry, Departments, and Agencies in procurement, financial management, 
safeguards, and technical support, and operations support (vehicles, equipment, financing 
site visits, etc).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Ghana 
–
Western Region. The Ayamfuri-Asawinso road (52 km) to establish a South-
North transport corridor in the west of Ghana, linking the timber and mineral rich areas, 
and neighboring countries located West and North of Ghana, to the deep water port of 
Takoradi. Accra – Urban roads, Burma Camp Road, rehabilitation (5.7 km), Giffard 
Road, rehabilitation, (6 km). The project will also include the rehabilitation of feeder 
roads, but which will be selected during the first year of implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Components C, D, and E of the project include major civil works (road rehabilitation and 
upgrading) to be executed in the first year work program. In addition, there are minor 
civil works (construction of classrooms, classroom laboratory, hostel, workshop and 
offices) related to Component B. For component E, major civil works will take place in 
the second year’s work program and the feeder roads to be financed have yet to be 
identified. The project therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and 
consequently, OP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources have also been triggered, as the 
policy applies whenever OP 4.01 applies, i.e. whenever there is likely to be significant 
Page  5
civil works. Also Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has been triggered. The project 
has been assigned the Environmental Category A.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and a Resettlement/ 
Rehabilitation Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared for the road sector in 2006, and 
re-disclosed for this project. Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the first year's 
road projects (4 roads) have been prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.  Those roads 
are: Ayanfuri 
–
Asawinso highway, Teshie – Link Road, Giffard Road, and Burma Camp 
Road, urban roads. One EIA and one RAP cover the highway, and one EIA and likewise 
one RAP cover the three urban roads, the analyses and the census are, however, road 
specific, likewise the mitigation measures.  
 
Additional works to be carried out in the second year include: a) minor civil works 
(construction of classrooms, classroom laboratory, workshop and offices); and b) feeder 
roads program.   These works will be subject to the ESMF requirements and site specific 
EIAs/EMPs and RAPs, if need be.  
 
The cost for implementation of the mitigation measures will be covered by the 
Government of Ghana (RAPs) and by the credit (HIV/AIDS prevention and EMP civil 
works operations related to project investments and capacity building).  This has been 
confirmed in the EMPs and the RAPs in line with established practice under RSDP and 
ongoing Bank projects in the sector.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential, adverse indirect long term impacts due to the rehabilitation and construction of 
the roads are water and soil erosion from culvert discharges.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Two alternatives were considered for the roads to be rehabilitated under the project: the 
‘no action’ option and the ‘rehabilitation of road’ option.  The ‘no action’ alternative 
assumes that there will be no rehabilitation of the road implying that the road would be 
left in its present state of disrepair.  This would lead to high vehicular-vehicular and 
vehicular–pedestrian conflicts and road accidents resulting in loss of life and property and 
reduction in development opportunities such as easy movement of people and agricultural 
produce.  
 
The ‘rehabilitation of road’ option assumes that the road will be improved to correct the 
geometric defects so as to improve the standard of road and improve road safety. Even 
though the initial cost of the construction would be high, the accrued benefits to be 
derived (socially, culturally and economically) would by far supersede the ‘no-action’ 
alternative.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Mitigation of adverse environment and social impacts of development projects is 
supported by national laws. The Land Valuation Board provides the executive instrument 
for any expropriation of land or property for development projects (private or public), 
after receiving detailed designs and carrying out its own field inspections. The Land 
Valuation Board has both the human capacity and the logistic resources requested for the 
work. As part of the RSDP initiatives, environmental desks were established at DUR, 
GHA and DFR. Review of both environment and social safeguards documents, and 
monitoring of compliance at supervision stage, have been the core tasks of the desks. The 
main challenge has been capacity. RSDP was the first training ground. The first 
safeguards documents ever, to be prepared and implemented in the road sector in Ghana, 
were under RSDP. The environmental desks are constituted of two highway engineers 
with masters in environmental management (Team leaders), and supported by highway 
engineers in DUR and three sociologists in GHA. DUR would benefit from strengthening 
its social safeguards capacity, likewise, DFR. TSP will support the environmental desks 
of DUR, GHA and DFR with the aim to: a) train more staff, b) strengthen the analytical 
capacity, and c) facilitate the implementation and monitoring of the EMPs and the RAPs 
prepared for each of the proposed road projects. In addition, TSP will work with other 
Bank funded infrastructure projects in Ghana, in view of creating synergies and a pool of 
local experts.  
 
Appropriate safeguards instruments have been prepared for each road project. An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), was prepared for the road 
sector in 2006, and re-disclosed for this project. Environmental impact assessments 
including EMPs for each of the three project roads have also been prepared, to mitigate 
adverse environmental and social impacts. These safeguards instruments have been 
reviewed by the environmental desks of DUR and GHA, and cleared by the Bank. The 
mitigation measures of the EMPs have been costed and will be executed by the 
contractors.  
 
Individual Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared, for each project road. 
They have been reviewed by the environmental desks of DUR and GHA and cleared by 
ASPEN. Also, they were disclosed in prior to project appraisal; in Ghana on December 
22, 2008 and at Infoshop on December 23, 2008. The RAPs identified 333 households to 
be adversely affected, of which 87 will permanently lose their properties and 244 will be 
partially affected. The EIA and SIA teams included both social scientists and 
environmentalists. The socioeconomic data collected through review of existing 
documentation, public consultations, and field studies, covered issues related to land 
tenure, land acquisition, involuntary resettlement, road safety, HIV/AIDS, vulnerable 
groups, indigenous peoples and cultural property.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The design of the Project has been participatory at several levels: at national level, at 
regional level, at district level and at donor community level. At the level of districts, 
Page  7
public consultations were held in local communities along the selected road projects 
throughout the environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and social impact assessments 
(SIAs) processes.  
 
Key stakeholders in the disclosure of the safeguards instruments are the Environment 
Protection Authority (EPA), the Ministry of Transportation, DUR and GHA. Pursuant 
internal clearance of the EIAs (including EMPs) and the RAPs, the safeguards 
instruments were sent to the EPA for national clearance. Subsequently, they are sent from 
the Ministry of Roads and Highways to the Bank for clearance. Once cleared by the 
Bank, they were disclosed in country and at the InfoShop, the process is explicitly 
explained in the ESMF, the RPF, the EIAs, the EMPs and the RAPs prepared by the 
client.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/01/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/23/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ajay Kumar 
03/25/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart 
03/25/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
03/25/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/30/2009 
Comments:   
