Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2008 
Report No.:  AC3603
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P111117 
Project Name:  Community Based Rural Development Project Supplemental 
Task Team Leader:  Sean Bradley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (30%);Water supply (30%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%);Health (10%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed additional financing will enhance the impact of the original project by 
continuing to strengthen the capacity of rural communities to enhance their quality of life 
by improving their productive assets, rural infrastructure, and access to key support 
services from private and public sources.   
 
3. Project Description 
Specifically, the additional financing will support: (i) scaling up of public works under 
Components 2, 4 and 5 for agricultural development, human and social development, and 
natural resource management; (ii) scaling up of Component 1 capacity building activities 
to support the flood response in the north and extend the block grant mechanism for 16 
months, and (iii) continued project management support associated with expanded work 
in the north and the proposed project extension of sixteen months to June 30, 2010.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The CBRDP is national in scope, working through all local government District 
Authorities (DAs).  Approximately 32% of the additional financing will be focused on 
Page  2
the three northern regions of the north of Ghana in response to flood damage, while the 
balance of additional financing will be used for all DAs throughout the country.  Full 
value of additional financing will go toward scaling up of existing project activities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
To date, only small and dispersed negative impacts have arisen from on-going CBRDP 
sub-projects.  These have taken the form of: borrow pits (from which dirt and sand are 
cut for construction purposes) not being properly filled in creating potential hazards to 
populations and health risks due to standing water; improper landscaping around school 
construction leading to some erosion problems; and the increased demand for fuel wood 
for clay-works and other micro-enterprises.  However, in the latter case regarding micro-
enterprise use of fuel wood, the enterprises are small in number, dispersed throughout the 
country, and the size of the business (and therefore demand for fuel wood) is quite small.  
 
CBRDP zonal staff, working with Government of Ghana Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) staff at regional level and relevant district staff (planning officers and 
engineers), have taken note of these issues and have improved monitoring and mitigation 
measures applied.  Data from field trips is fed back into training of district staff for this 
purpose.  
 
No feeder roads have been rehabilitated or tracks improved in protected areas or forest 
reserves.  The financing of dams, which would present significant potential risks, is 
currently suspended and will not be resumed until significant improvements can be made 
in design and implementation.  In such an event under the AF, the task team will ensure 
that appropriate safeguard issues and inputs are incorporated into the training and that 
specific screening procedures be developed as a condition of financing such sub-projects.  
Page  3
To the knowledge of the task team, no social safeguard issues have arisen due to 
resettlement of persons on land used for sub-projects.  This is supported by the fact that 
almost all sub-projects are built on sites where existing infrastructure (roads, schools, 
wells, etc.) existed.  Where the few new facilities have been constructed, wide 
consultation at community level is undertaken and agreed-upon processes of allocating 
new lands and compensating families for loss of assets, where appropriate, have been 
used.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project has not, to date, presented any significant indirect or long-term negative 
impacts.  Issues that have arisen (relating to borrow pits for construction sites, waste 
disposal around clinics, and fuel wood use in relation to small enterprises) have been 
picked up in regular screening and appropriate measures proposed/taken to rectify.  As 
the AF will finance the exact same types of activities, the task team does not anticipate 
any additional indirect or long-term impacts than those already revealed and managed.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on experiences under the on-going project, it is only OP 4.01 that is triggered by 
the project.  This has been managed to date through the application of an ESMF that 
screens all sub-projects financed to identify any potential areas of concern and to identify 
relevant mitigating measures.  Though there have been no instances when the RPF has 
been triggered under the current project, OP 4.12 has also been triggered for the AF and 
the existing RPF will also remain in force under the AF.  
 
CBRDP staff work with regional EPA staff to train local government (district) staff 
(planning officers and engineers) in the application of the ESMF and RPF.  EPA staff 
review screening forms and follow-up on any sub-projects with potential environmental 
issues. CBRDP zonal engineers also review and follow-up the screening process to 
ensure that it meets agreements with World Bank. Assessment of these records by 
CBRDP staff and Bank safeguard specialists indicate that this work is being done 
satisfactorily. A specific safeguard review mission was carried out in July 2007 and 
found the project to be environmentally compliant.  
 
As noted, to date only relatively small environmental issues have arisen during the on-
going project, including improper re-fill of construction borrow pits leading to potential 
health and other hazards, poor landscaping around schools causing some erosion at some 
sites and increased demand on fuel wood resulting from the few/small clay and pottery 
micro-enterprises.  These have been corrected by tying final contractor payments to 
refilling such borrow pits and landscaping around construction sites, involving 
Page  4
communities in helping improve the environs of newly constructed works, and by 
encouraging the planting of wood lots where micro-enterprises need fuel.  Zonal project 
staff, regional EPA staff, and relevant District authorities have been trained in these 
issues and are working with contractors, communities and beneficiaries to ensure that 
they are properly addressed.  
 
The Bank task team and relevant safeguard specialists will review the application of the 
EMSF and RPF during the first supervision mission following approval of the AF 
(estimated for August 2008) to determine if any adjustments are recommended to 
improve their use and impact.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are (i) District Assemblies, (ii) area councils, and (iii) communities 
in which sub-projects are financed. Part of the standard training under CBRDP has been 
and will continue to be sensitization to issues around environmental and social 
safeguards.  
 
The ESMF and RPF developed under the original project were discussed and disclosed 
widely through national, regional and local institutions (ministries, departments and local 
government authorities).  The EPA has committed to ensuring the application of the 
safeguard policies contained in these two documents and further disclosure of safeguard 
policies and procedures will be done at district level and in the communities where sub-
projects are carried out.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/09/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/09/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sean Bradley 
05/09/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart 
05/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah 
05/09/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
05/09/2008 
Comments:   
