Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4002 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Grenada 
Project ID: P113342 
Project Name: GD -(AF) Education Dev -2nd APL 
Task Team Leader: Cynthia Hobbs 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 20, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (80%);General education sector (20%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Grenada
 OECS Education Development Project’s (OEDP) was approved on 27 June2003. 
The key development objectives were to: (i) increase equitable access to secondary education; 
(ii) improve the quality of the teaching and learning process; and (iii) strengthen management of 
the sector and governance of the schools. The main thrust of this project was on improvement of 
quality and management. However, it was restructured on 16 November 2004, following 
Hurricane Ivan. The first objective was revised to include replacement and rehabilitation of 
secondary schools damaged by the passage of the hurricane. The other two objectives remained 
the same, but the expected outcomes were significantly scaled down and the activities were 
funded mostly by DfID. The additional financing would place special emphasis on scaling up the 
aspects that were curtailed when the project was restructured, namely improving quality and 
strengthening management. No civil works will be financed with the additional resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional resources would be allocated to support teaching and learning and to strengthen 
the school management teams and project administration. The proposed activities would fall 
under Components 2, 3 and 4 of the original OEDP.  
Page  2
Under Component 2, Improving the Quality of Teaching and Learning, support for literacy and 
numeracy activities would include: (i) certificate training of some 60 primary and secondary 
teachers in literacy and numeracy through an online modality, and in-service training for 
additional primary and secondary teachers; (ii) strengthening of instructional support through the 
acquisition and development of basic pedagogical resources to enhance teaching of Mathematics 
and Language Arts and facilitate parental assistance in the learning of Mathematics, as well as 
the development of a standardized performance measurement system; and (iii) training in 
materials production to strengthen the capacity of the Materials Production Unit to develop 
instructional materials for use in schools, and upgrading of equipment for said purpose. Also 
under Component 2, the additional resources would finance more training for technical and 
vocational teachers in secondary schools and the improvement of student support services, 
concentrating on providing training of 20 Counseling Assistants (qualified teachers) to 
Bachelor’s degree level and of five school counselors from Bachelor’s to Master’s degree level.  
 
Under Component 3, Strengthening Governance and Management, the additional resources 
would finance training for the recently formed school management teams and members of the 
district teams to provide added support for the implementation of literacy and numeracy 
programs in schools.  
 
Under Component 4, Project Management, the additional resources would continue to support 
the Coordinating Project Unit (PCU) and MOE under the current arrangements, and the 
monitoring of project outputs and outcomes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will affect education stakeholders across the country, since it involves the central 
Ministry of Education, school management teams and district education offices, and school 
principals, teachers and students nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A.  The original project did not trigger any environmental or social safeguard policies, nor 
would the scaling up of project activities under the additional financing.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/27/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cynthia Hobbs 
10/17/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
10/17/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
