Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC4011
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Grenada 
Project ID:  P113342 
Project Name:  GD -(AF) Education Dev -2nd APL 
Task Team Leader:  Cynthia Hobbs 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 4, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (80%);General education sector (20%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.46
0.46 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Parent project PDO:(a) To increase equitable access to Secondary Education; (b) to 
improve quality and efficiency of Secondary Education; and (c) to strengthen the 
institutional capacity of the educational sector. Focus for additional financing will be on 
(b) and (c).   
 
3. Project Description 
Improving the Quality of Teaching and Learning  
 
(a) Teacher training, instructional support and materials to support literacy and 
numeracy initiatives  
 
(b) Upgrading of teachers’ skills in TVET  
 
(c) Improving Student Support Services and counseling  
 
Strengthening Governance and Management  
 
(a) Training of school principals, vice principals and district management teams to 
support teaching and learning  
Page  2
(b) Training of student council members to enhance student participation in the teaching 
and learning process  
 
Project Management   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
None.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Jorge Ignacio Mesa Regueiro (LCSHE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing does not involve expansion in scope or coverage that would 
trigger safeguards policies.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The additional financing does not involve expansion in scope or coverage that would 
trigger safeguards policies. However, under the parent project, following restructuring as 
Page  3
an emergency response to address damage from Hurricane Ivan, the focus shifted to 
reconstruction of one secondary school and rehabilitation of two secondary schools. One 
school was dropped from the project. All the works are complete. Consistent with the 
Bank's more flexible guidelines for processing of emergency operations, the team 
provided the Government with the Bank's LAC Guidelines for Addressing Environmental 
and Social Safeguard Issues and requested that these guidelines be handed out to 
contractors. The Bank's team visited the construction sites during each supervision 
mission and confirmed that the guidelines were being adhered to. The Bank's team 
verified that all form works, plastering, rendering and quality were satisfactory, and the 
construction firms complied with international standards for the good practice of 
engineering. The Bank's team also confirmed that proper precautions were being taken 
such as provisional fencing, hoardings, signs, and informative meetings with teachers, 
students and parents regarding weekly construction activities and safety guidelines.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include Ministry of Education staff, district management team 
members, principals and vice principals, counselors, teachers, and students. Since no 
safeguards policies will be triggered, no consultations were planned. The Government 
will place a copy of the ISDS on the MOE's website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  4
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cynthia Hobbs 
10/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
10/28/2008 
Comments:   
