Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4497 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/24/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P114055 
Project Name: Markets for Sustainable Energy 
Task Team Leader: Juan Cayo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 29, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 11, 2012 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);General energy sector (29%);Oil and gas (1%) 
Theme: Other urban development (50%);Other rural development (25%);Macroeconomic 
management (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the proposed project is to help Guatemala improve the security of 
electricity supply.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would consist of the following components:  
 
Component 1:  Strengthen and Expand the Transmission System ($60 million). This component 
would: (i) improve the reliability and capacity of Guatemala's power transmission network to 
transport an increased supply of electricity to end- consumers in response to growing demand, 
and (ii) facilitate regional integration through key investments in the power grid to improve 
interconnection to Mexico and the Electricity Interconnecting System for Central America 
(SIEPAC system). This component would include construction of 100-200 kilometers of 230kv 
transmission lines and associated substations as well as possibly some reinforcement of the 
existing transmission network. To minimize the creation of new power line rights-of-way, the 
project intends to make the maximum feasible use of those transmission lines whose right-of-
way are already in place, and which require an upgrade of existing lines and sub-stations. The 
Page  2
sections of Guatemala's power transmission network under consideration for World Bank 
financing would not be connected to a series of planned new hydropower and coal-based 
generation plants (including one coal-based plant with expected financing from the International 
finance Corporation, IFC). Thus, this project does not depend upon, nor will it directly facilitate 
the construction of these proposed new power plants. Instead, the World Bank financed sections 
of the Guatemalan power grid will enhance the interconnectivity among all five sections of the 
grid, and will thus enhance the system's security and capacity to transport power from generation 
plants throughout the system to key zones of power consumption. The specific segments of 
transmission line to be built and upgraded will be selected from a list of priority projects 
identified in the Government's Transmission system Expansion Plan (2008-2018).  
 
Component 2: Energy Efficiency Measures ($3.5 million).  This component will include 
measures to promote energy efficiency in the country on both the supply and demand sides.  
Building on the goals and objectives of the government for energy efficiency, the component 
will support new and ongoing energy efficiency programs. Among the proposed activities is a 
pilot program to replace mercury-vapor street lighting with more efficient models in a number of 
municipalities. There would also be support to other energy efficiency programs in Guatemala, 
such as for efficient lighting, appliances and other commercial and industrial equipment, an 
energy labeling program, and information and awareness about energy efficiency.  
 
Component 3:  Technical Assistance for National Energy Planning ($1.5m).  This component 
will provide Technical Assistance (TA) and capacity building for the Government for energy 
planning, including capacity building, for the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) to carry out 
medium and long term energy planning for both the power and hydrocarbons sectors and support 
for a detailed assessment of the options available to Guatemala over the short, medium, and 
longer term to manage the impact of high and volatile oil prices on the power sector and the 
economy. This component will also seek to improve the broader policy and implementation 
framework for environmental and social assessment of the power sector that are the 
responsibility of MEM. In this context the technical assistance will also support the elaboration 
of a Strategic Environmental Assessment of hydropower development in Guatemala, to help 
ensure that new project sites are chosen with a view towards minimizing adverse environmental 
impacts (relative to power generation benefits). This component will also support strengthening 
the capacity of MEM and the state electricity utility Instituto Nacional de Electrificacion (INDE) 
to address environmentally and socially sensitive areas of hydropower development during the 
construction and operation phases, and to ensure compliance with relevant laws, policies and 
procedures (including, where applicable, the World Bank's Environmental and Social Safeguard 
Policies). In addition to hydropower-related issues, INDE will also receive TA and training for 
enhancing its overall planning and environmental and social assessment framework for the 
power sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
For Component 1, the following transmission lines and associated substations have been 
considered so far for World Bank financing:  
 
a. Sub-stations Guate Oeste, Guate Norte, and Solola.  
 
b.
230
kV double circuit line Solola-La Esperanza (60 km). The section Guate Sur-Guate Oeste-
Solola remains to be additionally discussed. The routing of the new transmission lines under 
Page  3
consideration will follow existing roads to the maximum extent feasible. In some cases, the 
transmission line right-of-way will not exactly follow the existing road, due to topography. 
However, none of the rights-of-way under consideration for financing under this project would 
involve opening up access to presently roadless areas, nor the fragmentation of significant 
patches of natural forest.  
 
c. The locations for rehabilitation of existing transmission lines and substations remain to be 
determined.  
 
For Component 2, the locations of the communities, residences and businesses to participate in 
the energy efficiency programs remain to be determined.  
 
For Component 3, the TA to be provided to MEM and INDE will be with a national focus, but 
delivered mostly in Guatemala City.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Guatemala requires Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) for projects and works in the 
country. The EIA requirement is stipulated by the Law on Environmental Protection and 
Improvement. The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources monitors and evaluates the 
EIAs and issues environmental licenses.  
 
The institutional capacity for safeguards policies of the project implementing agency (INDE) 
for the transmission component will be assessed as part of project preparation, and appropriate 
institutional strengthening with respect to properly managing environmental and social issues 
will be incorporated within Component 3. The counterparts for the energy efficiency programs 
and their respective institutional capacity for managing safeguards-related issues will also be 
determined during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (LCSEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Category: B, because none of the power transmission lines under 
consideration for financing by this project would (i) involve significant damage to forests or 
other natural habitats, (ii) provide new access to any currently roadless areas, nor (iii) physically 
connect to, economically depend upon, nor directly facilitate the construction of any new 
(hydroelectric, thermal or other) power generation plants.  
 
The requirements of OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Impact Assessment will be met by 
examining the project's potential negative and positive environmental impact and outlining 
relevant measures to prevent, mitigate or compensate for adverse impacts and improve 
environmental performance. The EIA will also outline relevant monitoring, management and 
capacity strengthening measures within an Environmental Management Plan. A special focus of 
this EIA will be to identify transmission line right-of-way alignments that would minimize any 
forest clearing or other adverse environmental or social impacts.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The results of the above studies will be used to fine-tune the project design in terms of 
selection of the routing for new transmission lines and the location of new sub-stations, along 
with the rehabilitation of existing transmission lines and sub-stations (by INDE) and the location 
of the pilot projects for replacement and disposal of inefficient lamps for public lighting (by 
MEM). The overall objective of these studies is to help minimize any possible adverse 
environmental or social impacts from the project. these studies will also be used by INDE and 
MEM to design adequate measures to mitigate or compensate any adverse project impacts and to 
enhance the project's benefits to stakeholders.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Please see above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Please see above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Please see above.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The requirements of OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples will be met by developing an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), which will enable the project to address 
indigenous people's issues adequately during design and implementation. The IPPF will be 
developed on the basis of a social assessment to ensure that the project benefits are culturally 
compatible for indigenous communities. Where feasible, this social assessment will also take 
into account the impacts and opportunities for other, non-indigenous groups, particularly poor 
and vulnerable populations.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Please see above.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/29/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Prior to appraisal, the following studies will be completed by external consultants for INDE 
(the implementing agency for Component 1) and MEM (the implementing agency for 
Component 2): (i) and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) report that includes an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP); (ii) a Social Assessment and Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework; and (iii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), in case the need 
arises for involuntary land taking for transmission line rights-of-way. since both INDE and 
MEM lack previous experience with World Bank-financed projects, World Bank staff will 
assist them in the preparation of the terms of reference for the above studies.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Cayo 
06/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
06/15/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
