Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC4155
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guatemala 
Project ID:  P107416 
Project Name:  Expanding Opportunities for Vunerable Groups 
Task Team Leader:  Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 4, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (40%);Health (35%);Roads and highways (25%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (40%);Nutrition and food security (20%);Child health 
(15%);Rural services and infrastructure (15%);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring 
(10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
122.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
4.00
4.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve use of education, health 
and nutrition services by the extreme poor in targeted municipalities. To this end, the 
proposed project would:  
 
(i) 
improve the effectiveness of the conditional cash transfer program to boost 
demand for education, health and nutrition services in 130 municipalities;  
 
(ii) 
increase access to a basic package of health and nutrition services for underserved 
population in the 70 most vulnerable municipalities;  
 
(iii) 
improve physical access to social service providers in the 46 most vulnerable 
municipalities; and  
 
(iv) 
enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Finance to facilitate coordination of multi-
sector programs and to inform policy making.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would achieve its development objectives through the 
implementation of four components: (a) strengthening management processes, 
monitoring and control mechanisms of the Mi Familia Progresa program, and creating 
Page  2
mechanisms to gather information, generate knowledge and define a mid-term social 
protection strategy, (b) ensuring access to a basic package of health and nutrition services 
by vulnerable populations in 70 prioritized municipalities, (c) improving key rural roads 
in 46 municipalities to connect families to services and markets, strengthening the 
management capacity of the Economic Solidarity Fund (FONADES), and enhancing 
municipal capacity to implement and maintain rural infrastructure, and (d) supporting 
government to coordinate the proposed operation and improve its capacity to oversee 
foreign investment operations.  
 
Component 1: Institutional and technical support for the Mi Familia Progresa program 
to improve the effectiveness, monitoring and control of conditional cash transfers (Bank 
financing US$17.6 million).  
 
This component would strengthen the management, monitoring, evaluation and 
promotion of Mi Familia Progresa, the flagship social program of the Colom 
administration. The activities to be financed aim to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the program, evaluate its processes, strengthen management capacity at 
the national and local level, and improve information and communication systems. The 
proposed Project would contribute to improving the program in all its stages: targeting, 
selection, registry and assistance of beneficiaries; management of benefits and co-
responsibilities, monitoring and evaluation, control and accountability and information 
and promotion. Additionally, the proposed Project would provide technical and financial 
support to develop a mid-term social protection strategy with Mi Familia Progresa 
(MiFaPro) as an entry point, as well as mechanisms to gather information and knowledge 
generation about social protection. To achieve these objectives, the proposed component 
comprises specific activities grouped in 5 categories as follows:  
 
Sub-component 1.A. Improving targeting, selection and registry of MiFaPro 
beneficiaries (US$6.7). This component would provide support to MiFaPro to improve 
those processes related to the identification, selection and registration of eligible families 
in the program, including (i) assessing, adjusting and testing the instrument to select 
beneficiaries, and (ii) improving the operation and updating processes of the registry of 
beneficiaries.  
 
Sub-component 1.B #Strengthening program management of benefits and co-
responsibilities (US$0.8). This sub-component seeks to provide technical and financial 
support to MiFaPro in fine tuning processes to manage benefits and to verify compliance 
with co-responsibilities. These activities are expected to boost program sustainability.  
 
Sub-component 1.C. Consolidating the Monitoring and Evaluation Systems of MiFaPro 
(US$3.5). This subcomponent would provide technical and financial support to further 
develop a comprehensive management information system, carry out process evaluations 
of the program, implement beneficiary surveys, carry out regular spot checks, implement 
further follow up surveys for the impact evaluation of the program, and local audits and 
social controls.  
 
Page  3
Subcomponent 1.D. Developing and implementing an information, education, and 
communication (IEC) strategy (US$4.0). The proposed Project would finance the design 
and implementation of an information, education, and communication strategy, as part of 
the package of activities that the program has developed to encourage beneficiary 
families to participate in the program, and inform different actors inside and outside 
government at central and sub-national level about program progress.  
 
Sub-component 1.E #Designing second generation strategies to protect vulnerable 
families (US$2.7). This sub-component would support MiFaPro to (i) gradually adapt its 
registry of beneficiary to be the entry point towards a single registry of beneficiaries of 
social programs, (ii) develop a strategy for a mid-term evolution of the conditional cash 
transfer.  
 
Component 2 # Ensuring access to a basic package of health and nutrition services by 
vulnerable population in 70 prioritized municipalities. (US$51.4 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the supply and expand access of the 
basic package of health and nutrition services in 70 municipalities. This component aims 
to ensure access and strengthen the supply of basic health and nutrition services in 70 of 
the poorest municipalities of Guatemala where, due to the intervention of MiFaPro, 
demand for these services is expected to increase. The activities of this component would 
support the current strategy of the Government of Guatemala (GoG) to consolidate the 
basic package of health care services in order ensure access in the 130 of the poorest 
municipalities that are currently receiving little or no health care services.  
 
Subcomponent 2.A # Enhancing the PEC#s basic package of health care services with 
the addition of basic nutrition services (US$ 17 million). This subcomponent would 
strengthen the implementation of the Program for the Extension of Coverage (PEC), in 
communities currently receiving basic health care services, through the addition of the 
Community-based Nutrition Program package (AINM-C). These activities would ensure 
that the 70 most vulnerable municipalities of Guatemala have access to and receive the 
basic package of health and nutrition services. The proposed Project would ensure that 
special attention is given to indigenous communities in the 70 municipalities, taking into 
account that on average 70 percent of indigenous children are malnourished in 
Guatemala.  
 
Subcomponent 2.B # Ensuring access to a basic package of health and nutrition services 
to individuals in remote communities (US$ 19 million). This sub-component would 
provide financial support to the Ministry of Health (MoH) to ensure access to the same 
basic package of health care and nutrition services that are administered in subcomponent 
2.A. The delivery of the basic package of health care and nutrition services would be 
carried out by health mobile teams (HMTs), unlike subcomponent 2.A where services are 
administered through existing NGOs contracts.  
 
Subcomponent 2.C # Strengthening capacity of the Ministry of Health to implement, 
monitor, supervise and evaluate the provision of primary health and nutrition services in 
Page  4
the poorest municipalities. (US$15.2 million) This subcomponent would support 
strengthening the MoH#s institutional capacity for implementing the modality of Health 
Mobiles Teams and the extension of AINM-C, supervising the provision of primary 
health and nutrition services, management of information and monitoring results, and 
evaluating performance.  
 
Component 3. Strengthening rural infrastructure and local development (US$50.4 
million)  
 
The objective of this component is to reduce rural poverty by increasing the 
connectivity of rural areas to social, economic, educational, and other services that are 
essential for the development of local populations. The area to be covered under this 
component is made up of the 46 poorest municipalities in the country, as prioritized by 
the GoG.  
 
Subcomponent 3.A. Institutional strengthening of FONADES and the subgroup of 
prioritized municipalities (US$ 6.3 million).  The objective of this subcomponent is to 
develop the technical capacity of FONADES in part for rural road rehabilitation and 
maintenance and the 46 prioritized municipalities in terms of project cycle management 
in road infrastructure projects, as well as improving local governance. This would be 
accomplished through four set of activities targeted to: (i) the existing Mancomunidades ; 
(ii) Mancomunidades in the process of formation; (iii) municipalities that do not belong 
to any Mancomunidad; and (iv) FONADES in its capacity as executing agency of the 
Project.  
 
Subcomponent 3.B.  Rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads and tracks, and 
construction of vehicular and pedestrian bridges and crossings (US$36.1 million). This 
subcomponent would finance the rehabilitation of approximately 600 km of rural roads in 
the targeted area to restore year-round transitability and ensure physical access tailored to 
the specific transport needs of the local communities. Additionally, 15 vehicular bridges 
would be constructed to ensure the connectivity of the rural roads that have been 
rehabilitated (the typical length of bridge eligible for this component is between 15 and 
20 meters).  
 
Subcomponent 3.C. Local Infrastructure Subprojects (US$8 million) . This sub-
component would complement the MiFaPro program further facilitating participating 
families# access to clean water sources for human consumption, improving hygiene and 
promoting the general health of the beneficiary population. Irrigation would have a 
positive effect by diversifying income sources, and by improving productivity in 
agriculture, so that beneficiaries are better able to profit from the increased availability of 
education, nutrition, and health services.  
 
Component 4. Institutional Strengthening of the Department of External Aid Monitoring 
within the Ministry of Finance and coordination (US$3 million).  
 
Page  5
The Ministry of Finance plays a central role in coordinating Government policies in 
Guatemala. Apart from its responsibility to manage national budget, its participation in 
the Executive Board of the Council for Social Cohesion, responsible for coordinating the 
Government#s multi-sectoral interventions for poverty reduction in the targeted 
municipalities, as well as its leadership role in the National Economic Recovery Plan 
(Programa Nacional de Recuperación Económica # PNRE) make it a crucial player in the 
advancement of the Government#s strategy today.  
 
The proposed Project would contribute to enhance the role and capacity of the Ministry 
of Finance to oversee the execution of external funds, to ensure efficient coordination of 
multi-sector programs and to inform policy making.  Component 4 would support the 
modernization of the Public Debt Directorate, focusing in particular on strengthening the 
capacity of the Department of External Aid Monitoring for results monitoring and on 
supporting its role as Project coordinator. Moreover, through the implementation of 
monitoring tools and the training of the personnel from the Ministry of Finance (MoF), 
this modernization would significantly improve the quality of the information regarding 
results of programs to which external funds contribute, providing the Ministry, and thus 
the Government as a whole, with critical tools for informed policy making. This would 
support the MoF's participation in the Executive Board of the Council for Social 
Cohesion and contribute, in turn, to ensure that priority Government programs are 
adequately financed and well-coordinated.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed Project would target geographically the 130 most vulnerable municipalities 
in Guatemala, in which the Mi Familia Progresa program is expected to be present by the 
end of 2009, when the program reaches full implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSHS-DPT) 
Ms Carine Clert (LCSHS-DPT) 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The Project involves increasing the demand 
for health services, which in turn would increase the amount of medical waste generated. 
Also, the rehabilitation of rural roads and financing of rural infrastructure projects could 
have negative impacts on the environment both during construction and implementation 
phases. Road infrastructure has a low-to-medium level of impact, corresponding to a 
Category B environmental risk, due to the fact that no new roads or rights-of-way would 
be created and paving would be avoided. Works will basically entail rehabilitation and 
maintenance of existing roads. Potential negative aspects related to construction activities 
include management of debris and waste    occupational health and industrial safety, risks 
to other users due to minor excavations and landslides, potential temporal soil erosion 
and degradation in construction zone, noise and air pollution from the movement of 
vehicles and other equipment.  Similarly, the productive infrastructure subprojects 
eligible for financing would be small in scale and negative impacts mostly limited to 
project sites and construction periods.  Although no specific subprojects for roads or 
productive infrastructure have been selected, a method of classifying potential 
environmental impacts was developed in the MGAS and mitigation measures are clearly 
defined.  
 
The impacts from the health component would be on biomedical waste management, 
given that an increase in access to health services could lead to an increase in biomedical 
waste or the concentration of waste loads. In the proposed Project this is largely related to 
the disposal of sharps from vaccinations. If managed improperly, these wastes could pose 
health risks for patients and personnel as well as environmental contamination. The 
MGAS includes information on existing procedures and legislation on biomedical waste 
management.  
 
Accordingly, an Environmental Assessment (EA) has been prepared to ensure proper 
environmental management of works, and safe handling of medical waste. This EA draws 
largely from the existing EA on medical waste completed for the on-going Bank health 
project in Guatemala, and on the system of environmental management developed by the 
Bank for the Rural Roads operations handled by FONADES predecessor, ProRURAL. 
The document was consulted  prior to Project appraisal.  A summary of the draft can be 
found in the PAD.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). Given that the Project is likely to target a 
considerable proportion of indigenous youths and children, particularly through MiFaPro, 
an Indigenous People#s Plan (IPP) was completed during preparation. The IPP for 
Component 2 on the supply of health and secondary education will largely draw on the 
IPPs that were elaborated for the ongoing Bank-financed health and education projects 
and will be updated as needed to reflect latest developments as well as specific issues 
related to Component 1 on strengthening of the MFP program and the infrastructure 
component.   The IPP was submitted by the borrower to the Bank for approval on July 
Page  7
22, 2009. It was disseminated by the Government prior to appraisal, and it will be 
included in the Operational Manual.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). While involuntary displacement of people is 
not expected, and the government has agreed in principle not to resettle people as a result 
of rural roads and infrastructure work, the Government has prepared a Resettlement 
Framework (RF). The draft summary was prepared, consulted, and reviewed by Bank 
specialists, whose comments were incorporated.  A summary can be found in the PAD.  
The RF will be published prior to Project appraisal. .  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11).  Given that productive infrastructure projects 
will likely involve soil excavation, OP 4.11 is triggered in the case of chance finds of 
culturally significant artifacts. The MGAS includes procedures that meet the objectives of 
this policy, and specific instructions for contractors in the case of chance finds, as 
described above.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Because the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) component would increase the demand for 
health services that increase medical waste, and because the rural roads and infrastructure 
component could involve construction that has negative environmental impacts, an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been drafted.  This Plan would guide 
project activities to minimize negative impacts and mitigate them when they do happen.  
The EMP is currently in draft form and a summary can be found in Annex 10 of the 
Project Appraisal Document (PAD).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Past social assessments involving consultation and participation of Indigenous Peoples 
(IPs) have shown that the cultural relevance of health and education services (language, 
respect of values/norms, communication messages) is a challenge to be addressed as part 
of a broader package to get outcomes on the ground for poor, rural indigenous 
communities.  
 
As part of GoG efforts on quality education and health services, recommendations on 
previous social assessments and IP plans for health and education will be integrated in the 
broader package of Component 2, ensuring that cultural appropriateness of services be 
addressed.  
 
To effectively carry out the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
developed for the project, FONADES will create a small unit formed by environmental 
and social specialists, which will help ensure that all infrastructure projects to be financed 
Page  8
out of project proceeds abide by the ESMP procedures. Training will be provided through 
this unit to the people in the sectoral units at FONADES to ensure mainstreaming.  
 
The GoG has agreed not to resettle any persons during project implementation; 
nonetheless, it has prepared a Resettlement Framework in case this does become 
necessary under the rural roads and infrastructure component.  The RF is in draft form 
and a summary can be found in Annex 10 of the PAD.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include, women, children, indigenous peoples and non-indigenous 
peoples in the poorest communities of Guatemala. A Social Assessment was carried out 
to identify needs, conditions and perceptions of rural communities, households and social 
service providers (health and education) in the areas served by MiFaPro. The analysis 
was implemented using qualitative and quantitative methodologies for data collection.  
 
Given the presence of indigenous communities in the different project areas of 
implementation, an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has been prepared.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/29/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/31/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/03/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/29/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/31/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  10
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
07/31/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Mariela Mena 
07/31/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Carine Clert 
07/31/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
07/31/2009 
Comments:   
