Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4156 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P107416 
Project Name: Expanding Opportunities for Vunerable Groups 
Task Team Leader: Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (25%);Health (20%);General education sector 
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%);Roads and highways 
(15%) 
Theme: Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (29%);Child health (29%);Nutrition 
and food security (14%);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (14%);Social safety 
nets (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Project is to contribute to the Government of Guatemala 
(GoG) strategy to increase the usage of education, health and rural infrastructure services by the 
extreme poor in the most vulnerable municipalities, by boosting their demand for those services 
and strengthening sector capacity to deliver them.  
 
Demand for services would be boosted by improving the:  
 
#
targeting mechanism to select beneficiaries.  
 
#
monitoring system to verify compliance with co-responsibilities.  
 
#
efficiency of program operation to ensure that operational rules of the program are 
complied with.  
 
#
inter-sector coordination for the verification of co-responsibilities and to ensure 
availability and quality of services.  
 
Page  2
Sector capacity to deliver quality services will be strengthened by:  
 
#
improving and consolidating existing models of service delivery.  
 
#
testing and adjusting models of service delivery where needed.  
 
#
partially financing scaling up of successful models.  
 
#
enhancing planning within each sector.  
 
#
promoting transparency and accountability mechanisms.  
 
#
improving allocation of investments in order to ensure minimum standards of service.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed loan would finance the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Institutional and technical support for the Mi Familia Progress program to 
improve the effectiveness, monitoring and control of conditional cash transfers (Bank financing 
US$15.0 million).  This component would strengthen the management, monitoring, evaluation 
and promotion of Mi Familia Progresa.  The activities to be financed aim to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the program, evaluate its processes, strengthen management 
capacity at the national and local level, and improve information and communication systems. 
The project is expected to improve the program in all its stages: targeting, selection and registry 
of beneficiaries; management of benefits and co-responsibilities, monitoring and evaluation, 
control and accountability and information and promotion. Additionally, the proposed project 
would provide technical and financial support to develop a mid-term social protection strategy 
with the CCT program as an entry point, as well as mechanisms to gather information and 
knowledge generation about social protection.  
 
Specific activities to be financed under this component are grouped in 5 categories as follows:  
 
#
Sub-component 1.A - Improving targeting, selection and registry of MFP beneficiaries.  
 
#
Sub-component 1.B -  Strengthening program management of benefits and co-
responsibilities.  
 
#
Sub-component 1.C -  Consolidating the Monitoring and Evaluation Systems of 
MIFAPRO.  
 
#
Sub-component 1.D -  Developing and implementing an information, education, and 
communication (IEC) strategy.  
 
#
Sub-component 1.E - Designing second generation strategies to protect vulnerable 
families  
 
Component 2 # Ensuring access to a basic package of health and nutrition services by 
vulnerable population in 130 prioritized municipalities (US$51.4 million). This component seeks 
to assist the GoG to improve access to a package of basic health and nutrition services and 
improve health outcomes by  most vulnerable groups of the population in the 140 poorest 
municipalities of the country, with greater emphasis on children under 5 years and pregnant 
mothers. Improvements in access to preventative health and nutrition services will complement 
the incentives provided by the conditional cash transfer program. These improved services would 
better meet the increased demand generated by MifaPro among poor households, thus would 
Page  3
help them enhance their levels of human capital and expand their opportunities. This component 
will support Government to deliver a preventive package of health services and set of 
interventions to prevent chronic malnutrition following the experience of Guatemala with the 
basic health and nutrition outreach program, the Programa de Extensión de Cobertura y 
Nutrición (PEC+N).  
 
To achieve the proposed objectives, this component consists of three subcomponents:  
 
#
Sub-component 2.A # Ensuring access to a basic package of health and nutrition services 
to people living in remote communities. (US$19.0 million).  
 
#
Sub-component 2.B # Extension of Community Integrated Care for Children and Women 
Strategy (AINM-C). (US$17.2 million).  
 
#
Sub-component 2.C # Strengthening capacity of the Ministry of Health to implement, 
monitor, supervise and evaluate the provision of primary health and nutrition services in the 
poorest municipalities. (US$15.2 million).  
 
Component 3. Strengthening rural infrastructure and local development (US$50.0 million).  The 
objective of this component is to reduce rural poverty by increasing in a sustainable fashion the 
connectivity of rural areas to medical, social, economic, educational, and other services that are 
essential for the development of local populations. The current Administration has launched a 
plan that establishes poverty reduction and rural development as its top priorities. The area to be 
covered under this component is made up of the 130 poorest municipalities in the country, as 
prioritized by the Government of Guatemala (GoG) according to its official poverty map. The 
GoG will attend to these municipalities through its two main programs for poverty reduction: 
MiFaPro and ProRural. Within this group of 130 municipalities, to be advanced by the rural 
roads component, ProRural/FONADES and the Bank have agreed that priority under 
subcomponents 1 and 2 will be given to a subgroup of prioritized municipalities, these being the 
46 poorest municipalities from the group of 130, and with which ProRural has been working 
since May 2008. For subcomponent 3, Subprojects for Productive Infrastructure, coverage will 
be extended to the group of 130 municipalities. The scale up for subcomponent 3 will be 
characterized by an increase from 46 to 130 municipalities as FONADES progressively works 
with more of them (for example, FONADES is planning to work with 84 municipalities by 
2010). In order to ensure the coordination of MiFaPro, ProRural, and the other entities working 
in the 130 prioritized municipalities, the GoG has created a mechanism at the highest levels of 
the Executive named Consejo de Cohesión Social, composed of the ministers (or direct 
representatives) of education, health, transportation and communication, and agriculture, as well 
as by representatives from SEGEPLAN, INFOM, MiFaPro, and ProRural.  
 
This component is comprised of 3 sub-components:  
 
#
Sub-component 3.A  - Institutional strengthening of FONADES and the subgroup of 
prioritized municipalities (US$ 6.5 million).  
 
#
Sub-component 3.B - Rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads, and construction of 
vehicular bridges (US$ 34.0 million).  
 
#
Sub-component 3.C - Productive Infrastructure Subprojects (US$ 10.0 million).  
 
Page  4
Component 4. Institutional Strengthening of the Department of Project Implementation and 
Monitoring within the Ministry of Finance and Project coordination (US$ 5 million). This 
component will support the institutional capacity of the Department of Project Implementation 
and Monitoring at the Ministry of Finance (Departamento de Ejecución y Seguimiento de 
Proyectos). The proposed project would contribute to enhance the role and capacity of the 
Department in supervising the execution of projects, and ensure adequate project coordination 
and reporting.  
 
The component has two sub-components:  
 
#
Institutional Strengthening and  
 
#
Project Coordination   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed Project would target geographically the 140 most vulnerable municipalities in 
Guatemala, in which the Mi Familia Progresa program is expected to be present by the end of 
2009, when the program reaches full implementation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Past social assessments involving consultation and participation of Indigenous Peoples (IPs) 
have shown that the cultural relevance of health and education services (language, respect of 
values/norms, communication messages) is a challenge to be addressed as part of a broader 
package to achieve outcomes on the ground for poor, rural indigenous communities.  
Recommendations from previous social assessments and IP plans for health and education 
projects will be integrated in the broader package of Component 2, ensuring that cultural 
appropriateness of services are addressed as part of the GoG#s effort to deliver quality education 
and health services.  Ongoing feedback from beneficiaries and indigenous leaders will be 
provided to the MFP as part of the participatory monitoring and evaluation of the CCT program.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSUW) 
Ms Carine Clert (LCSHS-DPT) 
Ms Mariela Mena (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project involves increasing the demand for health services, which in turn would increase 
the amount of medical waste generated. Also, the rehabilitation of rural roads and financing of 
rural infrastructure projects  could have negative impacts on the environment both during 
construction and implementation phases. Accordingly, the GoG has prepared a draft 
Environmental Assessment that will articulate the proper handling of medical waste; this EA 
draws largely from the existing EA on medical waste completed for the on-going Bank health 
project in Guatemala.  The EA also covers the identification and mitigation of potential impacts 
of small rural infrastructure projects and rural roads.  The document will be consulted with key 
stakeholders prior to Project appraisal.  A summary of the draft can be found in the PAD.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The Project is designed so that the three documents described above will be used to guide 
implementation and make adjustments to the operation#s design when necessary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Given that the Project is likely to target a considerable proportion of indigenous youths and 
children, particularly through the MFP, an Indigenous People#s Plan (IPP) will be completed 
during preparation. The IPP for Component 2 on the supply of health and secondary education 
will largely draw on the IPPs that were elaborated for the ongoing Bank-financed health and 
education projects and will be updated as needed to reflect latest developments as well as 
specific issues related to Component 1 on strengthening of the MFP program and the 
infrastructure component.  This update and these additional issues will be identified in the rapid 
social assessment that will be completed by Project Appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While involuntary displacement of people is not expected, and the government has agreed in 
principle not to resettle people as a result of rural roads and infrastructure work, the Government 
has prepared a Resettlement Framework.  At this stage the RF is in draft form and a summary 
can be found in the PAD.  The RF will be consulted with key stake holders in July 2009, prior to 
Project Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/06/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/17/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft Environmental Assessment (EA), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), and Resettlement 
Framework (RF) have been completed.  All will be consulted between June and August 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
2009, and final versions will be submitted to the Bank for no objection prior to Project 
Appraisal in August 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
07/02/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
07/02/2009 
Comments:   
