Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC2601
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P098742 
Project Name:  Guinea- GEF- Electricity Sector Efficiency Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (65%);Central government administration (22%);District heating and 
energy efficiency services (13%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(S);Standards and financial reporting (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project Development Objective: The project seeks to improve the sector's commercial 
and operational efficiency. These results will be achieved through critical investment 
support impacting the sector's financial viability and the quality of service delivery.  
 
Global Objective: The project contributes to reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions by addressing the large inefficiencies in the distribution sector and reducing 
energy losses.  
 
The proposed project is partially blended with the IDA-financed Electricity Sector 
Efficiency Improvement Project, which was approved by the Board in June 2006 and 
beame effective in August 2007. The project complements IDA interventions in 
rehabilitation of critical generation, distributional efficiency and technical assistance.  
Specifically, the GEF project will support increasing efficiency of the distributional 
network, design of energy efficiency and demand side management programs and 
implementation of pilot energy efficiency initiatives, and other technical assistance 
Page  2
activities to improve EDG's capacity to develop, manage and implement energy 
efficiency enhancing interventions. 
 
.
As the GEF activities have been appraised along with IDA activities in March 2006, 
no additional work in this regard will be necessary, and the project development 
objectives remain unchanged.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support investments that aim at improving (i) existing distribution 
networks and generation capacity for reliable supply; (ii) commercial character of the 
business; and (iii) customer interface. The main rationale of these investments is to create 
value in the Guinean electricity business, demonstrate its viability in a replicable manner 
and to facilitate private sector engagement in the electricity sector in Guinea beginning in 
areas such as billing and collection. Activities such as contracting/outsourcing of services 
are envisaged under this project and no transfer of assets to the private sector is 
anticipated.  The project will also facilitate the development of capacity in Guinea's 
public power utility Electricite de Guinee (EDG) in terms of technical, commercial and 
personnel systems and capabilities. This document is for the GEF portion of the partially 
blended IDA/GEF project.  The IDA portion of this project has already been approved by 
the Board.  
 
In order to provide the above support, the project is structured into three components: 
Component I - Commercial Reorientation of the Electricity Sector Toolkit (CREST);  
 
Component II - Rehabilitation of Critical Generation (full details of this component are 
available in the IDA project documentation); and Component III  Institutional 
Strengthening and Technical Assistance. The proposed GEF project finances only 
Components I and III. Component II is fully financed with IDA funds.  
 
Component 1: CREST.: The project would support investments in goods and services 
related to implementation of the following initiatives under the CREST Efficiency 
improvement program (4.2 million USD):  
 
(a) HVDS 
 
 
(b) 
HT Trivector meters for HV loads  
 
(c) 
LT Trivector meters (CT operated) for LV commercial loads above 20 KW  
 
(d) 
Single phase and three phase meters (whole current) for LV loads below 20 KW 
with AMR facility  
 
(e) 
Reactive power compensation by installation of online capacitors  
 
(f) 
Set up of customer care centers  
 
(g) 
Introduction of spot billing  
 
(h) 
Launch of rapid response vehicles  
 
(i)         GIS/GPS  systems for AM/FM operations  
 
These investments will strengthen the distribution infrastructure, improve quality of 
supply and customer satisfaction, and reduce losses.  Existing equipment will be replaced 
by more efficient models in the project areas.  However, existing equipments will not be 
Page  3
disposed and will be used for distribution of electricity in less critical locations not 
covered by the project.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Technical Assistance  
 
3.1 Energy effciency and conservation:. The project recognizes the need to sustain and 
scale up the efficiency gains that will occur in the sector through these investments by 
promoting demand side management (DSM) measures .Accordingly it would assist 
development of an appropriate framework and institutional capacity for energy efficiency 
and conservation programs;  
 
3.2 Private sector capacity development:  The project would assist development of 
capcity of the private sector to participate in the sector the aim of improving the 
electricity sector's financial viability.  These could include outsourcing of various 
distribution functions and Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) among other approaches;  
 
3.3 Financial and accounting systems: Details of this sub-component fully funded by 
IDA can be found in the IDA project documentation.  
 
3.4 MIS and operational IT support: The project would support initiatives leading to 
capacity building and infrastructure support (in various areas such as anti theft measures, 
energy audit and remote metering techniques), MIS systems, customer billing and HR 
data bases etc.  
 
GEF will fund US$ 4.5 million to assist with the support for energy efficiency 
improvements, in addition to the US$ 7.2 million provided by IDA.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component I will be implemented in Conakry, Guinea's capital. Under component I, 
existing networks will be rehabilitated with new transformers, conductors, meters etc 
(about 2.2 million USD under the proposed project). Existing equipments will not be 
disposed and will be used for distribution of electricity in less critical locations not 
covered by the project.  Component III would provide technical assistance in terms of 
billing, customer data bases, demand and load forecast studies, energy efficiency 
programs etc.( about 2.3 million).  
 
Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
This project does not require any capacity for safeguard policies as none of the proposed 
activities will have any adverse environmental and social impacts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not Applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not Applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not Applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
 
Comments:  Category C project - no SGP specialist required.  Later, should project involve land 
acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, ASPEN will be consulted. 
