Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3368 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P110327 
Project Name: Urban Water Sector Performance Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Paul Kriss 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to increase sustainable access to water services in 
Conakry through: (i) financing physical investments in the water supply system; and (ii) 
improving the commercial and financial performance of the urban water utility, especially by 
addressing governance and accountability issues within the utility.  
 
The objective will be achieved through investing selectively in the rehabilitation of certain 
sections of the distribution network, based on the performance of a system flow analysis.  
Governance issues and poor accountability are at the heart of the poor performance of the urban 
water sector and the urban water utility.  They will be tackled based on the conclusions of: (i) an 
institutional, management and operational performance audit of SEG; (ii) the likely outsourcing 
of the commercial and/or financial functions critical to achieve quick results; (iii) increased cost 
recovery in order to achieve financial sustainability; and (iv) the strengthening of the regulatory 
and supervisory capacity in the urban water sector.  It is also recommended to review the 
possibility of installing an incentive based performance contract.  
 
Water tariffs and long term cost recovery issues will also be addressed during the project, 
through the development and implementation of a sound tariff policy.  The accountability and 
Page  2
autonomy of SEG are of prime importance to achieve the above objective.   The project will also 
lay the ground for long term reforms of the urban water sector by financing the necessary 
studies, which conclusions will be implemented by a larger project to follow.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will include the following components:  
 
1. 
Rehabilitation of the water supply system.  
 
2.
Performance improvement and institutional strengthening.  
 
3.
Sector governance, financial sustainability and regulatory capacity.  
 
Rehabilitation of the water supply system (US$9 million) This component will finance 
investments in the water supply network in Conakry.  These could include measures to equalize 
pressures, improve the zoning of the system, reduce technical leakages, introduce a social 
connection program, and increase micro and macro metering of the network.  The exact 
composition of these investments would be determined by a flow analysis study to be performed 
during project preparation. Rehabilitation of water pipelines in Government and military owned 
buildings to reduce leakages will also be considered in order to reduce wastage in the water 
cons
umption of Government’s entities and bonded customers.  The possibility to expand 
production through well drilling might be explored as well.  
 
Performance improvement and institutional strengthening (US$6 million) This component will 
finance activities related to improving the governance of the urban water utility and transparency 
in the management of its operations, and by implementing a performance improvement plan to 
achieve key technical, financial, and commercial indicators.  A service contract to outsource 
commercial and financial functions of SEG will be considered. Increasing technical, operation 
and management capacity of the utility will be addressed through the setting up of an appropriate 
organizational structure. Key positions and functions of SEG will be streamlined and key 
managerial positions in the technical department will be competitively advertised and selected 
managers will have to deliver on clear performance targets. An operating fund for the service 
contract, as well as to improve working conditions, will be set up.  
 
Sector governance, financial sustainability and regulatory capacity component (US$5million): 
This component will support the regulatory and monitoring capacity of Government to review 
the sector’s performance, and provide TA to analyze thelong term options for the urban water 
sector while supporting its financial sustainability.  It will also include major studies, laying the 
ground for larger investments required, including, but not be limited to: independent technical 
and financial audits, participatory monitoring of sector performance, tariff policy formulation, 
financial modeling of the urban water sector, water production expansion options,  TA and the 
inclusion of the civil society in the monitoring of the quality of the urban water services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project location will be in Conakry.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The borrower has implemented several Bank projects and the utility has been an executing 
agency for several years, but capacity remains limited.  Nevertheless, we will re-launch CB 
activities to ensure that capacity to deal with safeguard issues is in place.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared during 
project's preparation.  There is a chance that while rehabilitating some of the distribution network 
people might need to be resettled.  This plan will establish the framework on how to deal with 
such situations if the need arises.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will (RPF) will be developped during project's preparation 
to ensure that all social impacts related to the rehabilitation of the water supply system, the 
possible expansion of water production through drilling of wells, are mitigated.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/30/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The ESMF and the RPF will be disclosed in the country as well as in the Bank infoshop prior 
to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Kriss 
02/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
02/25/2008 
Comments:   
