Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3627 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P111470 
Project Name: Education For All-Fast Track Initiative Program 
Task Team Leader: Michael Drabble 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (80%);Secondary education (20%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
117.80
117.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Pooled Fund to which the Catalytic Fund will contribute 
–
the FC-PSE – is 
to contribute to enhancing equitable access to and quality in education at all levels - with focus 
on primary education – and literacy training,while also strengthening central and deconcentrated 
management of the education system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The FC-PSE program consists of three main components: (i) improving equitable access to basic 
and non-formal education; (ii) improving quality of basic and non-formal education; and (iii) 
strengthening management of the education sector.  
 
(i)  
Improving Equitable Access to Basic and Non-Formal Education  
 
The first component of the FC-PSE program aims to promote equitable and regulated access to 
basic and non-formal education. Specifically, it aims to increase enrollment rates in pre-school, 
first grade, and lower secondary, support specific measures for mentally and/or physically 
handicapped children, and expand access to literacy training. In addition, this component will 
support the creation of professional integration courses for primary and lower secondary school 
leavers, as well as professional training specifically oriented toward the mining sector.  
Page  2
The component includes the following sub-components: (a) constructing, rehabilitating, and 
furnishing pre-school, primary, and secondary level educational infrastructure; (b) expanding 
educational access of primary-level students with special needs by facilitating the integration of 
students with special needs into certain primary schools; (c) expanding access to literacy training 
by financing literacy courses and training literacy trainers; (d) establishing professional 
integration courses for primary and lower secondary leavers; and (e) creating a small number of 
targeted, short-term professional training courses oriented toward the mining sector.  
 
(ii)  
Improving Quality of Basic and Non-Formal Education  
 
The objective of this component is to improve quality and relevance of basic and non-formal 
education, with particular focus on the acquisition of pedagogical materials, initial and continued 
teacher training, the provision of block grants to Primary Education Delegations (the MENRS 
administrative level below the prefecture), and student evaluations.  It will comprise the 
following sub-
components: (a) acquiring textbooks and teachers’ guides for public and private 
primary and secondary schools; (b) supporting initial training for primary and secondary 
teachers; (c) supporting continued training for primary and secondary teachers; (d) providing 
block grants to schools and Elementary School Delegations to support School Improvement 
Projects, teacher training, and operating costs; (e) conducting nation-wide student learning 
assessments at the primary and lower secondary level; and (f) implementing curriculum reform 
in higher education  
 
(iii)  
Improving Management of the Educational System  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the central and deconcentrated management of 
the sector, including its infrastructure services, by supporting the following sub-components: (a) 
building capacity for the monitoring of civil works in the National Service for Educational 
Infrastructure and Equipment through TA, training, and the provision of resources; (b) 
construction and rehabilitation of regional and prefectoral administrative education offices; (c) 
strengthening planning and monitoring capacity at the regional and prefectoral level; and (d) 
strengthening the MENRS at the central level in the areas of PSE steering and coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation, planning and financial management, and communications.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country-wide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Education - and specifically, the National Coordination at the Ministry of 
Education (CN/PSE)- will be responsible for the exeuction of the FC-PSE program. The National 
Coordination has been implementing an IDA-financed education project since 2002, and is 
therefore experienced with compliance with and enforcement of World Bank safeguard policies. 
Furthermore, the National Service for Educational Infrastructure and Equipment, which will 
have overall responsibility for the implementation of the construction program, has acquired 
experience with the control and enforcement of safeguard policies under the current IDA credit.  
Page  3
The regional and prefectoral education offices will receive training on the content of the ESMF 
and RPF, with specific focus on their responsibilities in enforcing compliance. Training will be 
carried out through workshops, sharing of documentation, site visits, etc. In addition, the 
CN/PSE will hire external auditors to assess compliance with the ESMF and the RPF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS) 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (AFTWR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main environmental and social issues relate to the planned construction of early-
childhood centers, primary schools, lower-secondary schools, and the extention of teacher 
training colleges.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not support construction that might have a negative impact on physical 
cultural resources. It is of note that no such resources were identified during project preparation.  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In the context of construction of new educational facilities, local authorities and communities 
will give land to the Education Ministry (MENRS). It is not expected that this will involve 
relocation or destruction of productive assets; however, each site will be reviewed to ensure 
compliance with RPF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/30/2008 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Environmental 
Safeguard Management Framework (ESMF) is underway; both will be completed in May 
2008 and disclosed in country and to infoshop before grant agreement signing.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept the transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Drabble 
04/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
05/06/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
