Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC3917
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID:  P090712 
Project Name:  Community-Driven Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Drabble 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (30%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%);Other social services (25%);Water supply (15%) 
Theme:  Other social development (P);Conflict prevention and post-conflict 
reconstruction (S);Other social protection and risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.42 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.42 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Rural communities in three regions plan, implement, use and maintain priority basic 
social and economic infrastructures and services, through a transparent and participatory 
process.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include three components: a) Institutional strengthening and capacity 
development; b) Local investment fund; and c) Project Coordination and Monitoring & 
Evaluation. The components would be implemented over four years in three regions 
(Cacheu, Bafata, and Oio).  
 
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (total estimated 
cost USD 1.49 million). This component will support capacity development of 
institutions at regional, administrative sector and community level, to plan and carry out 
investments in a participatory and transparent manner.   Capacity building activities will 
include: a) support to the local investment cycle: such as the development and 
implementation of a communication strategy, training of key local institutions on roles 
Page  2
and responsibilities, development and training of key staff and stakeholders inter alia on 
participatory tools and safeguard concerns; and b) the promotion of dialogue and 
consultation among local stakeholders and institutions, through workshops, exchange 
visits and training sessions with a view to supporting a culture of transparency and 
accountability and giving a voice to all categories of citizens.  
 
Component 2: Local Investment Fund (total estimated cost USD 2.82 million). This 
component will improve basic social and economic infrastructures and services in the 
three regions covered by the project. The component will finance micro-projects 
identified by the communities themselves through a participatory process, and included 
as part of their participatory Local Development Plan (LDP).  During the initial 18 
months of project implementation efforts will focus on two administrative sectors per 
region, testing and refining processes and procedures prior to scaling up to full regional 
coverage.  Beneficiary communities will be selected every year within the sectors of the 
three targeted regions according to pre-established criteria (defined in the Project 
Implementation Manual).  Beneficiary communities will then undertake a participatory 
planning process and subsequently design and implement micro-projects according to the 
following main steps: a) an information and communication campaign; b) the 
preparation, with support from facilitators, of a local development plan (LDP); c) after 
endorsement of the plans by local government, design of micro-project and preparation of 
request for financing; d) technical appraisal of micro-projects and signing of a financing 
agreement; e) implementation of micro-project under the responsibilities of grupos 
promotores and comites de gestao; and f) monitoring and evaluation. There will not be a 
menu of eligible micro-projects, but a simple negative list of activities that may not be 
financed by the project. Examples of possible micro-projects include: support to 
community productive and economic activities such as rice field and/or crops, 
construction or rehabilitation of productive infrastructure, construction or rehabilitation 
of community schools; equipment for schools; construction or rehabilitation of 
community health posts or health centers; equipment of health posts; community feeder 
roads; training and capacity building (alphabetization, etc); information and awareness 
sessions (nutrition, HIV, etc); etc.  
 
Component 3: Project coordination and Monitoring & Evaluation (total estimated cost 
USD 1.1 million). This component will finance a Project Coordination Unit within the 
Ministry of Economy and Regional Integration, which will be responsible for all 
operational and fiduciary management of the project, and for monitoring and evaluation 
of project activities. The PCU staff includes a Project Coordinator, a Financial 
Management Officer, a part-time Procurement Specialist, a part-time Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist, and administrative staff.  Procurement activities, which are not 
expected to be large nor frequent after the start up of the project, will be carried out 
through sharing staff time with other WB financed projects in the country. The 
component will also finance the development and implementation of a participatory 
monitoring and evaluation system, in particular the set up of a management information 
system (MIS) and the associated data gathering plan and tools. These tools will include 
baseline surveys, an evaluation of project processes 18 months into implementation, two 
independent beneficiary assessments, annual technical audits, and annual independent 
safeguard compliance reviews.  The PCU will produce regular project progress reports, 
and quarterly financial management reports.  
Page  3
Scope of intervention: The proposed project will intervene in three regions out of eight, 
identified by the government according to the following criteria: relative ease of access 
(communications and roads are fairly good), dynamism of both civil society and local 
governments and potential for success , level of poverty, and existence of other donor 
funded projects. The regions selected by the government are Cacheu, Oio and Bafata.  
Within each region, targeted beneficiary communities will be identified on an annual 
basis by the Concelho Directivos Sectorais in accordance with pre-defined criteria to be 
included in the Project Implementation Manual.  
 
Based on a maximum contribution of US$20,000 by the project towards the cost of 
implementing community action plans, it is expected that the project will finance at a 
minimum 120 micro-projects (assuming that 1 micro-project is the minimum number per 
community local development plan) during the entire life of the project.  
 
Estimated number of beneficiaries: Given the demand-driven nature of the project it is 
not yet possible to estimate accurately the number of beneficiaries.  It is expected that the 
project will intervene in a minimum of 120 communities, benefitting between 57,600 and 
192,000 individuals, based on the assumption that a given beneficiary community 
comprises between 60 and 200 households, with an average of 8 people per household. 
This represents approximately one third of the population in each of the project regions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will intervene primarily in rural areas, targeting communities residing in the 
north west of the country:  Cacheu, Oio and Bafata.  The exact location and type of sub-
project will be demand-driven by the community and hence is not known upfront. Based 
upon experience under the ongoing Coastal and Biodiversity Management Project’s 
(CBMP) CDD component, the types of micro-projects deemed priority by the 
communities are likely to include  inter alia wells for potable water, school infrastructure 
and equipment, community health posts, rehabilitation of small rural feeder roads, 
communal economic infrastructure and equipment (e.g., rehabilitation of rice fields or 
“bolanhas”; rice dehuskers, palm oil presses, fish transformation materials), etc.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTTR) 
Ms Tanya Lisa Yudelman (AFTH2) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Individual micro-projects are small and no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts 
are expected.  Environmental and social safeguard risks are the typical ones for a rural 
CDD project supporting small scale basic social and economic infrastructure, and might 
include: (i) localized degradation/encroachment of natural habitats and associated loss of 
biodiversity; (ii) soil degradation and erosion; (iii) decline in water quality; (iv) 
inappropriate waste disposal; (v) cutting of trees; (vi) use of pesticide and (v) potential 
public health concerns.  Possible social issues were identified to include: loss of/damage 
to cultural property and involuntary resettlement, including loss of access to resources. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for 
the project, and details the environmental and social screening criteria and mechanisms to 
be used during micro-project appraisal.  This screening tool will include a checklist 
designed to detect any potential environmental or social negative impacts linked to an 
individual micro-project and ensure that an appropriate Environmental Management Plan 
and/or Resettlement Action Plan and/or Pest Management Plan is prepared and 
appropriate mitigating measures are put in place if necessary.  In addition, there is a list 
of no eligible micro-projects, which includes inter-alia: (i) micro-project in natural 
habitats areas including natural parcs; (ii) micro-project using large quantities of wood 
coming from the communities and/or cutting trees to free space for micro-project 
investments; (iii) micro-projects using no eligible pesticides for agriculture activities (iv) 
micro-projects supporting construction of dams of more than three meters tall, (v) micro-
project supporting private commercial endeavors, etcâ
 ¦  The complete list is included in 
the ESMF. The ESMF also includes provisions for an annual review for safeguard 
compliance and to detect potential cumulative environmental impacts that might arise 
across several micro-projects. With respect to involuntary resettlement, in the event a 
micro-project proposal triggers this policy, the community assisted by the project 
facilitators will try to avoid any involuntary resettlement by exploring all viable 
alternative locations and designs for a micro-project.Should involuntary resettlement be 
unavoidable, the extent of land take will be the minimum possible.  It should be noted 
that resettlement due to land acquisition is expected to be nil or negligible.   
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term negative environmental or social impacts are anticipated to arise due to 
implementation of micro-projects. The environmental and social screening procedures are 
designed to identify and ensure appropriate mitigation is put in place. Implementation 
will be closely monitored to ensure that these are effective.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No other alternatives were considered as it is not expected that the micro-projects will 
have significant negative environmental and social impacts.  That said, with respect to 
involuntary resettlement the option of excluding micro-projects that trigger the safeguard 
policy was considered, however, this was discarded as, given the structure of the 
customary and formal land laws as well as the experience to date under the CBMP 
project, it is not expected that this will be a significant issue, and it was considered 
important to retain the flexibility to meet community’s priority needs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of project preparation the Government has prepared an ESMF and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF).  The ESMF also includes detailed Terms of Reference for the 
preparation of a Pest Management Plan. The processes and procedures defined within 
these will be an integral part of the Project Implementation Manual.  Recognizing that 
existing capacity of government officials at the central and local level to ensure 
compliance with environmental and social safeguards is weak, project staff as well as 
central and local government representatives will all be sensitized and trained in these 
issues (PCU, Regional Advisors and Facilitators). National and/or international experts 
will be mobilized for designing specific training content and methodology adapted to 
different public.  The cost of development of training materials is included in the project 
preparation advance (PP), while delivery of training will be financed by the IDA grant.  
Training will be organized on a continuous basis during project implementation in order 
to incorporate early lessons from the implementation of micro-projects.  Furthermore, 
general sensitization of beneficiaries will form part of the formal project communication 
strategy.  
 
Safeguard compliance will be assured through a three tiered process.  First, at the micro-
project preparation stage, beneficiary communities assisted by trained Facilitators will be 
required to complete an environmental and social safeguard checklist as part of the 
micro-project funding application.  This will help them identify any safeguard issues of 
concern, and prompt the incorporation of appropriate mitigation measures into micro-
project design.  Provision exists under the project to contract specialized technical 
assistance to support the preparation of environmental management plans and 
resettlement action plans when deemed necessary.  Second, at the micro-project appraisal 
stage, the Regional Advisors (RA) together with relevant regional technical 
representatives will conduct a desk and field review of the proposal prior to its approval. 
Page  6
The RA’s role explicitly includes verification of the appropriate identification and 
mitigation of safeguard concerns.  Third, at the project level, a full-time Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist will form part of the PCU team, and, working together with the RA 
and Facilitators in the field will be responsible inter alia for tracking safeguard 
compliance across the project as a whole and identifying and addressing any issues that 
arise during micro-project implementation.  Additionally, an independent specialist will 
be recruited to conduct an annual review of safeguard compliance, including detection of 
potential cumulative environmental impacts that might arise across several micro-
projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include:  (i) beneficiary communities, which will be identifying, 
preparing and implementing the micro-projects; (ii) local authorities (regional and 
sectoral government, traditional authorities and civil society organizations), which will be 
participating in the identification and definition of the LDP; and (iii) technical sectoral 
ministries implicated in the implementation and ongoing operation of the selected micro-
projects, as appropriate.  Development partners (donors, NGOs, religious organizations, 
etc.) active at the local level are also considered important stakeholders.  Preparation of 
the ESMF and RPF included consultation with representatives of each of these 
stakeholder groups and discussion of the safeguard processes and procedures being 
proposed.  Particular attention was paid to identifying vulnerable groups and potentially 
affected people (based upon the expected micro-project types), and ensuring the LDP 
consultative processes and involuntary resettlement processes and procedures were 
designed to proactively facilitate inclusion of these groups. The final documents will be 
made available for consultation in central and local government offices, as well as at the 
project and World Bank offices.  Community beneficiaries’ awareness of the 
environmental and social safeguard issues will be raised and sensitization efforts will be 
conducted on an ongoing basis throughout the participatory LDP process and micro-
project cycle.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2009 
 
Page  7
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Drabble 
02/26/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tanya Lisa Yudelman 
02/26/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gordon Appleby 
02/26/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
02/27/2009 
Comments:   
