Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3953 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P112177 
Project Name: Mineral Sector Induced Growth Program 
Task Team Leader: Boubacar Bocoum 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(15%);Power (15%);General industry and trade sector (15%);General transportation 
sector (15%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Tax policy and administration 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other rural development (S)
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Program Objective is to assist the Government of Guinea to develop a dynamic framework 
for resource management and economic linkages through targeted interventions to develop 
mining induced positive economic externalities and spin over activities that would otherwise not 
be realized.  The planned interventions will ensure that mining activities: a) benefit the people of 
Guinea, in particular the communities and regions where the mining assets are located, through 
leveraging pararllel business opportunities (trade, agriculture, municipal services, transport, 
etc.)to develop sustainable non mining income generation and employment; and b) serve as a 
catalyst and an engine of private sector led growth for other sectors of the economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Program is an opportunistic operation that does not involve direct investments into mining 
activities, but rather will promote the economic activities and linkages that ensure that mining 
activities benefit the local economy and consequently the country at large.  
Page  2
The proposed program has four components:  
 
Component A: Strengthening Mining Revenue Collection  Capacity of the Government and 
Public Private Dialogue.  
 
(i) Collect, administer, and monitor mining taxes and royalties;  
 
(ii) Facilitate the public private dialogue and engagement with the mining companies to 
formulate, prepare, implement and manage medium- and long-term integrated development 
projects aligned with the decentralization framework in Guinea, and long term sought sustainable 
development programs.  
 
Component B: Development of Integrated Economic Clusters.  
 
The interventions under this component are aimed at supporting the development and the 
transformation of new economic opportunities in the socio-economic spaces that are targeted for 
investment in the mining sector. Micro, small and medium scale enterprises (MSME) will be 
supported to capitalize on the increased direct and indirect demands generated by the presence of 
mining operations or news projects. The component will strengthen the business environment in 
the targeted pilot areas to allow Guineans to realize the existing opportunities and thereby 
improve the contribution of mining to local and national economies.  
 
Component C: Capacity building and support to public service delivery in the targeted clusters.  
 
Institutional strengthening to enable active and informed leadership and participation of central 
and decentralized authorities in the design and implementation of appropriate public policies, 
and services required to tune the country economic and fiscal policies with cluster-based 
economic promotion, and the development of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurs. Decentralized 
service delivery may be strengthened around: (i) agricultural extension services in the targeted 
clusters with the objective of increasing production, and (ii) municipal services (water, 
electricity, etc.) in partnership with the mining industry through PPPs.  
 
Component D: Program implementation, evaluation and monitoring.  
 
At the central, regional, and local level, the project would provide support for project 
implementation, project coordination, procurement, financial management, monitoring and 
evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Three different regions within Guinea are being considered for this program, the North-West 
region of Boke/Sangaredi and the South-East region around the Iron ore deposits of Simandou 
and Euronimba; and the North-East region of Siguiri with existing gold mines. However, the 
team decided to focus on Boke as a pilot given the presence of both operating mines and several 
mines under feasibility or pre-feasibility study, while Nzeroke is viewed as a second option.  The 
MIGEP is not involved in the promotion of mining investments per se, but will rather capitalize 
on opportunities created by their presence to promote sustainable economic activities in the 
targeted regions, the environmental impact of this program is not considered to be significant. 
However, it is worth noting the proximity of two of the targeted areas (Boke and Nzerekore) to 
protected and sensitive areas, which may be impacted by the potential development of some 
Page  3
SMEs (in extensive agriculture, fisheries, housing, retailing for example) to satisfy the increased 
demand created by the expected population growth in these areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional capacity for assessing social and environmental safeguards is low, and enforced 
by a weak Ministry of Environment. The environmental and social management framework 
(ESMF), and the resettlement policy framework (RPF) willl provide guidelines for 
avoiding/minimizing or mitigating the potential environmental and social impacts resulting from 
Program activities. They will also describe the roles and responsibilities of stakeholder groups, 
including any capacity strengthening and awareness raising measures deemed necessary to carry 
out the safeguard functions of the Program.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel P. Owen (SDV) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
From an environmental point of view this operation is a category B project. The 
environmental and social impacts of this Program are expected to be minimal site-specific, and 
manageable to an accepted level.  Since the locations, number and scale of some of the activities 
are undefined at this moment, it is proposed that an environmental and social management 
framework, and resettlement policy framework be prepared by the client. These instruments will 
be reviewed, cleared by the Bank and then disclosed in country and at Bank Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The Bank sponsored project related activities by stimulating economic development around 
the selected areas where the demand for goods and services are expected to grow, have a 
potential to impact sensitive ecosystems. The potential for triggering the natural habitat policy 
OP 4.04 will be assessed in the context of the ESMF. If confirmed, the appropriate mitigation 
measures will be put in place.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The Bank sponsored project related activities by stimulating economic development around 
the selected areas where the demand for goods and services are expected to grow, have a 
potential to impact forestry or woodlands. Similarly, the potential for triggering the forestry 
policy OP 4.36 will be assessed in the context of the ESMF. If confirmed the appropriate 
mitigation measures will be put in place.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The environmental and social assessment framework will provide guidelines for 
agrochemicals including the use and management of pesticides as well as fostering integrated 
pest management (IPM) in the agricultural production system in the selected areas.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In view of the lack of specifics on the scale, number and sites of Program intervention areas, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and who the affected people are, a resettlement policy framework (RPF) will be prepared. The 
RPF will provide guidelines for resettlement compensations, mitigation measures, along with 
grievance mechanisms in the event Program activities result in land acquisition and/or loss of 
livelihood on the part of Program affected people (PAPs).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The Bank sponsored project related activities by stimulating economic development around 
the selected areas where the demand for goods and services are expected to grow, have a 
potential to impact international waterways. The potential for triggering the projects on 
international waterways OP/BP 7.50 will be assessed in the context of the ESMF. If confirmed, 
the appropriate mitigation measures will be put in place.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the resettlement 
policy framework (RPF) will be shared with the Safeguards Team to  get their comments 
early January.  The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed (in English and local language) in 
Guinea and InfoShop before the start of appraisal, tentatively scheduled end January.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Boubacar Bocoum 
11/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
11/06/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
