Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3809
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID:  P113468 
Project Name:  Guinea Bissau--Food Price Crisis Response Program, Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Aniceto Timoteo Bila 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 22, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (75%);General education sector (25%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve food security by supporting the most 
vulnerable population including children and increasing rice production in the project 
area.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would help the Government of Guinea-
Bissau’s response to the food price 
crisis and will include three components: (i) support to improve food security for the 
most vulnerable population through school feeding and food for work programs; (ii) 
support for the country’s Emergency Plan for the Agricultural Campaign 2008-2010 
proposed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) to increase 
food production and productivity, with a particular focus on rice; and (iii) project 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The proposed Project is expected to be 
completed over a period of three years.  
 
The first component of the project (US$1.5 million) will be implemented by the World 
Food Program (WFP) and is designed to support provide support to the most vulnerable 
population through (i) the school feeding program; and (ii) the food for work program to 
Page  2
rehabilitate land under rice. Since the WFP program is already under implementation, 
channeling funds from this project through the WFP will supplement the WFP program 
to provide an emergency response to the most vulnerable population of Guinea-Bissau. 
WFP and the Bank will enter into a specific agreement for the implementation of 
Component 1. Using the existing WFP framework and partners will also minimize the 
linkage and elite capture.  
 
The second component (US$3.0 million) will be implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development and is designed to support (i) matching grants for 
food production; and (ii) provision of technical support to the farm groups. While the 
project would support diversification and production of all food crops, the main focus 
will be to increase rice production.  
 
The objective of the third component (US$0.5 million) is to coordinate project 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation and the resources in accordance with the 
project objectives and procedures. The implementation arrangements and the project 
supervision will be designed to minimize elite capture and leakages.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will intervene in areas of potential food production throughout the country 
but with a specific focus on six regions namely: Bafata, Biombo, Bissau, Chacheu, Gabu 
and Oio. The project will support food production activities in these areas through 
provision of agricultural inputs (seeds and fertilizers, agricultural tools) and rehabilitation 
of dykes and drainage channels. There is plenty of community/ state land which is 
completely vacant which can be brought into cultivation; no person or communities will 
be displaced nor will assets be negatively impacted as a result of the project; no land will 
be used to increase cultivation if it is being utilized for purposes other than agriculture; it 
would be presumed that any person utilizing land for agriculture purposes would want to 
participate in the project benefits, however, it would be entirely voluntary. However, 
limited use of pesticides may be required for pests’ control. Given theproject’s focus on 
food production and productivity, and support on rehabilitation of dykes and drainage 
channels, and use of inputs including pesticides, three Bank safeguards policies are 
triggered; Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP4.04) and Pest 
Management (OP 4.09), respectively. Although the size and nature of activities to be 
supported are not expected to cause any major environmental impacts, the project is rated 
as Category B. As per Bank safeguards policies the Government will be required to 
prepare and disclose in country and at the InfoShop the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), within six months of effectiveness of the Grant 
Agreement. The ESMF will formulate guidelines and procedures for environmental and 
social screening. It will also provide guidelines for pest and pesticides use and 
management, as efforts, under the project, to boost food production and productivity may 
have pesticide management implications. In addition, the ESMF will discuss institutional 
arrangements for implementation, along with any capacity strengthening and awareness 
raising measures deemed necessary for relevant stakeholder groups involved in 
implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Given the project’s focus on food production and productivity and support for 
rehabilitation of dykes and drainage channels, and use of inputs including pesticides, 
three Banks safeguard policies are triggered, Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), 
Natural Habitats (OP4.04), and Pest Management (OP 4.09), respectively.Food 
production intensification may imply increased use of agricultural inputs and pesticides, 
which would require a Pest Management Plan.  Although no new land will be 
rehabilitated, OP4.04 is triggered to safeguard possible intervention on land that has been 
abandoned more than 10 years.  
 
The Government will prepare and disclose in country and at the InfoShop an ESMF 
within six months of effectiveness of the Grant Agreement.  The ESMF would: (i) assess 
the environmental and social impacts of expected sub-projects; (ii) outline environmental 
management procedures and provide requisites tools, including a screening process with 
a
sub-project assessment forms and guidelines for mitigating impacts; and (iii) determine 
the capacity building needs. In addition to formal disclosure, the content of these 
documents will be disseminated in Guinea-Bissau through a series of stakeholder 
workshops.  The frameworks and the screening processes will be integrated into the 
Operational Manual of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project activities are small, and would not cause any long term or irreversible damage.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Due to the emergency nature of the food crisis, the proposed project was prepared under 
OP/BP 8.00 that provide the Bank’s policy framework for a rapid response to the crisis in 
Guinea-Bissau.  In accordance with OP/BP8.00, the recipient will prepare the ESMF and 
disclose it within six months of project effectiveness.  The project would include 
measures to strengthen the borrowers’ capacity to manage the ESMF including training, 
technical assistance and studies, as required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Smallholders and communities in the project area will be involved during the preparation 
of project activities, and will benefit from awareness raising and training concerning 
community rights and obligations; and how to seek redress against what they could 
regard as unfair process.  Training of technical staff at the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development is also planned and will minimize the negative impact of potential 
conflicts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/14/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2009 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aniceto Timoteo Bila 
08/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
08/18/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
08/07/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/29/2008 
Comments:  Prepared for Appraisal 
