Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3845
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P113608 
Project Name:  Labor Intensive Public Works - Additional Financing for Third Urban 
Development Project Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 8, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
2.50
2.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of phase II of the PDU3 are: (a) to improve the provision of 
infrastructure and services in Conakry and secondary cities; and (b) to improve the 
financial and organizational management of municipalities in support of the 
decentralization process.  The objectives remain the same for the additional financing 
being requested for the Urban Labor-Intensive Public Works component of the 
emergency project, in that the works will focus on physical infrastructure improvements, 
but with a focus on generating employment for the poorest and most vulnerable.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will mostly benefit poor, disadvantaged communities in Conakry 
and peri-urban neighborhoods. The project will use labor intensive methodology with 
execution primarily through the types of small and medium enterprises that carry out 
programs under the existing project.  The use of existing mechanisms and capacity will 
allow for quick implementation, eliminating the need to devise new methodologies or 
contracting arrangements.  However, this means that only about 50% of benefits will be 
transferred directly to participants in the form of wages.  Although this is not as high as 
Page  2
might normally be desired in this type of program (often between 60% and 70%), it is 
deemed acceptable considering the greater speed of response it allows by using existing 
PDU3 methodology.  It is expected that bids can be let out quickly for all of Conakry and 
the first contracts signed by late September /early October.  
 
Regarding site selection, a recent audit of five Conakry communities already identified a 
list of priority secondary roads and drainage for rehabilitation using technical analysis 
and participatory methods.  The program will finance small works projects over a 6-8 
month period. The project will provide approximately 5300 jobs to unskilled workers of 
around 2-3 months each, providing direct and indirect benefits to a total population of 
around 300,000 people in 40 of the poorest neighborhoods in Conakry whose 
neighborhoods would be targeted for the labor-intensive works. The program will utilize 
self-targeting labor hiring techniques by applying a slightly below-market wage rate in 
order to attract the neediest to the program and avoid poaching/diverting individuals from 
other productive activities. The wage rate will be adjusted according to the market 
conditions in the program areas. The targeting specifications will be included in the 
bidding documents and used as evaluation criteria.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Conakry - Kaloum, Dixinn, Matoto, Ratoma and Matam.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No additional safeguard issues are associated with the additional financing.  Issues 
associated with the original project areas follows “Potential adverse environmental and 
Page  3
social impacts are likely to include soil and water pollution, air pollution, loss of 
vegetation, soil erosion, and the generation of asbest
os
and medical waste.”   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None of the planned activities are expected to cause any potential indirect and/or long-
term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In light of the fact that this project (APL) was prepared in the context of a longer-term 
program and given that the potential adverse environmental and social impacts can be 
easily mitigated, the consideration of project alternatives was not necessary.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under the original project, the Recipient has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)to enable 
project implementers to identify and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts at the planning stage of infrastructure investments. While the RPF outlines the 
policies and procedures to be applied in the event that sub-projects involve land 
acquisition, the ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process to be 
followed during project implementation. The ESMF includes and Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) which proposes environmental capacity building 
measures for project implementers because their current capacity in this regard is 
insufficient.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include representatives of relevant ministries, solid waste 
management services, pest management services, municipalities, NGOS. The ESMF 
includes a requirement for public consultations and disclosure, so the relevant 
stakeholders will be consulted at the time sub-project planning. The ESMF was prepared 
in consultation with the afore-mentioned stakeholders, and they indicated their support 
for the proposed project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  4
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/23/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  5
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
09/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
09/23/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
09/23/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
09/23/2008 
Comments:   
