Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4230 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/08/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Haiti 
Project ID: P112164 
Project Name: HT (AF) Electricity Loss Reduction Project 
Task Team Leader: Christophe de Gouvello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 8, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (67%);Debt management 
and fiscal sustainability (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed Additional Financing (AF) is the same as the original 
Project, namely: "to contribute to the sustainable improvement in the quality of electricity 
services to customers and to the strengthening of the financial and operational performance of 
the public electricity utility Electricité d#Haïti (EDH)#.  The objective of the Additional 
Financing is to (i) improve the management of the utility by providing a two-year program of 
technical assistance to EDH, (ii) finance cost overruns for the two customer systems and the 
remote meters, which were bid out in the second half of 2009, and (iii) help strengthen the 
capacity of the Ministry of Public Works to oversee the energy sector and cover additional 
project management costs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The combined Project would then consist of the components described below.  
 
Component 1: Improvement in EDH management systems and practices (Original including 
reallocation: US$2.19 million, Additional US$1.49 million, Total: US$3.68 million). The 
component finances the purchase of two systems (the commercial management and technical 
Page  2
management systems) for the utility, which will help improve billing and quality of service. The 
AF would finance the cost overruns incurred for the purchase of the Customer Management 
System and the Technical Service Management System. These include: US$0.19 million for the 
Customer Management System (CMS), and US$1.3 million for the Data Processing Center, 
shared by both CMS and TSMS.  
 
Component 2: Improvement in quality and reliability of services and increase in revenue 
collection of EDH (Original: US$3.15 million, Additional US$0.37 million, Total: US$3.51 
million). The component supports the implementation of the CMS and TSMS in a specific zone 
of Port au Prince and for the large customers of EDH, through targeted investments in 
equipments for the distribution, including meters and transformers, and support for the selection 
of adequate staff.  The AF would finance expected cost overruns in the component related to the 
purchase of remote meters for the large clients, and to include the purchase of remote meters to 
accurately measure energy produced by Independent Power Producers.  
 
Component 3: Participatory approach, project management, monitoring and impact evaluation, 
and replication strategy (Original: US$0.66 million, Additional US$0.42 million, Total: US$1.08 
million). This component finances internal and external communication campaigns for the 
Project, as well as costs of the Project Coordination Unit. The AF would finance: (i) the Project 
Coordination Unit (composed of the Coordinator, the Financial Management Specialist and the 
Procurement Specialist) during the two-year extension hereby requested to carry out the scaled-
up activities, (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of the performance indicators by the PCU and 
(iii) the strengthening of the capacity of the MTPTC to oversee the performance of EDH, and in 
particular that of Technical Assistance Program.  
 
Component 4: Management support to EDH (Original: US$0 million, Additional US$2.57 
million, Total: US$2.57 million). The AF will finance a program of technical assistance to 
support EDH management. This program will consist in the introduction of four international 
experts in EDH#s management structure to enhance the performance of the Commercial, 
Technical, Finance/Administration and Planning Divisions and transfer capacity for improved 
management policies and practices to EDH.  The component will also finance the operating costs 
associated with these experts (living and travel expenses), as well as ad-hoc technical assistance 
as needed.  
 
Contingencies (Original: US$0.01 million, Additional US$ 0.15 million, Total: US$ 0.16 
million). AF is being requested to fund possible further cost overruns in the various components 
of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be carried out in the capital Port au Prince, and in the largest cities of the 
country (mainly: Gonaives, Petit Goave, Jacmel, Cap Haitien, Les Cayes)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project does not raise any safeguard issues. It has been rated as category C.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
As stated above, no safegards policies are triggred for this Additional Financing. The 
category remains the same as for the original Project, C.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/10/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christophe de Gouvello 
07/08/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/08/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
07/08/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
