Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/23/2008 
Report No.:  AC3980
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P114292 
Project Name:  Bridge Reconstruction and Disaster Mitigation 
Task Team Leader:  Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: November 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (50%);Flood protection (30%);Central government 
administration (20%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Administrative and civil service reform 
(S);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to i) restore access on selected critical points of 
the Haitian transport system, and ii) support vulnerability reduction by strengthening the 
Haitian National Disaster Risk Management System.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project includes the following four components:  
 
Component 1. Reconstructing selected bridges to restore access (US$7.2 million): This 
component will retroactively finance – subject to conformity to Bank procurement 
guidelines, emergency works performed by MTPTC to restore basic access in areas 
where major bridges have collapsed (sub-component 1.1.). The component will also 
rebuild two of the four damaged main bridges (Mirebalais and Chalon), help the MTPTC 
acquire a stock of emergency bridges in preparation for future disasters and provide 
targeted assistance to bridge reconstruction works financed by other donors (sub-
component 1.2.).  
 
Page  2
Component 2. Improving the resilience of transport infrastructure (US$4.9 million): 
This component will finance several repair and consolidation works on damaged or 
weakened bridges and road sections. An indicative list of works has been prepared by the 
MTPTC, with the assistance of a World Bank mission that visited Haiti immediately after 
the FGHI storms. This component will also finance community-based routine 
maintenance activities, building on both the successful experiences piloted by the FER 
and by the Bank-financed CDD operations in Haiti.  
 
Component 3. Improving transport asset management (US$2.6 million): This 
component will finance a number of capacity building activities aiming at developing 
good practices in bridge asset management, hydrolic monitoring and at strengthening the 
institutional capacity of the MTPTC and its regional offices (DDTP).  
 
Component 4. Support Vulnerability Reduction by Strengthening Haiti’s NDRMS 
(US$4.9 million): This component will finance a comprehensive technical assistance 
package to support the creation of a post-disaster recovery and coordination unit within 
the MPCE and provide technical assistance to strengthen the vulnerability reduction 
capacities of the NDRMS per the recommendations of the PDNA  (sub-component 4.1 & 
4.2). Coordination arrangements will include MTPTC, particularly with regard to the 
implementation of the proposed project (components 1, 2 and 3), but also other ministries 
and relevant institutions. This component will also pilot a more integrated approach to 
disaster prevention through strategic studies to be performed in selected areas particularly 
vulnerable to natural disasters such as Gonaives or Etang Saumatre-Lac Azuei (sub-
component 4.3). This component builds on existing Bank operations in disaster risk 
management in Haiti, namely the ERDMP, by providing a more systematic approach to 
disaster risk mitigation, recovery and reconstruction at the national coordination level and 
within specific key ministries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have impacts at the national level through institutional and policy 
improvements. The locations identified in the Project Activity Map found in Annex 13 od 
the Emergency Project Paper (EPP) where component 1 and 2 will be implemented are 
those were reconstruction and mitigation works will be undertaken. Component 4 will 
finance pilot studies and the preparation of integrated disaster risk management plans in 
the watersheds of Gonaive and Lac Azeui.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified under Environmental Category B because of the limited potential 
for adverse environmental impacts. Any impacts associated with the project are likely to 
be temporary, highly localized and easily mitigated with known management techniques. 
Since the project primarily involves reconstruction at existing sites, the potential for 
incremental environmental impacts are low. Thus, a full environmental impact 
assessment will not be undertaken. However, in the context of component 1 and specific 
sub-projects of component 2, some activites might engender negative impacts. For most 
of these small scale works, construction contractors will be required to adhere to an 
agreed site management plan to address the local issues where necessary.  
 
Bridge rehabilitation activites under component 1 and drainage activiteis under 
component 2 could lead to environmental impacts such as pollution resulting from 
suspension of sediments or disposal of constrcution waste in stream where demolition or 
construction activites will take place. An environemtnal impact evaluation could be 
required for these specific activities and a management plan would recommed mitigation 
measures and necessary follow up.  
 
The rehabiliation of roads could cause individuals trees or population of trees to 
disappear due to their increasing use. The project plans to support the rehabilitation of 
forest areas through multiple reforestation and soil rehabilitation micro-projects. No 
critical natural habitats will be affected by the project but efforts will be made to avoid 
and mitigate any damage to locally important habitat values.  
 
The infrastructure investments could require the resettlement of population from their 
own field or could possibly require temporary or permanent land aquisition at 
construction sites. The Haitian government has set as "Cadre d'Expropriation" 
(Resettlement Framework) under the Bank financed Transportation and Territorial 
Development Project (PTDT). This Resettlement Framework is currently being revised in 
order to be applicable to the proposed project. The revision will in particular include: (1) 
Page  4
an initial socioeconomic assessment of the conditions of affected populations; (2) a 
broader description of the process to consult consultations; (3) a compensation system 
aiming at restoring "previous conditions" for affected populatoins; (4) the institutional 
arrangement for managing and implementing the framework; and (5) a description of the 
proposed grievance mechanism. Once approved by the Government, the revised 
framework will be published in Country and the Infoshop. It is estimated that such 
publication should take place prior to the proposed Board date (Nov. 18, 2008).  
 
The rehabilitation of roads could lead to the discovery or damage of cultural resources. 
It hence requires a supervision to make sure that the cultural and art objects be correctly 
identified and that adequate measures be set in place.  
 
Position environmental impacts would include boosting the local and regional economy 
through the creation of jobs for the local population and companies. This project would 
promote agriculture, commerce and tourism through regaining access to regions of the 
country previous isolated. It would also raise the standard of living of isolated 
populations by integrating them in the national system and re-gaining services such as 
health care that were previously lost.  
 
An Evironmental and Social Safeguard Framework for the project has been drafted by 
the Bureau de Monetisation Project Coordination Unit (BM-PCU). The EMF describes 
the sub-projects to be developed, describes a screening and evaluation tool, identifies 
likely impacts, and offers suggestions on mitigation measures for the most likely impacts. 
The EMF also describes institutional measures for implementation of the measures. This 
framework is almost completed in order to comply with Bank safeguard policies and the 
draft version has ben published in Infoshop and in-country. A final version is expected to 
be finalized before the proposed Board date. The final version will include: (1)a budget 
for implenting the proposed overall project screening supervision and monitoring 
activites; (2) a simplified list of indicators to be collected in order to monitor the project's 
environmental and social impacts; (3) a clarification of the project's arrangements to 
implement and supervise EMF; (4) a section on agreed procedures for the use of pesticies 
in reforestation activites (in compliance to OP4.09 in case there is a need to control pests 
in the context of reforestation activites); and (5) a description of procedures to be 
followed by contractors in case of chance finding of cultural artifcats during construction 
activites.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The rehabiliation works would restore and improve the situtation that prevailed before the 
disasters. It would mitigate erosion of rivers and improve resilience to disasters. No long 
term negative impacts are anticipated and the relevant scresing and assessment 
procedures will be used to guide the identification and mitigation of adverse impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementing agency for component 4, the BM-PCU, has a full-time environmental 
specialist who is responsible for assuring that those policies laid out in the Environmental 
and Social Safeguards Framework and ensuing Manual are respected. The BM-PCU has 
and will continue to finance numerous environmental safeguard and environmental 
training sessions under the Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management Framework 
(P090159). In addtion, a social and environmental specialist will be hired by the UCE to 
ensure a sound implementation and supervision of the Project's Social and Environmental 
Framework. A provision (US$75,000) was also included in project design to finance 
activites aiming at improving the management of social and environmental impacts of 
project activities. A communications expet working for the BM-PCU will be available to 
the project to improve the quality of communications / public consultations prior to 
undertaking the rehabilitation and mitigation works. Arrangements under the ongoing 
projects managed by the BM-PCU have been found satisfactory by visiting Bank 
missions and will be maintained. Construction contrators will be required to adhere to a 
site plan for managing potential environmental impacts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the MTPTC and the MPCE and those individuals that benefit 
from a functioning and resilient national transportation infrastructure and improved 
national disaster risk management system.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/14/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Page  7
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
10/21/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/21/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/21/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
10/21/2008 
Comments:   
