Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/14/2008 
Report No.:  AC3450
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P106621 
Project Name:  HT - MEETING TEACHER NEEDS FOR EFA 
Task Team Leader:  Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (90%);Pre-primary education (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Haiti aims to improve access and learning in basic education and to reach Education For 
All (EFA) by 2015.  In order to achieve this, among other things, a greater number of 
higher quality teachers are needed.  This project would support the Government of Haiti 
(GoH) in the development and implementation of an accelerated teacher preparation 
program.   
 
3. Project Description 
Under the project, recent high school graduates would be selected for a three year 
program, consisting of ten months in an Institut de formation des ma√Ætres (Teacher 
Training Institute, IFM) and two years of full time practice teaching.  At the end of the 
project, this high capacity teacher preparation system would be capable of training 
sufficient numbers of teachers to help Haiti to reach EFA in 2015, as the system would 
expand from graduating fewer than 500 new teachers per year to graduating more than 
2,500 new teachers per year.  In addition, new teachers would be available to schools 
only one year after entering teacher preparation, as opposed to the current three year lag.  
The quality of teaching practice would improve as teacher preparation would focus on 
effective strategies to improve student learning in core subject areas in the context of 
Haitian schools. The first cohort of student-teachers would begin their teacher preparation 
Page  2
in September 2008. Upon finishing their year of institution-based training, student-
teachers would work as full-time teachers in public and non-public schools for two years 
and would be supported by mentor teachers and supervisory personnel at the school level.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
National coverage, with emphasis on expansion of teacher provision in rural areas where 
primary enrollment is lowest.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is a Category C.  No environmental issues are anticipated in association with this 
project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The hoped-for long term impact is increased access to higher quality primary schooling, 
which would have a beneficiary social impact on all households involved.  There are 
risks that subsequent funding will not materialize, whether because of unsatisfactory 
results of this project, unsatisfactory results of the EFA APG I, lack of future IDA 
funding for Haiti, or other factors beyond the Bank's control, in which case the 
sustainability and expansion of the program would be jeopardized.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project considered shorter-term training to accelerate teacher provision and lower costs 
even more, but social assessment indicated this would be unacceptable to stakeholders.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Client participated in design of social assessment and in presentation/discussion of social 
assessment's findings and recommendations.  The social assessment strong endorsement 
o
f
expanding access to and quality of schooling confirmed the suitabilty of the projectís 
objectives.  The Client and external auditors will monitor project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key Stakeholders:  high school seniors and recent graduates, teacher education personnel, 
Ministry of Education and Training and Ministry of Finance staff, parents, students, 
principals, teachers, teachersí unions.  
 
The social assessment team interviewed key stakeholders in Port-au-Prince as well as 
over 400 stakeholders in 4 departments, of which 3 were selected due to their 
classification in the Poverty Map of Haiti as being extremely weak in terms of access to 
basic education: Artibonite, Centre, and Ouest. The fourth department, Nippes, was not 
included in the Poverty Map and was added at the request of the Ministry of Education 
and Training. Stakeholders consulted in Port-au-Prince included representatives from the 
Ministry of Education, NGOs, other donors, teachersí unions, and representatives of non-
public school associations. In rural areas, stakeholders included parents (with and without 
children in school), students, school directors, local authority figures, regional Ministry 
of Education and Training representatives, and teachers. Local authority figures ranged 
from local government representatives, such as mayors, to religious leaders, to influential 
members of society. A complete description of the methodology and results by region is 
available in a French report.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
03/14/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
03/14/2008 
Comments:   
