Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3227 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Haiti 
Project ID: P106621 
Project Name: HT - MEETING TEACHER NEEDS FOR EFA 
Task Team Leader: Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (80%);Pre-primary education (20%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to strengthen Haiti's capacity for implementing an expanded and 
improved quality teacher education program to meet the critical needs of the sector.  
 
Monitoring indicators to measure expansion, improvement, and quality of the teacher education 
program will be defined during preparation. Some possible indicators include: number of 
partnership agreements with providers established, number of qualified teacher trainers recruited, 
number of teachers trained and deployed per year, and competence of students taught by newly 
trained teachers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This proposed project supports the government's EFA strategy by strengthening Haiti's teacher 
preparation system and gradually increasing the number of graduated certified teachers with 
appropriate skills from 400 to 2,400 new teachers per year (a key HIPC trigger) through the 
activities described below:  
 
Page  2
Component 1:  Building Institutional Capacity for Implementation of the Accelerated Pre-
service Teacher Education Reform (Programme de Formation Initialed Accelere, FIA)  
 
This component seeks to improve the conditions under which the FIA will be implemented by 
providing technical assistance and resources as needed to MENFP and the teacher education 
providers (public and non-public).  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Improving the Regulatory Framework of the Accelerated Pre-Service 
Teacher Education Reform (Programme de Formation Initiale Accelere, FIA)  
 
The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen capacity of MENFP and the major public 
and non-public providers of teacher education to ensure a more effective implementation and 
oversight of FIA.  In addition, the Ministry will be able to manage its teaching force, thus 
ensuring that trained teachers will be efficiently hired, posted and paid. At the central level, 
interventions will be carried out through the Training Division of the Ministry of Education 
(Direction de Formation et de Perfectionnement, DFP), responsible for leading and overseeing 
the overall implementation of the FIA, the Division of Human Resources, (Direction des 
Ressources Humaines, DRH) and major non-public providers of teacher education.  At the local 
level, capacity will be strengthened through the Pedagogical Support Units - (Servi
ces d’Appui 
Pedagogique, SAP), District Education offices(Bureau de Districte Scolaire, BDS) and teacher 
support offices (EFACAPs) in the Regional Education Departments, which are responsible for 
the field supervision and pedagogical support of student-teachers and schools.  
 
Activities to be financed under this sub-component include: (i) provision of technical assistance 
to the institutions involved at the central and local levels for the implementation of FIA and 
management of teachers; (ii) the provision of training, equipment, transportation and operating 
budgets to the to the DFP, SAPs, BDSs, EFACAPs ;and (iii) the development of recruitment 
procedures and incentives to attract teacher candidates, at the decentralized and centralized 
levels.  This technical assistance and additional means should allow for quality, regular 
monitoring and support of teacher preparation institutions, student teachers and schools.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2:  Building Capacity of the Providers delivering the Accelerated Pre-Service 
Teacher Education Reform (Programme de Formation Initiale Accelere, FIA)  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to contribute to supporting and building capacity of the 
teacher education providers participating in implementation of the FIA.  Providers will be 
selected based on criteria to be determined during preparation.  The MENFP will sign 
partnership agreements with qualified providers to outline their responsibilities and the type of 
support they will receive from the program.  
 
Based upon a needs assessment of the providers, it is expected that this sub-component will 
provide grant financing to: (i) upgrade teaching infrastructure (i.e. small repairs of classrooms 
and libraries) and supply equipment/furniture as needed; (ii) offset additional operating costs 
supported by the teacher education providers during implementation; (iii) provide financial 
incentives for and/or contract-training of additional trainers needed to be hired as a result of the 
increase in teaching workload due to the implementation of FIA; (iv) hire and/or retrain teacher 
Page  3
trainers; (v) purchase learning materials (textbooks, reading books, teaching aids and reference 
materials) both for the teacher education providers (upgrading libraries ) and for student teachers 
during their training and to take with them when they will be deployed to schools for their 
practicum; and,(vi) test and evaluate the new curriculum.  
 
Component 2:  Improving the adequacy and quality of teacher education in the context of FIA.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1:  Providing support to teacher trainers to improve the effectiveness of 
Teacher Education  
 
In order for pre-service teacher education to be effective, teacher trainers need professional 
development opportunities throughout their careers.  This subcomponent will create a 
collaboration/partnership with selected universities to create a sustainable program of 
professional development.  These universities will be selected on the basis of criteria to be 
established prior to appraisal.  This program will provide professional development opportunities 
for teacher trainers, including school-based interactions with teachers and students. Collaborating 
school staff will receive mentoring from teacher trainers in order to work more effectively with 
their teacher trainees.  Selected school staff will also partner with teacher trainers in provision of 
pre-service training.  
 
Component 2.2: Supporting the training of preschool teachers to improve equitable access to 
primary schooling  
 
To improve access and performance of first grade students, this component will support the 
training of teachers for the preschool level class attached to primary schools. Currently, teachers 
have little training, inappropriate materials, and are unable to provide developmentally 
appropriate teaching to children.  Working in close collaboration with the Direction de 
Formation et de Perfectionnement (DFP), and building on the FIA, this subcomponent will 
develop the human resources at the preschool level which will improve transition rates to 
primary school as well as student performance in the early grades.  Operating through existing 
training agencies (such as public and private teacher education institutions, most of which are 
training preschool teachers al
ready, le Centre de l’Education Speciale and TIPA TIPA), the 
project will train a cadre of preschool teachers  who teach the preschool classes for five year olds 
(the year prior to primary entry) attached to primary schools.  The training curriculum would 
build on existing curricula developed by UNICEF and others, and the approach would be 
adapted from the accelerated teacher education program, FIA.  
 
For any works with a potential Category “B” impact level that are identified during project 
preparation or implementation, an EA will be prepared in accordance with OP 4.01.  
Furthermore, if project design were to change so as to include more substantial civil works, such 
as either expansion of existing building or new constructions, the team would assess the potential 
for triggering OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and the need for developing an appropriate 
resettlement instrument.  Even if lands used are already government property, if squatters or 
other third parties are either living on or using the lands for economic means and would lose 
access to such lands, these impacts would be covered under OP 4.12.   
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
Whole country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
02/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
02/07/2008 
Comments:   
