Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4049 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Haiti 
Project ID: P114775 
Project Name: Additional Financing for Haiti Community-Driven Development (CDD) 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Garry Charlier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General education sector (5%);Health (3%);Central government administration 
(2%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Poverty strategy, analysis and 
monitoring (S);Managing for development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.58
0.58 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of this proposed Additional Financing (AF) remains the same as that 
of the original Haiti Community-Driven Development Project (PRODEP), i.e. to support the 
scaling up of the direct transfer of public resources to local community organizations in poor 
rural and peri-urban communities, by: (i) improving their access to basic social and economic 
infrastructure and supporting income-generation activities through the financing of small-scale 
investments proposed, implemented, and managed by local community organizations; and (ii) 
improving governance and building social capital in communities by strengthening citizen 
participation and transparency in open decision-making processes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The original grant for the Haiti CDD project (PRODEP) was for US$38.0 million equivalent; the 
proposed Additional Financing is for US$8.0 million equivalent, and would scale up investments 
and activities under Component 1: Community Subproject Funding, Management, and Support 
of the original project. 
 
Component 1: Community Subproject Funding, Management, and Support (US$ 8.58 million; 
IDA US$ 8.00 million) would: (i) finance approximately 300 small-scale community-subprojects 
in the 32 communes of Phase I of PRODEP; and (ii) provide additional technical assistance to 
further strengthen capacity in the COPRODEPs (i.e., municipal project development councils) 
and beneficiary community-based organizations (CBOs). Specifically, and as in the original 
CDD/PRODEP project, subproject funding would finance: (i) basic small-scale socio-economic 
infrastructure (spot rehabilitation of rural road or paths, education, health, natural resource 
management, etc.) and productive/income generation community investments (at an average cost 
of US$ 20,000 per project, with a ceiling of US$50,000) identified by CBOs, and subsequently 
prioritized by representative COPRODEPs based on available project resources; and (ii) the 
contracting of service providers to mobilize CBOs to participate in the project, and provide them 
with necessary training and technical assistance in the preparation, execution and operation of 
subproject investments.  
 
Other technical assistance and incremental project management and administration costs, 
including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for the AF, would be covered by the existing 
budgets of the original PRODEP (Component 2: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance, 
and Component 3: Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The AF would support activities in the 32 eligible municipalities (among the poorest in the 
country) from Phase I of PRODEP across five Haitian Departments (the Northeast, Center, 
Southeast, South and Nippes). Scope and coverage remain unchanged, and these municipalities 
are already covered by the project's original EMP. In addition to maintaining the geographoic 
scope of the original project, the AF project would maintain its scope and type of activities 
financed. As a result, no new safeguard policies have been triggered.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA) and an Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) for the original project in 2005, in accordance with OP 4.01 and national 
environmental law. Following public consultations with stakeholders in May 2005, the EA and 
EMF were disclosed in June 2005, including their posting on government web sites (e.g., 
www.mef.gouv.ht, www.bureau de gestion.gouv.ht) and the World Bank InfoShop. The EMF 
includes procedures for the screening of all subprojects and sites, application of mitigation 
measures to offset identified impacts, regular environmental monitoring, and environment-
related technical assistance. The EMP remains unchanged and would be applied as is to the AF.  
 
Institutional Capacity: The implementing agency (the Bureau of Monetization, previously the 
PL-480 Management Office) and its PCU have hired an environmental specialist who has been 
responsible since 2005 for assuring that the policies defined in the EMF and Operations Manual 
are respected. The project has also financed a number of environmental safeguards and 
Page  3
environmental training sessions for other PCU staff, service providers (MDOD), Project 
Councils (COPRODEPs), and local and central government staff participating in project 
implementation at the regional and local levels. A communication expert was also hired, based 
on the need observed during the implementation to improve the quality of communication/public 
consultation prior to undertaking small community subproject works. Safeguards arrangements 
under the on-going project have been deemed satisfactory by visiting Bank missions and are 
expected to be maintained under the AF.  
 
Experience of safeguards implementation to date/lessons learned: Safeguards implementation 
has been found by Bank supervision missions to be robust. The EA, Pest Management and 
Physical Cultural Property policies (OPs 4.01, 4.09 and 4.11, respectively) were the only 
safeguard policies originally triggered, and experience under implementation has highlighted no 
need to revise this assessment. Both the environmental and social screening mechanisms used in 
the identification and selection of community subprojects (all 612 subprojects to date have been 
assessed using these instruments) and local risk management activities have been largely 
satisfactory.  
 
The Operations Manual will be updated to reflect lessons learned to date in the implementation 
of the original project and other linked projects (e.g., the Urban CDD Pilot/PRODEPAP and the 
recently launched Urban CDD Project/PRODEPUR). Key lessons learned include: (a) the need 
for minor improvements in the format of the screening checklist, to provide more space for the 
recording of identified environmental concerns; and (b) the involvement and increased 
responsibility of local and regional officials as a critical factor in the implementation of the EMF, 
as well as the provision of support through TA and training.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Peter Cohen (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
As with the original project, this project presents no major environmental or social impacts. 
The AF would continue to be classified as a Category B, due to its limited potential to produce 
any large-scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts. Moreover, and as in the 
original project, these activities would continue to be accompanied by the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) of the original project, designed to improve environmental 
management in the targeted areas. Potential negative impacts (direct, indirect, and cumulative) 
related to the construction, operation and maintenance phases of community subprojects 
–
and, 
in particular, those involving civil works – would be mitigated and/or avoided wherever possible. 
As in the original project, mitigation measures would be identified and assessed during 
subproject preparation and addressed in contracts as binding clauses with associated costs, 
potentially resulting in significant environmental and social benefits at the local level.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The EMP of the original project includes appropriate Pesticides Management Plans (with 
non-chemical measures for pest management and guidelines for the proper selection, application, 
storage, handling, transport, and disposal of pesticides) in the event that community sub-projects 
(such as community agricultural inputs shops, small irrigation schemes, etc.)might procure 
pesticides or result in the increased use of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The EMP for the original project includes chance find procedures to be applied in the 
unlikely event that sub-project construction activities might be found to impact culturally 
significant resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
As in the original project, all subprojects with potential involuntary resettlement impacts 
would be ineligible for financing under this AF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/21/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A: The Borrower prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA) and an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) for the original project in 2005, in accordance with OP 4.01 
and national environmental law. Following public consultations with stakeholders in May 
2005 the EA and EMF were disclosed in June 2005, including their posting on government 
web sites (e.g., www.mef.gouv.ht, www.bureau de ge
stion.gouv.ht) and the World Bank’s 
InfoShop. The EMF includes procedures for the screening of all subprojects and sites, the 
application of mitigation measures to offset any identified impacts, regular environmental 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
monitoring, and environment-related technical assistance. This EMP remains unchanged and 
would be used for the AF as well.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
11/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
11/13/2008 
Comments:   
