Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/18/2009 
Report No.:  AC4251
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P113623 
Project Name:  Strengthening the Management of Agriculture Public Services (GFRP) 
Task Team Leader:  Diego Arias Carballo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 18, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (40%);Global food crisis response (40%);Rural 
services and infrastructure (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to enable MARNDR to prioritize and target 
investments according to the agricultural sector policy, and improve  local agriculture 
support services .  
 
Key indicators for the project would be: (i) the validation by the GTA  of an agriculture 
sector policy; (ii) the change in the number of farmers receiving local agricultural 
services in pilot areas; and (iii) the change in the MARNDR™s non-salary operating 
budget commitment rate .  
 
The proposed project represents the first stage of an expected fifteen to twenty-year 
engagement with Haiti on the agriculture public sector reform dialogue and development.  
The end goal would be that the Government, through MARNDR, regain the stewardship 
of the public sector resources going to agriculture, fulfilling its normative and regulatory 
and coordinating mandate.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening MARNDRs Managerial Functions (US$1.9 million) would 
finance (at the central and local level) two subcomponents:  
 
Page  2
Subcomponent 1a: Sector policies and coordination (US$0.9 million). This 
subcomponent would finance the formulation and coordination of sector and subsector 
policies, the mainstreaming of environmental aspects within the agriculture sector policy, 
and the prioritization of investment and regulatory instruments, that are today fulfilled by 
the MARNDRs Direction Generale (DG) and its Programming and Studies Unit (UEP).  
Funds for this subcomponent will finance long and short term technical assistance, 
events, training, dissemination material, and web-site related expenses (equipment, 
software, connectivity). The main products of this subcomponent would be: (i) the 
dissemination of a validated agriculture sector policy; (ii) the training of staff in relevant 
policy issues for strengthening agriculture sector (and sub-sector) policy formulation and 
implementation; (iii) the establishment of an Environmental Technical Unit (UTE) in the 
MARNDR; and (iv) the holding of duly prepared sub-sectoral meetings to foster the 
exchange of knowledge and agree on harmonization measures on a voluntary basis 
between donors, NGOs and the Government.  
 
Subcomponent 1b: Enhancing Administrative, HR, and fiduciary capacity (US$1 
million). This subcomponent would finance the improvement 
of
MARNDR™s 
administrative, HR, and financial capacity, including budgetary processes and 
procurement capacity by MARNDRs Directorate of Administrative Affaires (DAA).  The 
DAA is the main interface with the MEF regarding budgetary issues for the operational 
budget and corresponding procurement and it will have fiduciary responsibility over the 
Banks project funds. The UEP is the main interface with the MPCE regarding budgetary 
issues of the investment budget (financed by funds from the TP). Funds for this 
subcomponent would finance long and short term technical assistance and ICT equipment 
and software, training, and other inputs. Products of this subcomponent would be: (i) 
procedural manuals for budget preparation, procurement, and administrative procedures 
for MARNDR staff; (ii) improvement in check issuance, procurement processes, project 
M&E, and harmonization of financial nomenclature between DAA and DDF 
(Departmental Directorate of Finance); (iii) improvement in internal and external 
communications by connecting MARNDRs staff to email; and(iv) improved human 
resources job profiles and job family descriptions and human resource management 
performance indicators.  These activities would be given first priority among all project 
investments so as to strengthen the DAAs capacity to manage project funds (in addition 
to national and donor funds).  It is foreseen that the increased capacity of DAA to manage 
Bank funds will enable the MARNDR to better manage other donor funds mobilized in 
support of the agriculture sector through direct financial management of funds by DAA, 
donor coordination activities, and sector policy work (see Subcomponent 1.a).  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Farmer Extension and Support Services (US$2.3 million). 
This component would finance the expansion of the provision of improved agriculture 
support services in two pilot areas, one around the Research Center of Les Cayes-Ferme 
Levi and the second one around the Research Center of Thiotte-Savane Zombi.  Both 
pilot areas are in the Southern portion of the country, in a predominantly mountainous 
and humid ecosystem.  This component will be executed under the overall responsibility 
of the DAA and in coordination with the UEP and the Directorate of Research and 
Training (DRF), and will finance: (i) technical assistance and training for extension 
Page  3
agents, farmers, farmer-groups and service providers (including environmental and social 
aspects); (ii) strengthening of local support service structures (R&D Centers and DDAs); 
(iii) the development of a farmer and service provider registry (including equipment and 
software); and (iv) incentive payments to farmers for adoption of improved agriculture 
technologies that are both revenue increasing and environmentally friendly.  
 
In both pilot areas it is expected that a service contract be awarded to existing private 
sector providers of agriculture support services with experience in the pilot area.  The 
farmer registry will be a condition for implementing any farmer incentive payment 
scheme.  Farmer incentives for adoption of technologies will need to meet certain criteria 
in terms of beneficiary eligibility, type of technology, and expected economic and 
environmental impacts.  Products of this subcomponent would be: (i) creation of a farmer 
and service provider registry (managed by MARNDR) in both pilot areas; (ii) provision 
of agriculture extension services and incentive payments in the pilot areas; and (iii) 
completion of R&D studies by MARNDR in the pilot area.  
 
Component 3: Project coordination and supervision (US$0.7 million). Project execution 
will be under the responsibility of the DG and this component would finance incremental 
costs associated with project implementation.  A five person team would work jointly in 
the various aspects of project execution.  The project coordinator would be a member of 
the DG advisory team, while fiduciary responsibility (procurement and financial 
management) would be with the DAA.  All efforts by the DG would be made to 
coordinate project implementation across MARNDRs units.  In particular, there are a few 
activities that require overall project coordination in order to ensure the synergies 
between the various components and subcomponents of the proposed operation.  These 
are: (i) the UEP and DAA would work together in implementing a system to track 
expenditures in investment projects; (ii) the UEP and DRF would work together in 
establishing the farmer registry at the national level, but that could be immediately used 
to extend farmer support services in pilot areas; (iii) the UEP would work closely with 
DRF to ensure the development of the agriculture risk management activities in the pilot 
area; and (iv) the UEP will work closely with DRF to ensure that the newly created 
environmental unit provides support for the mainstreaming of environmental issues into 
the activities of Component 2.  To support this effort, this component would finance 
technical assistance, operational costs, and other costs necessary for project coordination.  
The program coordinator in the DG team would be the primary Bank counterpart for the 
purposes of project supervision and would interface with the fiduciary functions of the 
DAA.  The coordinator would also supervise the work of the different Directorates 
responsible for the various subcomponents (DRF, UEP, DAA, and the DG itself).  The 
coordinator would submit all documentation from the various directorates for the Banks 
information and/or clearance.  He/she would also be responsible for identifying any gaps 
between programmed and executed technical, social, environmental, financial, and/or 
administrative activities related to project execution and Annual Operating Plans (AOP), 
follow-up on baseline and indicators performance, and provide support to independent 
evaluations and auditors.   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Haiti (centralized MARNDR's offices in PAP and decentralized offices in rural areas)and 
two pilot regions located in the Southern portion of the Country: Les Cayes (Ferme Levi) 
and Thiotte (Savane Zombi).  Component 1 will finance activities regarding institutional 
strengthening in the central MARNDR’s offices in PAP, while Component 2 will finance 
agriculture extension and farmer incentives in two areas, around the R&D Centers of Les 
Cayes-Ferme Levi and Thiotte-Savane Zombi.  
 
The country is mountainous (80% of the surface) and does not lend itself well to 
production of field crops (28% is arable land), with the exception of some of the large 
irrigated valleys, and is a net importer of agricultural products. Yet there is an increasing 
demand for food products which could be sourced locally. However, quality and 
productivity of local farming are constrained by the dominance of small-scale subsistence 
farms, weak or non-existent agriculture extension services, insufficiently developed food 
supply chains, limited access to rural credit markets, and inability to meet increasingly 
important food safety standards.  The natural and agricultural ecosystems and the 
livelihoods of inhabitants are under threat from several sources, including deforestation 
(97% of the country is deforested), soil erosion, increased intensity and impact of 
flooding, and unregulated livestock gracing (85% of the watersheds are deemed 
degraded). Therefore, improvements in the management of natural resources for 
environmental values will be required for a sustainable development of agriculture, as 
well as the appropriate development of local infrastructure and services to serve rural 
communities.  
 
Les Cayes. Ferme Levi is located next to the City of Les Cayes in the Southwestern 
peninsula of Haiti, with an area of approximately 10,000 hectares, ranging between 0 and 
1400 meters of altitude. Two dry seasons can be differentiated: December-January and 
July-September; and two rainy seasons: February-May and October-November, with 
average temperatures ranging between 28o to 30o C. The region receives on average 
2000-2300 mm of rain per year. Two type of crops: permanent (coffee and fruit trees) 
mainly in hillsides and annual/pluriannual crops (maize, petit pois, rice, cabbage, etc.) in 
the irrigated plains. During the last years the evolution of the productive systems is 
characterized by an impoverishment of agriculture diversification, weak water and soil 
management and important deforestation upstream.  
 
Thiotte. This region is located in the Department of the South-East. The population of 
this Department is estimated in 6000 inhabitants and 1.000 households. Thiotte is located 
over a plain with an altitude of more than 1000 meters over sea level, receiving on 
average 1800 mm of rain per year. It is a region of humid mountains with three crop 
seasons but with weak capacity of the land to retain water which obliges the small 
farmers to build small reservoirs. Savane Zombi is located next to the Pines Forest (la 
ForÃªt des Pins), protected natural park in which a natural forest is threatened by strong 
pressures from small farmers. The production of vegetables(potatoes, cabagge, carrots) 
and livestock are the main agriculture activities in this region. The products are sell in 
Page  5
Port-au-Prince and in Dominican Republic, where most of the supplies are procured 
(particularly, fertilizers).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Natalia Gomez (LCSAR) 
Ms Rachel Hannah Nadelman (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will not finance roads, irrigation, rehabilitation of irrigation or other 
production facilities, or any other physical facilities.  The Project is mainly an 
institutional strengthening operation that will contribute to strengthen the institutional 
capacity of the MARNDR on formulation and application of agriculture sector policies 
and the improvement of the provision of agriculture public services, ensuring that 
environmental considerations are mainstreamed into agriculture sector policy, extension 
services. An economic incentives mechanism will be designed and offered to farmers in 
two selected regions (Thiotte and Les Cayes) to promote increased agriculture 
productivity and environmental-friendly cropping systems, ensuring the application of 
good agriculture practices and of environmentally sustainable interventions, particularly 
in basic grains, coffee, fruits and tubers, the main crops in the mentioned regions. 
Therefore, the Project may induce farmers to use fertilizers, pesticides, introduce new 
cropping systems and/or renew plantations. Environmental-friendly principles will be 
mainstreamed into (i) the MARNDRs agriculture sector policy and sub-sector policies; 
(ii) the economic incentives mechanism for increasing agriculture productivity, ensuring 
that environmental procedures and criteria agreed upon are applied(particularly in coffee, 
fruits and tubers production, the main crops in the pilot regions where the Project will 
operate), and (iii) extension services to be provided to farmers in the two pilot regions.  
 
In addition, the Project will strengthen the extension services in the selected zones to 
ensure the correct use of agrochemicals and pesticides, as well as to ensure the 
application of environmental-friendly agriculture practices. Experimental pilot farms will 
contribute to strengthen extension services and to train trainers and farmers on good and 
Page  6
environmentally sustainable agriculture practices. Environmental criteria will be 
mainstreamed into the content of agriculture extension services to be provided around the 
R&D centers of Ferme Levi and Thiotte.  
 
The Project would: (i) introduce screening environemental criteria that would be used as 
part of the approval process for the economic incentives program to ensure that Project 
resources do not finance agro-chemicals which are prohibited under the Bank's policies.  
The exact criteria would be included as part of the description of how grant applications 
will be evaluated; and (ii) develop guidelines, technical training services etc. on the 
relevant aspects of IPM that could be included as part of the extension and training 
services to be provided under the Project aimed at reducing environmental and health 
hazards associated with pest control and the use of pesticides. The procurement of 
agricultural chemicals, if done at all, would be done in compliance with the provisions of 
OP 4.09 with respect to eligible chemical products or their commercial formulations. 
Correspondent provisions would be incorporated into the Projects Operations Manual.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No adverse impacts are expected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The objective of the project is to strengthen the overall institutional capacity of the 
MARNDR, including M&E and environmental safeguards.  The MARNDR is currently 
executing a WB IDA grant for Avian Flu which it is implementing, thorough their 
existing capacity, the environmental safeguards of the project. This is also the case for 
other donor funded projects, such as IADB and IFAD financed projects.  
 
Nevertheless, the environmental management capacity of the MARNDR at the central 
and local levels is very limited. The MARNDR and its decentralized structure will be 
strengthened to introduce environmental considerations into sector policies and to 
strengthen their environmental management capacity, including the establishment of an 
environmental technical unit (UTE) within the Ministry that will comply with the 
funtions of the UTES (Sector Environemental Technical Units). In addition, R&D centers 
or other extension services providers will be strengthened under Component 2 of the 
Project as to ensure implementation of environmental principles in small scale agriculture 
production, particularly coffee, fruits and tubers in the two selected regions where the 
Project will operate (Ferme Levi and Thiotte).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Main environmental stakeholders are: (i) Ministry of Environment (MDE); (ii) COTIME 
(Environmental Interministerial Commission); (iii) MARNDR (including the new sector 
Page  7
environmental group (SEG)at the Programming and Studies Unit, UEP) and its 
decentralized structure (Departmental Directions, Local Agriculture Bureaus and 
Research and Extension Centres); (iv)Inter-Sector Table (MARNDR-Donors); (v) 
Universities and NGOs (e.g. ICEF, AVNS); (vi) regional and local authorities; (vii) 
Cooperatives, Producer Organizations and individual farmers.  
 
The Project will organize a Project Launch Seminar with all relevant stakeholders at the 
national and regional levels to disseminate Project's PDO, components activities and 
budget and particularly to familiarize all relevant stakeholders with the Project's 
Operation Manual.  
 
In addition, key Project information, Project's Operation Manual, monitoring and 
evaluation reports, supervision aide memoires, consultants reports, etc. will be available 
for public consultation in the MARNDR's webpage. The Project's Operation Manual and 
other key documents will be translated into French and Creole. The Project will organize 
a
Seminar/Training Sessions on WB's environmental safeguards to start building capacity 
in the MARNDR and its decentralized agencies, the regional and local authorities and 
project beneficiares. Training modules and educational material to be offered by 
extension services providers under Component 2 of the Project would include 
environmental criteria for the promotion of sustainable agriculture practices.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/23/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/24/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
Page  8
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
An environmental and social framework (ESF) was prepared and disclosed before 
Project's appraisal. The ESF was disseminated and available for public consultation 
through the MARNDR's webpage. The Project's Operation Manual includes all relevant 
environmental screening criteria, procedures and requirements (in particular for the 
operation of the economic incentives mechanism and for the provision of extension 
services) and will be disseminated at the Project's Launch Seminar. The Project's 
Operation Manual and other key documents are in French and will be made available for 
public consultation in the MARNDR's webpage.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  9
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Diego Arias Carballo 
04/13/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natalia Gomez 
04/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Rachel Hannah Nadelman 
04/13/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
04/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
04/14/2009 
Comments:   
