Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC4106
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P114775 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Haiti Community-Driven Development (CDD) 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Garry Charlier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General education sector (5%);Health (3%);Central government administration 
(2%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Poverty strategy, analysis and 
monitoring (S);Managing for development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.58
0.58 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed Additional Financing (AF) remains the same 
as that of the original Haiti Community-Driven Development Project (PRODEP), i.e. to 
support the scaling up of the direct transfer of public resources to local community 
organizations in poor rural and peri-urban communities: (i) to improve their access to 
basic and economic infrastructure and support income-generating activities by financing 
small-scale investments proposed, implemented and managed by the community 
organizations themselves; and (ii) to improve governance and build social capital of 
communities through an increase in citizen participation and transparency in open 
decision-making processes. The development objective of this proposed Additional 
Financing (AF) remains the same as that of the original Haiti Community-Driven 
Development Project (PRODEP), i.e. to support the scaling up of the direct transfer of 
public resources to local community organizations in poor rural and peri-urban 
Page  2
communities, by: (i) improving their access to basic social and economic infrastructure 
and supporting income-generation activities through the financing of small-scale 
investments proposed, implemented, and managed by local community organizations; 
and (ii) improving governance and building social capital in communities by 
strengthening citizen participation and transparency in open decision-making processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The original grant for the Haiti CDD project (PRODEP) was for US$38.0 million 
equivalent; the proposed Additional Financing is for US$8.0 million equivalent, and 
would scale up investments and activities under Component 1: Community Subproject 
Funding, Management, and Support of the original project.  
 
Component 1: Community Subproject Funding, Management, and Support (US$ 8.58 
million; IDA US$ 8.00 million) would: (i) finance approximately 300 small-scale 
community-subprojects in the 32 communes of Phase I of PRODEP; and (ii) provide 
additional technical assistance to further strengthen capacity in the COPRODEPs (i.e., 
municipal project development councils) and beneficiary community-based organizations 
(CBOs). Specifically, and as in the original CDD/PRODEP project, subproject funding 
would finance: (i) basic small-scale socio-economic infrastructure (spot rehabilitation of 
rural road or paths, education, health, natural resource management, etc.) and 
productive/income generation community investments (at an average cost of US$ 20,000 
per project, with a ceiling of US$50,000) identified by CBOs, and subsequently 
prioritized by representative COPRODEPs based on available project resources; and (ii) 
the contracting of service providers to mobilize CBOs to participate in the project, and 
provide them with necessary training and technical assistance in the preparation, 
execution and operation of subproject investments.  
 
Other technical assistance and incremental project management and administration 
costs, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for the AF, would be covered by the 
existing budgets of the original PRODEP (Component 2: Capacity Building and 
Technical Assistance, and Component 3: Project Administration, Supervision, 
Monitoring and Evaluation).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The AF would support activities in the 32 eligible municipalities (among the poorest in 
the country) of Phase I of PRODEP across five geographic departments (Northeast, 
Center, Southeast, South and Nippes) of the country. Scope and coverage remain 
unchanged, and these municipalities are already covered by the project's original EMP. In 
addition to maintaining the geographic scope of the original project, the AF project would 
maintain its scope and the type of activities financed. As a result, no new safeguards 
would be triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Peter Cohen (LCSSO) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As in the original project, there are no major environmental or social impacts under this 
Additional Financing. The AF would continue to be classified as a Category B project, 
due to its limited potential to produce any large-scale, significant and/or irreversible 
environmental impacts. Moreover, these activities would continue to be accompanied by 
the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) of the original project, which was designed 
to improve environmental management in the targeted areas. Potentially negative impacts 
(whether direct, indirect, or cumulative) related to the construction, operation and 
maintenance phases of community subprojects 
–
and, in particular, those involving civil 
works – would be mitigated or avoided, wherever possible. Also as in the original 
project, mitigation measures would be identified and assessed during subproject 
preparation, and addressed through binding clauses in contracts, including the associated 
costs. Finally, and as in the original project, all subprojects with potentially involuntary 
resettlement impacts would be ineligible for financing under this AF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Based on the experience with the ongoing original and pilot projects, indirect and/or 
long-term impacts due to future activities are expected to be minimal or positive. The 
relevant screening and assessment procedures would be used. The project is likely to 
result in significant improvements in social capital and capacity in the target areas and, 
via its environmental management activities and related technical assistance, in 
significant environmental improvements.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA) and an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) for the original project in 2005, in accordance with OP 
4.01 and national environmental law. Following public consultations with stakeholders, 
in May, 2005, the EA and EMF were disclosed in June, 2005, including their posting on 
government web sites (e.g., www.mef.gouv.ht, www.bureau de gestion.gouv.ht,), and the 
World Bank’s InfoShop. The EMF includes procedures for the screening of all 
subprojects and sites, application of mitigation measures to offset identified impacts, 
regular environmental monitoring, and environment-related technical assistance. This 
EMP remains unchanged and would be used for the AF as well.  
 
Institutional Capacity: The implementing agency – the Bureau of Monetization 
(previously the PL-480 Management Office) – and its PCU, have hired an environmental 
specialist who has been responsible since 2005 for assuring that the policies laid out in 
the Environment Safeguards Manual are respected. The project has also financed various 
environmental safeguards and environmental training sessions for other PCU staff, 
service providers (MDOD), Project Councils (COPRODEPs), and local and central 
government staff participating in project implementation at the regional and local levels. 
A
communication expert was also engaged, based on the need observed during the 
implementation to improve the quality of communication/public consultation prior to 
undertaking small community subproject works. Safeguards arrangements under the 
ongoing project have been deemed satisfactory by visiting Bank missions and are 
expected to be maintained under the AF. Finally, although there have been no cases of 
conflict around issues of resettlement thus far in implementation, steps have been taken 
under the preparation for the AF to ensure a more robust process of screening against 
resettlement impacts, based on experiences in other regions. Discussions have been held 
with the client, and procedures are being included in the Operational Manual to verify 
more rigorously in each relevant subproject: (1) that none of the three categories of 
impact covered under the policy are applicable; and (2) that “voluntary” contributions of 
land by communities are indeed voluntary, and involve no form of coercion. The process 
will include verification of the fact that people indeed have the option to refuse or reject 
such donations of land.  
 
Experience of safeguards implementation to date - lessons learned: Safeguards 
implementation has been found to be robust by Bank supervision missions. The EA, Pest 
Management and Physical Cultural Property policies (OPs 4.01, 4.09 and 4.11, 
respectively) were the only safeguard policies originally triggered, and experience under 
implementation has not highlighted any need to revise this assessment. Both the 
\environmental and social screening mechanisms used in the identification and selection 
of community subprojects (all 612 subprojects to date have been assessed using these 
instruments) and local risk management activities have been largely satisfactory.  
 
The Operations Manual will be updated to reflect lessons learned to date in the 
implementation of the original project and other closely related projects (e.g., the Urban 
CDD Pilot/PRODEPAP and the recently launched Urban CDD Project/PRODEPUR). 
Page  5
Key lessons learned include: (a) the need for minor improvements in the format of the 
screening checklist to provide more space for the recording of identified environmental 
concerns; and (b) the involvement and increased responsibility of local and regional 
officials is critical to the satisfactory implementation of the EMF, and ongoing provision 
of support through TA and training would continue under the AF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As in the original project, the key stakeholders are the residents of the communities 
benefiting from AF investments in small-scale community investments and capacity 
building activities. They have already received tailor-made safeguards training under the 
original project and are aware of Bank policies via informational sessions provided by the 
project’s environmental specialist and the PCU. These informational activities would 
continue to be carried out under the AF, as per the Project Operational Manual.  
 
It is important to recall that the original project is based on a participatory approach that 
also serves as a social control mechanism to ensure that no negative impacts occur. 
Communication and dissemination campaigns, incorporating activities linked to local 
history and culture (music, dancing, etc.), have been extremely effective in promoting 
community participation, and would continue to be employed under the AF. Community-
based organizations (CBOs) would continue to be the foundation of the project. Project 
Development Councils (COPRODEPs) would continue to receive support under to 
improve their capacity to assess, approve and monitor subprojects, and training and 
technical assistance would continue to be provided to reinforce their role in promoting 
social cohesion. A detailed summary of the consultation process to date – including 
which stakeholder suggestions were incorporated into project design and how, and which 
suggestions were not incorporated and why – is being included in an annex to the updated 
EMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/13/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/13/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/13/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/13/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  7
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
12/12/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
12/12/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Peter Cohen 
12/12/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
12/12/2008 
Comments:   
