Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/17/2009 
Report No.:  AC4196
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P115261 
Project Name:  HT: Emergency School Reconstruction Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Drabble 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (65%);Pre-primary education (25%);Secondary education 
(10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to support the Government of Haiti in: (i) 
restoring access to basic education in selected public primary schools damaged by the 
hurricanes of August/September 2008 and (ii) developing, demonstrating and 
disseminating improved standards and methods of safe school construction.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: “Building back better” a few selected destroyed and/or heavily damaged 
public primary schools (US$4.3 million)  
 
The main purpose of this component is to promptly “build back better” and safeguard 
seriously damaged educational infrastructures. The Project will intervene in schools that 
have been destroyed and/or schools whose infrastructure represent a serious risk for the 
safety of the student population and educational staff (sub-component 1.1).  This 
component will also finance the upgrade of facilities in a few selected schools that are 
used as temporary shelters in case of natural disasters (sub-component 1.2).  The first 
component of the ESRP will therefore support the “hardware” whereas the second 
Page  2
component will support the “software” relating to safe educational infrastructure.  The 
latter, through capacity building, communication activities, stakeholder consultations, 
training and involvement of partners at central and local levels will lay the ground work 
for the demonstration effect that the ESRP will seek to promote for the enforcement of 
new methods for safe school construction.  
 
Component 2: Reducing and mitigating the vulnerability of educational infrastructures 
(US$0.7 million).  
 
The main objective of this second component is to put in place a nation-wide program 
contributing to the reduction of major risks to and vulnerability of schools caused by 
natural disasters, compounded by faulty designs and weak supervision in the construction 
of educational infrastructures as well as a lack of maintenance.  To this end, the second 
component will on the support the creation of a mechanism for increased preparedness of 
key stakeholders in case of natural disasters that could possibly affect school facilities, 
students and educational staff, which will include the elaboration of the National Action 
Plan for Safe Schools – NAPSS as its key deliverable (sub-component 2.1). Second, this 
component will reinforce the capacity of the DGS to properly enforce new norms and 
regulations relating to the construction and maintenance of educational infrastructure 
(sub-component 2.2).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope and will involve projects at a variety of sites affected and 
damaged by recent hurricanes, floods and landslide events.  
 
It is not possible at this stage to give a complete description of the civil works since the 
pre-qualification and the complete technical assessment of works will only been carried 
out after the approval of the emergency project.  However, as a reference we include the 
table below, which presents a quantitative description of civil works required under the 
new standards set up by the MENFP for a six-classroom primary school.  It is expected 
that this type of school would accommodate 40 children per classroom, equivalent to a 
total of 240 children, with six teachers and a school principal (sometime being also a 
teacher).  In most cases, the emergency operation will be called to intervene on existing 
educational infrastructure and will probably not include in the civil works all the facilities 
listed below.  
 
(i) Six classrooms for a total area of 7.2m x 7.2 m per classroom  
 
(ii) One administrative building (76mÂ²) and small library (30mÂ²)  
 
(iii) Drinking fountain with 10 faucets  
 
(iv) Canteen (137.5mÂ²) with a kitchen (12.2 mÂ²) and storage (9 mÂ²)  
 
(v) Water tank (5,000 gallons)  
 
(vi)Water cistern (220 gallons) to be alimented by the water tank  
 
(vii) Latrines with 6 stalls (3 for boys and 3 for girls)  
 
(viii)Playground (volley and/or basket ball fields)  
 
(ix)Courtyard  
Page  3
(x) Surrounding security wall of 220m long and entry gate of 4.5m   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Mr John Atis (LCSHE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not expect to have large scale or significant impacts since the majority 
of school construction activities will involve reconstruction on existing school sites.  
Among other issues construction or rehabilitation of schools will involve environmental 
impacts associated with the demolition and removal of waste materials, control of dust 
and noise, and work site safety. Where schools are built on new sites, planning and site 
selection methodology will pay attention to issues such as risks associated with sites such 
as flood or site stability issues.  Special attention will also need to be paid to on-site 
sanitation issues or other localized risk issues such as drainage.  
 
The EMF includes an assessment of social benefits and risks of the project.  The likely 
beneficiaries of the projects are those families living in communities that have been 
adversely affected by hurricanes and tropical storms FGHI.  As outlined in the project 
descriptions, these populations will be consulted throughout the school reconstruction 
process.  The extent of community ownership and likely involvement in the school in the 
foreseeable future will be assessed during the prequalification process.  
 
With respect to involuntary resettlement, in the unlikely event that a proposal (after duly 
carrying out a full pre-qualification process) for the reconstruction of a school triggers 
this policy, the project through the FAES and after consulting the local stakeholders will 
try to avoid any involuntary resettlement by exploring all viable alternative locations and 
designs for the civil works.  Should involuntary resettlement be unavoidable, the extent 
of land taken will be the minimum possible.  By the same token, it should be noted that 
the project will try to minimize the loss of resources that could derive from involuntary 
Page  4
resettlement.  It should be noted that resettlement due to land acquisition is expected to be 
nil or negligible.  
 
The project is categorized as an environmental risk category B due to the small scale, 
highly localized and temporary nature of expected impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term impacts anticipated with the construction or rehabilitation of 
schools.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Where new school sites are involved alternatives will be considered as part of the site 
selection and site design process.  For existing sites, alternatives will be considered only 
as part of the redesign process for school buildings.  The project will also support studies 
and institutional strengthening for improving school design and construction standards 
including planning for environmental risks.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project has conducted an environmental analysis to assess the nature and scope of 
potential environmental and social risks associated with the project.  This analysis 
involved a review of existing procedures and standards for school design, site selection 
criteria and a review of recent experiences in school construction.  The analysis involved 
discussions with counterparts as well as a rapid screening of potential sub-projects.  The 
analysis proposes a methodology for site screening under the project as well as measures 
for managing the environmental management issues associated with construction.  A 
revised EMF will be elaborated within four months of project effectiveness.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared within four months of 
effectiveness.  The RPF will underscore that the project will adopt adequate procedures to 
avoid moving (or depriving from resources) people and that general principles of doing 
no harm, of avoiding or minimizing resettlement will be followed for all school 
reconstruction projects.  As mentioned earlier as part of the screening of civil works 
project undertaken by FAES, if the involuntary resettlement policy is triggered, the 
implementing agency will immediately launch the elaboration of a Resettlement Action 
Plan whose content and format will be described in RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Safeguards pre-cautions will be established with respect to the pre-screening of proposed 
sub-projects to ensure adequate evaluation of any site risks; establishing measures to 
ensure that contractors follow good environmental construction practices at each 
construction site; that capacity building under the project include review of technical 
design and construction standards; and that measures for sub-project supervision include 
Page  5
consideration of extent to which poor maintenance of sites may contribute to problems at 
specific sites.  Project planning and site selection will provide opportunity for stakeholder 
consultations.  
 
The Borrower has an acceptable institutional capacity for ensuring safeguard 
compliance.  Specifically, the FAES (executing agency) has been conducting 
construction and rehabilitation of social infrastructure for more than a decade, following 
World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank procedures.  Nonetheless, the client 
has expressed an interest in further strengthening its capacity, with a focus on 
undertaking environmental assessments of sub-projects.  This request will be taken into 
consideration under the institutional strengthening activities incorporated under the 
project.  To the greatest extent possible the project would support the development of a 
single review procedure which would apply to all sub-projects to be supported by FAES 
not only those financed by the Bank under the proposed operation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Per OP/BP 8.00, the Environmental Management Plan and the Resettlement Management 
Framework will be done post-appraisal.  Both documents will be reviewed and approved 
within four months of effectiveness and disclose accordingly.  
 
No, will be done within 4 months of effectiveness   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Drabble 
02/10/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/10/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
