Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/18/2009 
Report No.:  49094
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P106680 
Project Name:  Land Administration Program 
Task Team Leader:  Enrique Pantoja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (55%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%);Central government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (25%);Personal and property rights 
(25%);Decentralization (24%);Other rural development (13%);Other urban development 
(13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the broader, long-term program (APL) is to strengthen property rights in 
Honduras through modernization of the legal framework, institutional strengthening and 
development of a fully integrated and decentralized National System for Property 
Administration (SINAP).  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) for Phase II of the Land Administration 
Program (PATH) is to provide the population in the Project area with improved, 
decentralized land administration services, including better access to and more accurate 
information on property records and transactions. To achieve this objective, PATH will 
continue to promote the streamlining of the systematic cadastral surveying, titling and 
registration process and the improvement of land administration services in terms of 
access and transparency.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The second phase of PATH (IDA Credit of US$30 million equivalent), will be 
implemented over a period of five years, and will include five components: (i) Policy and 
institutional strengthening; (ii) Cadastral surveying and land regularization; (iii) 
Demarcation of protected areas; (iv) Strengthening of Miskito people#s land rights; and 
(v) Project management and Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E).  These components are 
discussed below.  
 
Component 1. Policy and Institutional Strengthening (US$8.35 million)  
 
Component 1 will promote critical policy development (Sub-component 1, US$ 0.17 
million) and institutional strengthening (Sub-component 2, US$ 8.18 million). Under the 
first sub-component, the Project will support (a) development of land policy and strategy 
on issues related to the link between land access/land regularization and agricultural 
productivity/rural development, and the preparation of a policy and master plan for the 
development of the national cadastral system; (b) improvement of the overall governance 
of land administration and transparency of PATH implementation, including making the 
National Commission for Land Policies and Standards (Comisión Nacional de Política y 
Normativa de la Propiedad or CONAPON) operational, and implementing social audits 
of relevant project activities; (c) development of the normative and procedural framework 
for municipalities to become associated centers of IP for cadastre, registry and property 
regularization; and (d) development of standard documents for notary protocols related to 
property registry procedures, and of a proposal to increase access to notary services.  
 
Under the second sub-component, the Project will support the strengthening of key 
institutions, specifically:  (a) IP will be strengthened through the implementation of an 
Organizational Development Plan (ODP), establishment of an information technology 
unit to operate SURE and its interaction with other SINAP subsystems, continuation of 
the modernization of property registries including implementation of SURE in at least 
five new registries and carrying out of small rehabilitation works, strengthening of two of 
its critical operational units: the General Directorate of Cadastre and Geography 
(Dirección General de Catastro y Geografía or DGCG) and the General Directorate for 
Parcel Regularization (Dirección General de Regularización Predial or DGRP), and 
carrying out of capacity building for alternative conflict resolution mechanisms for 
cadastral surveying and establishing inter-municipal limits. Simultaneously, (b) selected 
municipalities will be strengthened to allow them to function effectively as associated 
centers of IP and to implement urban titling activities and territorial planning; (c) INA 
will be supported in improving its agrarian registry and its capacity for rural titling and 
collective titling of indigenous peoples# lands, including support to the Inter-Sectoral 
Commission for Protecting Land Rights of Garífuna and Miskito Communities, and 
building INA#s capacity for alternative conflict resolution; (d) Co-executing agencies 
(ICF, IHT and IHAH) will receive technical assistance and technology transfer to ensure 
that they play an active role in SINAP implementation; and (e) the General Directorate of 
Territorial Planning (Dirección General de Ordenamiento Territorial or DGOT) under 
SGJ, the Honduran Association of Municipalities (Asociación de Municipios de 
Honduras or AMHON) and municipalities will be strengthened to promote the gradual 
Page  3
incorporation of territorial planning norms into RENOT, including the establishment of 
two de
partmental councils of territorial planning in Comayagua and Cortés.  
 
Regarding technology transfer more specifically, during Phase II, (f) SINAP, including 
its three modules, will be implemented to reach its full potential as a tool for land 
administration and territorial planning. Simultaneously, (g) the wireless network (Red 
Metropolitana Inalámbrica or RMI) developed during Phase I will be extended from 
Tegucigalpa towards the Sula Valley to facilitate data transmission and inter-agency 
communications and to ensure connectivity of SINAP.  
 
Component 2. Cadastral Surveying and Land Regularization (US$15.85 million)  
 
This component will directly contribute to improving legal security of tenure in 
Honduras. The cadastral surveying and legalization, titling and registration activities 
initiated under Phase I will be continued, with a focus on selected municipalities and 
direct benefits to rural and urban populations and areas critical for agricultural 
productivity. A list of pre-selected municipalities has been prepared based on an agreed 
methodology included in the Operational Manual.  
 
This component includes the carrying out of a complete cadastral surveying process in 
selected municipalities (Sub-component 2.1, US$ 10.7 million), including (a) preparatory 
activities such as declaration of zone under cadastral process by the DGCG, taking of 
aerial photography and preparation of digital ortho-photos; (b) surveying, validation of 
results (vistas públicas) and incorporation in SURE of at least 390,000 urban and rural 
parcels in the Project area; and (c) geo-referenced surveying of the administrative limits 
of five selected municipalities.  
 
The Project will also finance regularization activities (sub-component 2.2, US$ 5.15 
million), covering legalization, titling and registration under folio real (parcel-based 
property registry) of at least 90,000 parcels, including (a) the provision of new titles for 
approximately 50,000 families through the various options provided under Honduran 
legislation; and (b) the legalization of 40,000 parcels with an existing property registry to 
transfer them into folio real. Implementation of the Project#s Communication Strategy 
will be a central element of this component#s implementation.  
 
Component 3. Demarcation of Protected Areas (US$ 1.0 million)  
 
This component, which will require the active participation of the Institute for Forest 
Conservation (Instituto de Conservación Forestal or ICF), will focus on (a) the 
delimitation and demarcation of the Core Conservation Zones (CCZs) of at least eight 
selected National Parks (NPs), including the incorporation of their geographical and legal 
information into SURE and RENOT; (b) the regularization process of Las Salinas, a 
settlement occupied by nearly 115 families along the perimeter of the San Fernando de 
Omoa Fortress National Monument, which was demarcated during Phase I. More 
precisely, the Project will finance a census of the area#s current residents and the 
preparation of legal documents that will allow IP to title the potential beneficiaries once 
Congress approves the partition of the settlement#s area from the Monument#s perimeter; 
and (c) the implementation of the Project#s Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and 
if necessary, the implementation of the Process Framework.  To support this 
Page  4
component#s implementation, the Project#s Communication Strategy will include 
specific activities and instruments such as community outreach, radio announcements and 
pamphlets.  
 
Component 4. Strengthening of Miskito People#s Land Rights (US$1.80 million)  
 
This component will be implemented in close coordination with INA and ICF, adopting 
a
broader approach to promoting the land rights of indigenous peoples and ensuring 
respect for their collective tenure traditions and worldview (cosmovision). Accordingly, 
the Project will support in the departamento of Gracias a Dios (also known as La 
Moskitia), (a) the necessary free, prior and informed consultation, selection and 
participatory delimitation and collective titling of the lands of at least 25 pilot Miskito 
communities. The participating communities belong to FINZMOS and BAKINASTA, 
two of the 11 Miskito federations making up the broadly representative Miskito 
confederation Mosquitia Asla Takanka or MASTA. In addition, the Project will continue 
to support the participating communities from the first phase, which belong to 
KATAINASTA. In parallel, the communities will receive capacity building and 
organizational support to establish alternative conflict resolution mechanisms integral to 
the process; (b) technical assistance and capacity building in territorial planning and 
natural resources management to the participating Miskito communities, and education to 
increase legal awareness and help organizational capacity in relation to land tenure. In 
parallel, the Project will support the preparation of a comprehensive Program for 
Collective Land Titling in the departamento of Gracias a Dios.  
 
Moreover, (c) the Project will promote community development through community-
driven sub-projects and microenterprise development for participating Miskito 
communities. Criteria for eligibility of beneficiaries and for the selection of sub-projects 
will be included in a specific Manual. The selection criteria will consider the technical, 
economic, and environmental feasibility of a community#s proposal.  Below some 
examples of the types of possible sub-projects are presented.  
 
Category I - Sustainable Economic Development  
 
Examples:  
 
-
The development of management plans for Indigenous lands.  
 
-
Delimitation of Indigenous communal lands.  
 
-
Reforestation of watersheds in communal lands.  
 
-
Establishing forests for energy production.  
 
-
Land Conservation  
 
-
Prevention and control of forest fires.  
 
Requirements:  
 
-
Community projects or demarcated areas should have access to finance.  
 
-
In case a community or other group#s application concerns a protected area, the 
approval of ICF will be sought and the Environmental Analysis (including the 
Management Plan), the Process Framework and the IPP will apply.  
 
Page  5
Category II - Human Development  
 
Examples:  
 
-
Use of Forests with Forest Management Plans.  
 
-
Ecotourism.  
 
-
Sustainable use of non-wood forest products.  
 
-
Development and commercialization of crafts.  
 
-
Sustainable harvesting of marine fauna.  
 
Requirements:  
 
-
Subprojects will only be financed in communities or areas that have a land-use plan.  
 
-
In case the application is from a community or area that is within a protected area, the 
approval of ICF will be sought and the Environmental Analysis (including the 
Management Plan), the Process Framework and the IPP will apply.  
 
The following types of subprojects will not be financed:  
 
1.
Land acquisition.  
 
2.
Repayment of debts.  
 
3.
The creation of new highways and trunk roads.  
 
4.
Activities that require resettlement or the relocation of individuals or families.  
 
5.
Activities that involve negative impacts on archeological or religious sites.  
 
6.
Activities that could threaten the environment including any agricultural or 
livestock production as well as any other use of agrochemicals (especially pesticides).  
 
7.
Infrastructure construction that is not absolutely necessary for the execution of the 
sub-project (only construction necessary for the execution of a subproject can be 
justified).  
 
8.
Social, economic or environmental studies not essential to the implementation of 
a
sub-project.  
 
9.
Conferences, workshops and training that is not part of implementation of a sub-
project.  
 
10.
The acquisition of vehicles, machinery and construction equipment unrelated to 
any sub-project.  
 
11.
Activities with political or religious content.  
 
Component 5. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$3.0 
million)  
 
This component includes the costs associated with Project management and monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) that will be carried out by the IP through the Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU). Among other things, this component will finance implementation and 
operation of the integrated financial and administration system (SIAF), the establishment 
of the Project Steering Committee and Technical Committees, independent evaluations 
and audits, inter-institutional coordination activities, training and workshops, and 
oversight of the communication and gender strategies for Phase II.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The second phase will include various activities affecting lands in the Project Area, 
which includes the departments of Choluteca, Colón, Comayagua, Copán, Cortés, El 
Paraíso, Francisco Morazán, Gracias a Dios, Olancho, and Yoro.  The Project will 
support the delimitation and demarcation of Core Conservation Zones (CCZ) within eight 
National Parks, (NPs). It will also finance land regularization activities in the area of Las 
Salinas (San Fernando de Omoa Fortress National Monument), including the re-
delimitation of this area#s legal boundaries where necessary, in order to regularize the 
tenure of its occupants.  Finally, the Project will finance the participatory, collective 
titling of pilot Miskito communities in Gracias a Dios, as well as legal support and 
capacity building activities for these communities, including productive sub-projects.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz (LCSEN) 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp (LCSDE) 
Mr Marquez Martinez (LCSAR) 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Safeguard Issues:  
 
All of the direct and indirect environmental impacts originally detected as part of the 
Environmental Assessment (EA) carried out in mid-2003, prior to the approval of Phase 
I, are still relevant. An analysis of Phase I#s environmental performance was carried out 
as part of an Independent Evaluation of the first phase of PATH. The Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) was found to be implementing the Environmental Management 
Plan satisfactorily and no large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts 
were observed. This is to be expected since the physical impacts of demarcation (the 
physical marking of boundaries) are minor. Phase I#s Environmental Management Plan 
Page  7
activities served three projects, PATH, the Forests and Rural Productivity and the Natural 
Disaster Risk Mitigation Project. Some of the main findings of the evaluation were (1) 
Protected area co-management institutions (including NGOs, Municipalities and ICF) 
were supported in making field visits to document the boundaries of the Core 
Conservation Zones (CCZ), (2) Various workshops, open fora (cabildos abiertos), and 
other activities were conducted with patronatos, private companies and as part of a 
community education campaign to inform local people of Project activities including the 
importance of protected areas, their benefits, delimitation, demarcation and applicable 
sanctions for any tampering with boundary markers (hitos and mojones), (3) Demarcated 
protected areas were incorporated into the Territorial Planning Norms Registry (RENOT) 
under the National Property Administration System (SINAP) so that they can be placed 
in the Catalog of Inalienable Public Forestry Heritage, (4) No resettlement actions took 
place. The Process Framework ensured that there were no restrictions on already-existing 
access to resources in the protected areas. The Independent Evaluation found that the 
Phase I Process Framework was also satisfactorily implemented and there were no 
resettlement actions during Phase I.  
 
Four main lessons were learned from the evaluation of Phase I#s environmental 
performance:  
 
1. 
Phase I did not follow-up on the implementation of the EMP as much as it could 
have. As a result Phase II will include measures to ensure greater attention to monitoring 
progress of the EMP which will include the hiring, as needed, of an environmental 
specialist for that purpose as well as institutional strengthening activities such as 
workshops on EMPs and safeguards.  
 
2.
The only real issue detected through Bank supervision had to do with the 
improper disposal of the byproducts of boundary marker construction in the course of 
demarcating a protected area. This impact has since been addressed, with no long-term 
negative consequences. The EMP for Phase II incorporates these and other lessons 
learned from Phase I.  
 
3.
The NGO co-managers of protected areas do not have the financial resources 
necessary to effectively implement management plans; in this respect, the Project will 
support the GOH in working with the relevant stakeholders to inform local communities 
on the importance of the protected areas and the consequences of the CCZ demarcations.  
 
4.
Many municipalities do not have a stable set of trained personnel which means 
that they have to spend resources on constantly training staff. The Project will keep this 
in mind in all dealings with municipalities taking care to provide any necessary training 
and to minimize any unnecessary demands which would require use of limited municipal 
counterpart funds.  
 
Some very minor environmental impacts could result from the small-scale rehabilitation 
works in the selected registries under Component 1.2. These small works include, inter 
alia, painting, minor remodeling, roof rehabilitation, wiring, and installation of air 
conditioning systems. No new construction or additions to existing structures will be 
financed by the Project. The EMP and Operations Manual both provide contractually-
Page  8
binding guidance to contractors on environmentally-friendly and worker safety practices 
to be observed during these minor works.  
 
OP 4.36 on Forests is triggered since many of the protected areas are also forested. The 
second phase would affect 1,836.000 ha of forests in the municipalities prioritized within 
the Project area. This represents about 16.32 percent of the total surface area of 
Honduras. The Independent Evaluation of Phase I found that in compliance with the 
Forests safeguard, under the regularization of forested land activities co-execution 
agreements were reached, an Environmental Management Unit within IP was formed, a 
consulted Manual for the Regularization of Forested Areas was adopted and various 
training/institutional strengthening of project beneficiaries took place.  
 
OP 4.09 on Pest Management is not triggered because Component 4 will not finance 
any agricultural or livestock sub-projects or microenterprise development requiring 
procurement or use of pesticides.  
 
The Project will not finance the elaboration of Management Plans for the NPs because 
such work is beyond the Project#s scope and its resources to ensure enforcement. 
However, communities in and around protected areas will receive ample information 
about what the demarcation will mean for them and their activities.  If it turns out that 
any delimitation or demarcation activities are likely to lead to the restriction of 
community access to natural resources in protected areas, the Process Framework that 
was prepared for the project under OP/BP 4.12 will be applied.  
 
Social Safeguard Issues:  
 
Several of the indigenous peoples and resettlement issues that were present in Phase I of 
the Project will remain relevant in Phase II. Because the second phase of PATH includes 
activities that will directly impact the lands of indigenous peoples, the Indigenous 
Peoples safeguard policy applies. Carefully implementing the policy#s provisions will be 
a
top priority for all those involved in Phase II, given the socio-economic and political 
vulnerability of indigenous peoples on the Atlantic Coast (where Component 4 activities 
will be carried out), the land tenure insecurity that many of them face, and the pressure 
that these lands are currently under.  
 
An Inspection Panel Investigation was undertaken between 2006 and 2007 during the 
Phase I of PATH. The investigation was related to the small pilot effort to delimit and 
title the lands of selected Garífuna communities. Specifically, in January 2006 a request 
for an Inspection Panel Investigation was filed by the Honduran Black Fraternal 
Organization (Organización Fraternal Negra Hondureña or OFRANEH). OFRANEH 
claimed that the Bank had violated OD 4.20 on Indigenous Peoples, OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats and OP/BP 13.05 on Project 
Supervision.  Its main allegation was that the Bank had not taken into consideration the 
rights and interests of the Garífuna people in the design, appraisal and implementation of 
the Project, and that as a result their land rights and collective tenure traditions were 
under threat.  
Page  9
Most of the Panel's findings related to OD 4.20 (OP/BP 4.10 for the purposes of Phase 
II). In response to the Inspection Panel Investigation, Regional Management implemented 
an Action Plan. The Progress Report on the Plan#s implementation, sent to the Board in 
March 2009, indicated that all agreed activities were completed and that the Program was 
broadly in compliance with the Indigenous Peoples policy. However, concerns remain 
among some indigenous and Afro-Honduran organizations, including OFRANEH, with 
respect to the legal framework for the titling of indigenous peoples' lands, particularly 
Chapter 3 of Title IV of the Property Law.  
 
Responding to a request from the pilot Garífuna communities, a diagnostic of their 
current tenure situation is being carried out under Phase I. However, no titling of 
Garífuna lands will take under Phase I. The second phase will focus on promoting the 
land rights of Miskito communities, none of which has thus far managed to obtain titles 
to their lands. The Government has confirmed its interest in pursuing the recognition of 
the property rights of Miskito communities, and these communities and their 
organizations have also confirmed their interest in continuing to participate in the 
Program.  
 
Reflecting lessons from Phase I, during the second phase, special attention will be paid 
to implementing a culturally sensitive Communication Strategy, strengthening INA#s 
capacity for carrying out titling activities in La Moskitia and elsewhere, and developing 
locally acceptable alternative conflict resolution mechanisms.  As required, an updated 
Social Assessment has been conducted and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared to 
reflect the results of consultations with indigenous stakeholders.  
 
PATH will continue to exclude any physical displacement or resettlement of population. 
The Involuntary Resettlement policy remains triggered, however, because of the potential 
restriction of access to natural resources that may occur as a result of the demarcation and 
stricter enforcement of CCZs, a restriction that would affect neighboring communities 
that more or less rely on these resources.  
 
In national parks (NPs), the Project will only finance the delimitation and demarcation 
of their respective CCZs. It will not support other processes such as the internal zoning, 
the elaboration and implementation of management plans, or the regularization of land 
within NPs. The experience of the first phase shows that the demarcation of CCZs 
effectively contributes to conservation. It has given visibility to their boundaries, which 
as a result have been more explicitly acknowledged by the communities living near them, 
cutting down on the potential for encroaching. No conflicts, either related to land tenure 
or natural resource use, have emerged in these areas throughout the implementation of 
Phase I. This is in part due to the existence a legal requirement that an occupation census 
must be completed before the ICF proceeds with the delimitation and regulation of a 
CCZ.   
 
Page  10
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
All of the significant environmental and social impacts of land administration projects in 
general, and Phases I and II of PATH in particular, are inherently indirect (induced). For 
example, the production of cadastral maps or issuance of land titles do not have 
environmental or social impacts per se; rather, the impacts derive from the changes in 
human behavior related to land use, which come in response to increased land tenure 
security. PATH#s environmental impacts should generally be positive and 
environmentally sustainable in the long term. However, it is always possible that adverse 
environmental impacts could ensue, such as the following:   
 
1) 
Landholders could accelerate land clearing activity in advance of the arrival of the 
project field teams who would measure, map, and register a land parcel, in order to 
demonstrate the largest possible area under #productive use.#  
 
2)
Upon receiving secure land titles, many landowners would enjoy increased access 
to capital, resulting from improved access to credit. This means that some might opt to 
use part of their increased access to capital to clear the remaining forests on their property 
to expand their area of pasture or cropland.  
 
3)
There could be increased migration to forest frontier areas. Some rural 
landowners might be inclined to sell their fully-titled land and use the proceeds to migrate 
and clear more land at the forest frontier; however, this concern seems unlikely to occur 
as it goes against recently observed migration trends in Honduras.  
 
4)
Protected area limits might not be respected if land regularization activities were 
to take place prior to demarcation activities of the core conservation zones.  
 
5)
There is a risk that lands having, or suspected to have, culturally valuable 
resources could be titled to private owners before the appropriate government agencies 
(such as IHAH) have a chance to get involved in the identification and protection of such 
resources.  
 
In relation to indigenous peoples# development, one indirect impact that could result 
from the titling of indigenous lands in Gracias a Dios is that, unless it is done in a 
comprehensive fashion, it could bring those Miskito communities that are not slated for 
collective land titling right away under even greater pressure from logging and 
agribusiness interests in the medium term. Given the legal and logistical challenged 
involved, the Project has little choice but to carry out such titling sequentially. At least 45 
communities are expected to benefit from titling actions after Phases I and II; it is 
certainly possible that more communities could be added if the actions proceed more 
quickly than expected. Moreover, the Project will support a process for preparing a titling 
program for La Moskitia, which will help mitigate some of the above risks.  Yet it is 
more likely that the protection of Miskito lands proposed for titling at a later point will 
come through internal capacity building, legal education (which are programmed into the 
proposed Phase II as well) and organizational strengthening for territorial defense actions, 
such as the clearer marking and patrolling of boundaries (which will have to be included 
in a future phase of PATH, or in other Government programs).   
 
Page  11
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
On the environmental side, the initial plan was to complement the demarcation of CCZs 
with the elaboration of NP management plans providing for the internal regularization of 
such parks (involving demarcation and, when legally allowed, titling inside the NNP). 
Ultimately, considering the lack of financial and institutional capacity to implement 
management plans, along with the potential conflicts that could arise during 
regularization, it was agreed that the second phase will concentrate only on the 
demarcation of CCZs, which are in general very well conserved and less the object of 
property claims or social conflicts.  
 
By supporting the surveying and demarcation of CCZs, Component 3 itself will help 
protect them against potential impacts from Phase II and other non-Project activities.  
 
The titling activities included in Component 4 (Strengthening of Miskito People#s Land 
Rights) will also help to minimize adverse impacts, by preventing or at least discouraging 
the appropriation of lands and resources upon which Miskito families, among the poorest 
in the country, depend.  Partly in response to experiences during Phase I, for Phase II the 
decision was taken to move away from a narrow consideration of technical issues in land 
tenure in this component, and toward a more integrated, culturally appropriate 
combination of studies, land titling, capacity building, and productive sub-projects.  Such 
an alternative will help those Miskito communities receiving a title to position themselves 
to make the best of use of land as a productive asset, while at the same time preserving 
their culturally determined idea of land as a collective resource having intrinsic value.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
a) The following measures have been taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy 
issues:  
 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01.  
 
Even though Phase I Environmental Analysis (EA, including the Environmental 
Management Plan, EMP) is considered adequate, the Borrower has prepared a new EA 
that takes into account the new geographic areas to be covered under the second phase 
including some urban areas, as well as the key lessons learned during the implementation 
of the first phase. Additionally the EMP and Operations Manual both provide 
contractually-binding guidance to contractors on environmentally-friendly and worker 
safety practices to be observed during the small-scale rehabilitation works in selected 
registries under Component 1.2 of the Project, including inter alia, painting, minor 
remodeling, roof rehabilitation, wiring, and installation of air conditioning systems. No 
new construction or additions to existing structures will be financed by the Project. The 
EMP will provide guidance on any permits that may be necessary for these small works. 
The EA indicates that (i) the net environmental impacts observed under the first phase 
have been highly positive, particularly in view of the demarcation and consolidation of 
CCZ in the National Parks (ii) highly positive environmental impacts are also expected to 
occur in the new geographic areas to be covered under Phase II; (iii) various specific 
Page  12
lessons learned on how to improve cadastre and demarcation practices will be reflected in 
forthcoming modifications to the Project's Operational Manual, particularly in procedures 
related to Protected Areas. The new EA report has been publicly disclosed at the World 
Bank#s InfoShop in Washington, as well as in Honduras prior to appraisal. In addition to 
addressing and helping improve environmental concerns, Phase II will support the 
surveying and demarcation of selected CCZs inside NPs and will incorporate lessons 
learned from Phase I within the updated EMP.  
 
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04.  
 
As was the case with Phase I, the impacts on Honduras#s forests, wetlands, and other 
natural habitats are expected to be on balance very positive, particularly as a result of 
CCZs demarcation and consolidation activities under Component 3. In addition, any 
forested lands outside protected areas will be reviewed by ICF and the PCU prior to 
being eligible for individual land titling, as is already being done under Phase I.  
 
Forests OP/BP 4.36.  
 
Phase II will not finance forestry activities but since many of the protected areas and 
natural habitats are forested, this safeguard was triggered. The requirements for 
compliance under the revised Forests OP 4.36 (which took effect in 2002, after the first 
phase was approved) are identical to those set out in OP 4.04.  
 
Pest Management OP 4.09.  
 
The Project will not finance any activities or sub-projects that will require the 
procurement or use of pesticides, including any agricultural or livestock activities. 
Accordingly, this Safeguard is not triggered. The Manual for Productive Sub-Projects in 
Gracias a Dios will include provisions to ensure compliance with this safeguard in terms 
of screening out agricultural, livestock and other prohibited activities.  
 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10.  
 
To address the requirements of the Indigenous Peoples policy, the Strengthening of 
Miskito People's Land Rights was added to the Project as a free-standing component. 
This component will provide for the demarcation and titling of indigenous peoples# lands 
in a participatory and culturally acceptable manner, so it can be consistent with the 
communities' views with respect to the communal use of land and natural resources. An 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), based on a fully updated Social Assessment, has been 
prepared. This Plan incorporates the results of recent consultations with MASTA, which 
is recognized throughout La Moskitia as the main organization representing Miskito 
interests and aspirations with regards to land rights, as well as with FINZMOS and 
BAKINASTA, the Miskito federations representing the communities that will be titled 
under component 4.  As such, it confirms that the titling activities proposed enjoy the 
broad support of the communities involved. The Plan also outlines mechanisms for an 
ongoing process of free, prior, and informed consultation, meaningful stakeholder 
participation, and land-related conflict resolution.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11.  
Page  13
According to the Independent Evaluation of Phase I, the policy on Physical Cultural 
Resources is being satisfactorily complied with. Standing chance-find procedures require 
that the Honduras National Institute of Anthropology and History (IHAH) be 
immediately notified in case any archaeological or historical relic is discovered during 
cadastral or other Project activities. In compliance with the Physical Cultural Resources 
Safeguard, under Phase I, IHAH and the Salinas patronato reached an agreement to 
legalize the tenancy of residents living in the boundaries of Las Salinas Fortaleza de 
Omoa de San Fernando National Monument (a protected area). A decree was formulated 
authorizing the partition of the already-inhabited zones from the protected area # an 
activity that only requires the redrawing of boundaries. Component 3 of Phase II will 
support efforts to re-draw the boundaries of the National Monument in order to recognize 
and regularize the community currently within its boundaries. This activity only consists 
of changing the records in SINAP, the National Property Administration System. There 
are no physical activities as part of this component on-the-ground and so there is no need 
to develop any specific procedures to protect the cultural and historic integrity of this 
particular sub-component.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12.  
 
As the demarcation and better enforcement of CCZ boundaries may potentially lead to 
restrictions of access to natural resources, a Process Framework is needed to outline the 
participatory process for the identification, monitoring, and mitigation of such 
restrictions. The Process Framework that was prepared under Phase I has been updated to 
ensure compatibility with activities proposed under component 3 of Phase II.  This 
Framework will be implemented as needed in the forthcoming phase, although one of its 
aims is to refer to the multiple ways by which such restrictions might actually be avoided, 
and it stresses the desirability of doing so. Additionally, the process of regularization 
based on public need (Regularización por Necesidad Pública) is being closely monitored 
to ensure that the informal, largely poor households benefiting from it do not suffer from 
undue economic displacement.  This process falls under the exception set forth in 
footnote 8 of OP 4.12, specifically the second part that states that #the policy does not 
apply to disputes between private parties in land titling projects.# The monitoring that 
will take place (similar to the one implemented under Phase I) applies the good practice 
recommended therein.  
 
b) Capacity to plan and implement the measures:  
 
During Phase I of PATH, capacity for implementing safeguards among the various 
implementing bodies varied.  Following the Inspection Panel investigation carried out 
during 2006 and 2007, a concerted effort was made to improve in-country understanding 
of and capacity to deal with the applicable safeguard policies, a process that coincided 
with enhanced, integrated supervision by the Bank in general, and with more active 
oversight by social and environmental safeguards specialists in particular.  The 
participation of numerous PCU technical staff in the preparation and updating of 
safeguards-related manuals and instruments, such as the Protected Areas Regularization 
Manual on the environment side, and the Indigenous Peoples Plan on the social side, has 
led to greatly strengthened capacity for safeguards management centrally.  During Phase 
Page  14
II, these improvements will be built upon and extended to key entities such as the IP and 
INA.  For example, staff in INA will receive training not only in areas that are directly 
related to its responsibilities under the Program (e.g. in the titling of lands for Miskito 
communities), but also in associated areas with which they have less experience (e.g. the 
promotion of alternative conflict resolution mechanisms).  Such activities will be 
provided for under Component 1.  
 
An additional environment specialist will be contracted, as needed, for Phase II to 
follow up on the implementation of the EMP. Thus specialist would join the current 
Environmental Management Unit consisting of a Coordinator and an assistant. Based on 
Phase I's experience, Phase II will include measures to ensure greater attention to 
monitoring progress of the EMP. With the additional specialist to be hired as needed and 
planned institutional strengthening in environmental management and Bank safeguards, 
this Unit should have the capacity to manage Phase II environmental activities.  
 
On the social side, the PCU's Community Participation and Ethnic Affairs Unit will 
continue to oversee activities related to engagement with indigenous communities and 
their representatives, gender equity, and stakeholder communications.  For Phase II, this 
Unit will consist of a Coordinator, a Gender Specialist, a Communications Specialist, a 
Miskito Community Relations Associate, and an Assistant.  The communications and 
community relations specialists will be posted in Gracias a Dios in order to ensure close 
coordination with INA staff and indigenous federations and communities participating in 
the titling process.  The Community Participation and Ethnic Affairs Unit will also 
contract technicians to undertake specific tasks related to the implementation of 
component 4.  The existing capability of the Unit to carry out its responsibilities is 
expected to be enhanced through the application of training in relevant Bank safeguards 
during the early stages of Phase II.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The delimitation and demarcation of CCZs will require the carrying out of workshops 
with relevant stakeholders. These will include Protected Areas' occupants and people 
living outside the Protected Areas, as well as the relevant municipalities and patronatos. 
As was successfully implemented in Phase I, people living in or around CCZs to be 
demarcated will be informed of the demarcation and educated about what it means for 
them and their activities.  
 
Phase II will include revamped consultation mechanisms as means of soliciting 
stakeholder views more directly and consistently, thereby diminishing the possibility of 
conflicts in the Project. Two of the proposed mechanisms will be formal. The first is the 
Inter-
Sectoral Commission for the Protection of the Land Rights of Garífuna and Miskito 
Communities, a multi-stakeholder, central decision-making body that has proven to be 
effective during Phase I, which will remain active. Through their organizations 
OFRANEH, ODECO and MASTA, Garífuna and Miskito stakeholders will continue to 
have a say in the way the land rights of indigenous and afro-Honduran peoples are 
strengthened, and how land policy and programs that may affect them are being 
Page  15
implemented. Moreover, by inviting a representative from CONPAH to participate, the 
Inter-Sectoral Commission has effectively opened up its membership to all of 
Honduras#s indigenous federations.  
 
The second formal mechanism, the National Commission of Land-Related Policies and 
Standards (Comisión Nacional de Política y Normativa de la Propiedad or CONAPON), 
is proposed for activation during Phase II.  This body, whose constitution is provided in 
the Property Law, will serve as a means by which its members can monitor the operations 
of the Property Institute, and provide feedback and advice to IP management on the same. 
CONAPON#s membership base will be considerably wider than that of the Inter-Sectoral 
Commission, incorporating not just representatives from key institutions involved in land 
administration at the country level (such as INA, ICF, and SGJ), but also those from civil 
society, municipalities (via AMHON), and indigenous and afro-Honduran communities.  
 
The PCU will also work to convene regular community meetings and fora designed to 
serve as an open platform for consultation and participation of indigenous communities 
and their representatives. These meetings will not be designed to produce statements or 
decisions, but will rather provide a means for PATH and other government institutions to 
bring indigenous participants up to date on Project activities, and to solicit feedback on 
the course of Project implementation. The regional committees (Mesas Regionales), 
which were set up under Phase I to serve this purpose, will no longer remain active under 
Phase II.  A special meeting will be organized on an annual basis specifically to identify 
lessons learned, address any implementation issues and reconfirm broad support for the 
Project from MASTA and participating communities.  
 
Procedure-specific consultation mechanisms, such as the Vistas Públicas 
Administrativas that are an important feedback mechanism for validating cadastral 
information during the public-need regularization process (under Component 2), will 
continue to be employed. Such mechanisms are spelled out in the relevant annexes of the 
Operational Manual.  
 
IP, through the PCU, has held consultations with various stakeholders and concerned 
groups on the project and its environmental and social aspects including indigenous 
groups, environmental NGOs, government agencies, municipalities and civil society. 
These include, among others, the Zamarano Panamerican School of Agriculture, 
MASTA, Lempira Indigenous Council, National Coordinator of Honduran Communal 
Organizations, the National Council of Patronatos, the Fonseca Gulf Committee for the 
Defense and Development of the Flora and Fauna, and the Friends of the Tiger.  
 
As part of a continuous consultation process during the preparation of this Phase II, a 
series of site-specific consultations have been held with a range of interested 
stakeholders.  Additionally, in workshops conducted during the second half of 2008, the 
activities planned for each Project component were shared with potential beneficiaries. 
The overall process has been complemented and enriched by the findings of related 
studies and diagnostics. Among others, the following specific consultations have been 
held:   
Page  16
1. A Roundtable Discussion and Workshop with PATH Co-executors for the Mid-term 
Evaluation and Phase II on April 25, 2008 in Tegucigalpa. The following institutions 
participated: ICF, IP, GTZ-
Río Plátano Biosphere Project, SEFIN, Ministerio de la 
Presidencia, World Bank Resident Mission, AMHON, INA and SGJ.  
 
2. The Development of the Logical Framework for Phase II held May 29-30, 2008 in 
Tegucigalpa. In addition to the other institutions that participated in the April Roundtable 
Workshop, SERNA participated.  
 
3. A consultation on the Project's EA and EMP was conducted March 11, 2009. The ICF 
and IHAH participated in this consultation which defined which CCZs will be 
demarcated under Phase II.  
 
4. Consultations with representatives of Miskito indigenous federation, local churches, 
the Puerto Lempira mayor#s office, and the Miskito Consejo de Ancianos in Gracias a 
Dios on April 16-17, 2009. Among other things, this most recent of recurring 
consultations with indigenous leaders and other key stakeholders in La Moskitia resulted 
in a statement reaffirming their broad support for proposed component 4 activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  17
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
Page  18
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Enrique Pantoja 
06/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz 
06/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp 
06/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/17/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
06/18/2009 
Comments:   
