Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC4277
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P112090 
Project Name:  Improving Access and Quality of Basic Health Care Services 
Task Team Leader:  Carlos Marcelo Bortman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 12, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (23%);Population and reproductive health 
(22%);HIV/AIDS (22%);Health system performance (22%);Indigenous peoples (11%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of the proposed project is to support the GOH in the 
expansion of coverage and quality of basic health care services to rural, remote and poor 
populations. This project aims to diminish service access inequities and to reduce the 
risks that contribute to infant, child, and maternal mortality.  
 
In addition to the objective and indicators listed above, the proposed project aims to 
reduce the effects and spread of the Influenza A H1N1. Given the current 
epidemiological situation that arose during the time of the Project#s Appraisal, the 
proposed project will respond to the WHOs heighted pandemic alert. Success in 
achieving this objective will be assessed by the number of antiviral treatments purchased, 
and the number of Laboratory Tests performed.  
 
The current project will focus primarily on expanding the use of basic health care 
services. However, given the current financial crisis and the possibility of a decrease in 
public spending on health, the proposed project could be used to sustain the current 
decentralized models of health care implemented under the HSRP and now financed by 
the MOH during the period of the crisis, and as discussed with the World Bank team.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is divided into four components:  
 
Component 1. The expansion of coverage of the decentralized models of basic health 
care services (US $10 million). The objective of this component is to expand the 
implementation of the decentralized model of basic health care services, piloted under the 
HSRP, into seven departments (Colon, Santa Barbara, Ocotepeque, Yoro, El Paraiso, 
Olancho and Gracias a Dios) and those departments prioritized in the future by Red 
Solidaria. Honduras' 
Red Solidaria, the government’s social safety net program which 
coordinates interventions aimed at the poorest and most vulnerable communities, is 
already active in each of the seven departments and should complement the envisioned 
expansion.  
 
Component 2. Improve the quality of the provision of basic health services in the 
traditional models of health care (US $1.5 million).  The objective of this component is to 
pilot an innovative model of payment arrangements within a selected number of 
traditional primary health care centers (those managed by MOH).  The concept is to see if 
the best practices from the decentralized model can be successfully incorporated into 
existing MOH institutions, thereby improving quality of care and producing better health 
outcomes.  
 
Component 3. Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Health to monitor, 
supervise and evaluate the provision of health care services in the decentralized models 
of health care delivery (US $2.0 million).  The component would support strengthening 
the MOH's institutional capacity for supervising the decentralized and MOH-managed 
models of health services, management of information and monitoring results, and 
evaluating performance.  
 
Sub-component 3.1. (US $970,000): Support of current monitoring and evaluation 
systems. This sub-component will finance consultants, training, goods (computer 
equipment, office supplies, printing, etc.), internet service in some regions, operational 
costs, and the upgrade of existing information systems that are necessary for the 
supervision, monitoring, and evaluation of activities in Components 1 and 2 and the 
evaluation of the overall project. As part of monitoring and evaluation, each contract will: 
(i) measure baseline figures prior to implementing interventions; (ii) monitor and 
evaluate progress of key outcome and productivity indicators; and (iii) analyze how well 
the project’s goals have been achieved. Additional funds permitting, the team will look 
into designing and implementing an impact evaluation to determine the overall affect of 
the innovative service delivery models.  
 
Sub-component 3.2. (US $1 million): Strengthening the effectiveness and efficiency of 
the individual units that work with the decentralized models of health service delivery.  
 
Sub-component 3.3. (US $30,000): Financing the external audits of the project.  
 
Component 4. Reduce the effect and spread of the Influenza A H1N1 (US $5 million) 
Two weeks prior to the proposed Project#s appraisal, the GOH requested additional 
Page  3
financial support for its response to the global Influenza A H1N1 outbreak. The objective 
of this recently added component is to diminish the effect and spread of the Influenza A 
H1N1 through partially financing the government#s contingency Action Plan, which 
aims to reduce the impact of the epidemic.  
 
This component will finance: antiviral medicines (in particular, oseltamivir); equipment 
and re-active laboratory testing; mobilization for health care workers; a public health 
communications plan. Further, finances will also support: (i) the delivery of basic health 
care services in terms of prevention and treatment; (ii) frequent reporting and monitoring 
of diseases; (iii) mitigation and prevention of potential impact among vulnerable groups; 
and (iv) sharing of technical knowledge and capacity to improve surveillance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented country wide, with an emphasis in departments of 
Colon, Santa Barbara, Ocotepeque, Yoro, El Paraiso, Olancho and Gracias a Dios.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:  
 
In improving access and quality of health care, environmental impacts and mitigation 
measures per OP 4.01 need to be considered for two aspects of the project:  (i) 
biomedical waste management, and (ii) small-scale rehabilitation of existing health 
facilities. It is not expected that the project would generate any large scale, significant, or 
irreversible impacts, but localized impacts are possible that are consistent with a 
Category B environmental classification. OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) is the 
only environmental safeguard policy triggered by the project.  
Page  4
Over the long term, it is possible that greater access to health services provided by 
decentralized models could lead to an increase in biomedical waste or the concentration 
of waste loads which, if managed improperly, may raise health risks for patients, 
personnel and the public as well as environmental contamination. Though these types of 
risks are indirectly related to the actual project activities, the project can have a value-
added in supporting better waste management practices framed as not only an 
environmental issue but as one facet of improving the quality of health care. Minor, 
localized impacts are also possible from the rehabilitation of existing health facilities that 
would take place in order to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of individual 
health units that work with the decentralized models.  
 
No new construction would be eligible under the project. The Minister of Health, 
through the Directorate General of Health Regulations, will apply the current legal 
framework for minor works in health facilities to minimize any potential adverse 
environmental impact or impacts on personnel.  The client is currently preparing a set of 
guidelines for contractors that will be based on the Directorate General of Health 
Regulations# #Environmental Guide and Regulations for Rehabilitation of Health 
Facilities,# which will include sample clauses for environmental guidelines that would be 
included in bidding documents and contracts for works.  These guidelines will also be 
included in the project#s Operational Manual.  
 
The project plans to finance the rehabilitation of approximately 30 rural health centers 
or clinics for a total amount of less than US$1 million.  These civil works would be 
executed within the existing lands/sites of the health facilities and no new facilities would 
be constructed.  The types of works that would be anticipated are, for example, painting, 
small room additions, and equipment upgrades.  The impacts of such works would be 
temporary and localized, mostly consisting of nuisances such as noise and dust as well as 
the disposal of waste materials such as paint, oils, and other construction materials.  
 
Finally, the project will not finance the procurement of any pesticides nor will it support 
the purchase of any pesticide-control equipment. However, following good practices, the 
project will use support prevention and promotion measures to mitigate the spread of 
insect-related diseases.  
 
The Minister of Health, through the Directorate General of Health Regulations, will 
apply the current legal framework for minor works in health facilities to minimize any 
potential adverse environmental impact or impacts on personnel.   The client is currently 
preparing a set of guidelines for contractors that will be based on the Directorate General 
of Health Regulations# #Environmental Guide and Regulations for Rehabilitation of 
Health Facilities,# which will include sample clauses for environmental guidelines that 
would be included in bidding documents and contracts for works.  These guidelines will 
also be included in the project#s Operational Manual.  
 
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples  
 
Page  5
The project is targeted mostly although not exclusively to the municipalities covered by 
the Red Solidaria, home of the poorest strata of the population, and including Indigenous 
and Afro-Honduran peoples of eight ethnic groups (Lenca, Chorti, Garifuna, Tawahka, 
Pech, Miskito, Tolupan and English Islanders). Therefore, the OP 4.10 is triggered by this 
project, and an Indigenous Peoples Participation Plan (IAPP) has been prepared by the 
National Program for the Health of Ethnic Groups (PRONAEH).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
none   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Indigenous Peoples Participation Plan was elaborated by the National Program for the 
Health of Ethnic Peoples of Honduras (PRONAEH), within the MOH. The IAPP has 2 
subcomponents:  
 
(a) Under components 1 and 2 and at no cost to the project, guidelines for health care 
providers have been drafted and will be incorporated in the service agreements with 
health care providers (mancomunidades, municipalities, public health units) to ensure (i) 
the inclusion of ethnic groups as project beneficiaries; and (ii) the adaptation of the basic 
health care package of services that respond to the needs of the poor in a culturally 
adequate manner. PRONAEH will participate in the revision of TORs for providers, 
approval and negotiation of service contracts/agreements.  
 
(b) Under component 3, the strengthening of the PRONAEH for monitoring and social 
auditing of the present project, to be financed under this component, possibly with project 
counterpart funds of the Government of Honduras. PRONAEH will monitor and support 
providers of this and other programs of the MOH in ethnic regions, to ensure adequate 
provision of services.  Annex 10 includes the IAPP in detail.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two types of consultations took place: (a) the social assessment, involving the 
participation of stakeholders from the public health sector, including promoters and 
volunteers, and traditional health care providers, i.e. midwives, traditional healers, bone-
setters, AIN-C monitors; and (b) consultations between the MOH and the Indigenous and 
Afro-descendant Council (CONPAH) and federations. The first encounter took place in 
February, 2009 at Lake Yojoa, with the participation of the Confederation of 
Autochthonous Peoples of Honduras (CONPAH), the IDB-funded project 
(Autochthonous Peoples Development Project), nine Indigenous federations, and the 
Page  6
World Bank. A consultation of the Indigenous Plan with the health specialists of the 
federations took place in May 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/08/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/11/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Page  7
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos Marcelo Bortman 
05/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Faust 
05/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
05/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
05/11/2009 
Comments:  Approved. 
