Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3571
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P109058 
Project Name:  HONDURAS ROAD RECONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT II 
Task Team Leader:  Stephen J. Brushett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Export development and competitiveness 
(S);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
48.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration 
15.00
16.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Second Road Reconstruction and Improvement Project (PRMC-II) is 
to improve the quality of road network and of road management in support of the 
governme
nt’s growth and competitiveness goals through: (i) improved governance and 
enhanced road management capacity in SOPTRAVI and the Road Fund; (ii) 
improvement in selected road corridors; and (iii) extension in the scope of the 
maintenance of the unpaved road network.  In all three areas, the project builds on the 
progress that has been achieved through the First Road Reconstruction and Improvement 
Project (PRMC I), the only component of which not repeated in PRMC II is the 
mitigation of the impact of Hurricane Mitch.  
 
The principal expected, measurable outcomes of the project would respectively be: (i) 
improved perception by stakeholders of the transparency and efficiency of SOPTRAVI 
and the Road Fund; (ii) annual operational plan, procurement plan and a budget are 
aligned with the guidelines of a new Strategic Sector Plan to be adopted before end 2010; 
(iii) up to 200 kilometers of primary and secondary roads returned to good condition; (iv) 
average vehicle operating costs reduced by 35-70% on these roads; and (v) unpaved road 
Page  2
maintenance needs are covered by at least 75% by the end of the project in accordance 
with the Revised Road Maintenance Plan to be adopted before end 2010   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of primary and secondary roads 
(US$46.9million). The roads have been selected from among those identified as priority 
civil works following a study of the status and need for improvement in the country’s 
primary road corridors for trade. This component will finance the rehabilitation an 
improvement of the following road segments: Western Corridor: Cucuyagua–Nueva 
Ocotepeque–El Poy (69.9km); Nueva Ocotepeque–Agua Caliente (22.0km); 
LaEsperanza–Camasca (60.5km). Central Corridor: Olanchito–San Lorenzo (46.4km); El 
Porvenir–Marale (30.5km); and Sulaco–Empalme de Carretera Yoro (37.2 km).  
 
Component 2: Maintenance by Micro-Enterprises on the Unpaved Road Network 
(US$2.5million). Following the successful introduction of routine maintenance by micro-
enterprises on the paved network under PRMC-I, this component will initiate a pilot 
project for the extension of the program to the unpaved road network.The initial focus 
will be on the creation and introduction of 12 micro-enterprises on over 380 kilometers 
on sections of the unpaved secondary network, a proportion of which will be connected 
to the Western corridor primary road sections for improvement.  
 
Component 3: Implementation Support (US$5.0million). This component will cover the 
costs relating to: staffing and consultancy services necessary for project implementation; 
and the consultancy services required for the design and supervision of the civil works to 
be carried out under the first two components of the Project. Also covered will be the 
carrying out of any required technical, environmental or safety audits and the follow up 
of any particular conclusions arising there from.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening (US$3.0million). This will provide support to 
the implementation of the governance action plan (GAP) through strategically addressing 
key institutional issues including planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation. It will 
also continue the work started under PRMC-I towards improved social and 
environmental management in the road sector covering, inter alia, social assessment 
capacity; resettlement guidelines and practices; identifying and avoiding harm to critical 
natural habitats; and work site safety, including HIV/AIDS prevention.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The road reconstruction and improvement civil works will be in the Western Region 
(Departments of Ocotepeque, Intibuca, and Copan) and the Central Region (Departments 
of Francisco Morazan, Comayagua, and Yoro).  For a variety of reasons, none of the 
PRMC-II road segments are expected to adversely affect critical or other natural habitats. 
The above-mentioned road segments in the Western (Lenca) Corridor already pass 
through extensive areas of montane pine forest, which is already accessible for logging, 
Page  3
but (unlike Honduras’ tropical broadleaf forest areas) is not an “agricultural frontier” 
where improved access would be expected to induce significant new colonization or 
deforestation. The already paved (but potholed) Cucuyagua-Nueva Ocotepeque road 
passes alongside the existing Guisayote (El Pital) protected area, but would only be 
rehabilitated (not at all widened) and is not expected to adversely affect the protected 
area. The El Porvenir-Marale and Sulaco-Empalme Carretera Yoro roads pass through a 
mosaic of agricultural habitats and some pine forests, but no critical natural habitats (as 
has been confirmed by a co-author of the forthcoming report, “Analysis of Ecological 
Gapsin the National Protected Areas System of Honduras”). The San Lorenzo-
Olanchitoroad does indeed pass through a critical natural habitat (Aguan Valley thorn 
forest); see below for a description of the advance conservation measures that will be 
taken prior to the civil works bidding for this road.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSAR) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with this project’s Category B classification, project preparation produced 
(i) an Environmental Assessment (EA) report covering the overall project; (ii) an 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for those sub-projects that are expected to be 
initiated in the first year of project implementation (that is El Porvenir-Marale and 
Sulaco-Empalme Carretera Yoro) and (iii) an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF, Marco de Gestion Ambiental y Social, February 2008) that specifies 
the criteria, procedures, and responsibilities for properly managing the environmental and 
social impacts of all subprojects. The EA and ESMF were prepared by SOPTRAVI, 
reviewed and found acceptable by IDA, and are to be disclosed publicly within Honduras 
and at the Bank’s InfoShop in Washington. Public consultations took place in Honduras 
(Olanchito, Marale, and Camasca).  
Page  4
Although the social assessment findings indicate that minimal adverse social impacts 
are anticipated, identified social risks will be mitigated through the preparation of social 
safeguards instruments.  These instruments include an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), in 
compliance with OP 4.10.  Now completed and appropriately disclosed, the IPP indicates 
that minority ethnic groups located within the project area include the Lencas, the Maya 
Chortis and the Tulupanes.  Leaders from each group's representative organization, 
including the Lenca communities living in the Western Corridor road segments and the 
Tulupan indigenous community living in the MontaÃ±a de la Flor area near the Sulaco-
Empalme Yoro road segment,have expressed interest in the project as well as its 
perceived positive potential for their population.  The IPP includes activities to address 
needs for increased land security in order to prevent invasions (of new migrants that may 
come as a consequence of road improvement); agricultural technical assistance for the 
improvement of their crop-growing practices and road maintenance of the roads that 
connect their territories to the main road to be rehabilitated.  An Indigenous Peoples 
Policy Framework has also been prepared as a special request from the Government in 
order to build institutional capacity of their designated unit within SOPTRAVI, Unidad 
de Gestion Ambiental (UGA).  
 
An Abbreviated Involuntary Resettlement Plan (given the reduced number of people 
who will be displaced) has also been agreed with the Borrower and appropriately 
disclosed, in compliance with OP 4.12.  Based on appropriate consultations with the 
affected parties, the abbreviated plan includes measures to mitigate impacts on (i) three 
households in the San Lorenzo-Olanchito road segment who have agreed to relocate upon 
payment of cash compensation and/or land-based options in improved conditions; (ii) 
small-scale corn and bean farmers and cattle ranchers (tentatively estimated at 5 to 10 in 
total) within the Municipality of Sulaco, according to an initial assessment based on the 
preliminary designs of this road segment, who will participate in a income restoration 
program and land acquisition program.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project was prepared in accordance with the requirements of OP 4.01 Environmental 
Assessment and assigned an EA category “B”. The main civil works will involve the 
rehabilitation or paving of roads and there are potential environmental impacts at the site 
locations. To mitigate these impacts, an environmental management plan has been 
adopted.  
 
The anticipated environmental impacts and planned mitigation measures for each of the 
planned road segments have been assessed. In general, the expected environmental 
impacts are to be adequately mitigated through good construction and maintenance 
practices, as described in the ESMF which will be specified in bidding documents and 
contracts.  With the advance mitigation measures proposed, none of the road segments 
are expected to significantly damage natural habitats.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The San Lorenzo-Olanchito road passes through a critical natural habitat, the Aguan 
Valley thorn forest that is the main habitat of the endangered Honduran Emerald 
hummingbird, along with up to 14 endemic plant species and a rare endemic iguana 
(Ctenosaura melasnostrena). Under PRMC-I, environmental studies were carried out and 
the Poligono Reserve was successfully established on Government land (1,200 hectares, 
about half of which is thorn forest suitable for the Honduran Emerald). Presently, efforts 
are underway to get most of the remaining sizable patches of thorn forest (totaling about 
2,000 ha) under effective, long-term conservation. The Financing Agreement for PRMC-
II will specify that, before bidding on the San Lorenzo-Olanchito road works can 
proceed, a minimum target area of approximately 2,000 hectares of thorn forest in the 
upper Aguan Valley (most of the remaining habitat within the area of influence of this 
road) shall be under a legally binding, financially sustainable, and operationally effective 
system for long-term conservation, satisfactory to IDA. This system is likely to be 
achieved through a combination of direct land acquisition and recurrent environmental 
service payments to collaborating private landowners.. Once this substantial area of 
Aguan Valley thorn forest has been placed under effective, long-term protection, it would 
not be vulnerable to the land clearing that might otherwise be induced by the increased 
land prices anticipated as a result of the paving of the San Lorenzo-Olanchito road. In 
addition, care will be taken to ensure that no thorn forest habitat is damaged by the road 
improvement works themselves (nor by the relocation of several houses that are currently 
in the road’s right-of-way), and that signs and rumble strips will be installed to reduce 
traffic speeds in sensitive areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will continue the work started under the past project towards improved 
environmental management in the road sector. The ESMF includes a plan for 
strengthening SOPTRAVI’s capacity to address environmental and social issues, 
withspecific activities budgeted for US$150,000. These include the development of 
environmental monitoring systems and the addition of GIS capabilities in the 
environmental management unit (UGA).  A map will be produced highlighting 
environmentally sensitive areas in relation to the road network in Honduras.  
 
SOPTRAVI has used a contracted consultant for the preparation of the project's social 
assessment and social safeguards instruments. Likewise, they plan to hire another 
consultant or team of consultants for the implementation of the Abbreviated Involuntary 
Resettlement Plan.  However, the institutional capacity to supervise the proposed 
activities in these two plans as well as the UGA's general social monitoring capacity 
needs to be strengthen and will thus be included in the institutional strengthening 
component of the project.  This effort will include contracting a social development 
specialist whose terms of reference will include the oversight of the implementation of 
the Abbreviated Involuntary Resettlement Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan and follow-up 
on the actions coming out of the social assessment.  In addition the project envisages 
developing capacity to manage the gender dimension of transport and to introduce new 
Page  6
measures to improve work site safety for employees and for communities, principally 
through the introduction of an HIV/AIDS prevention program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive consultations have been carried out with potentially affected people with the 
purpose of preparing and disclosing safeguard instruments.  With respect to the people 
directly affected by the civil works, several consultations including workshops were 
conducted in order to communicate affected community concerns to the decision-makers.  
These concerns and suggestions including additional safety measures, requests for 
contractors to prioritize local employment and improved access to low-income 
communities- have been documented in the project's social assessment.  SOPTRAVI will 
follow up on these suggestions either through the incorporation of specific mitigation 
measures under the design of the improved road sections or through consultations with 
third parties to identify appropriate solutions.  
 
In regards to road maintenance to be carried out by micro-enterprises, the areas for the 
pilot project have been identified and consultations will take place during the first year of 
the project with the communities concerned to identify potential.  The benefits to the 
communities include increased employment, capacity building, and improved road 
maintenance.  
 
At a sector-wide level, the project supports the implementation of the governance action 
plan, which prioritizes transparency and public participation in the planning and 
implementation of road projects.  The plan has been developed following extensive 
consultation with a variety of stakeholders in the public and private sectors, including a 
series of workshops held in March 2008. The plan will support mechanisms for 
increasing the capacity for social monitoring and for providing technical assistance and 
training to help civil society organizations become more effectively involved.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen J. Brushett 
04/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
04/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kimberly Vilar 
04/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
04/24/2008 
Comments:   
