Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4219 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/03/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P110050 
Project Name: Honduras State Modernization 
Task Team Leader: Ana Bellver Vazquez-Dodero 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S);Managing for 
development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching objective of the Public Sector Reform Program is to contribute to enhancing 
efficiency and performance accountability in the use of public resources in Honduras, which will 
in turn improve the state’s capacity to provide quality services, and citizen’s trust in public 
institutions. The Development Objective of the Reform Program is to improve management of 
public resources by supporting: i) the consolidation  of ongoing reforms in the areas of customs 
and tax administration, financial management, planning, procurement, internal and external 
control, and human resources, and ii) the introduction of a results-focus in the management of 
public resources.  
 
The World Bank’s contribution to the Reform Program would aim at: (i) supporting the use of 
financial management, customs and tax administration and procurement systems by central 
government agencies, and (ii) introducing performance incentives in public management. The 
World Bank’s contribution would also be instrumental in providing incentives to advance the 
reforms supported by the other components, though a Competitive Fund. Specific outcome and 
output indicators will be defined in order to assess the impact of Bank’s contribution without 
compromising the flexible nature of such support.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The government of Honduras has designed a Public Management Reform Program based on a 
medium-
term strategy for the sector. It is proposed that the Bank supports government’s Reform 
Program with a $15.0 million Technical Assistance Investment Credit under a Sector Wide 
Approach (see Section 5 for a discussion on alternative options). Other co-funders of the Reform 
Program are: the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) with a contribution of $28.6 and 
KfW with an estimated contribution of 10 million euros.  
 
Description of Program Components  
 
Components 1-6 of the Reform Program aim at supporting the horizontal consolidation of 
ongoing public management reforms on revenue and expenditure managements. These 
components will continue providing support to the implementation of the reforms and the use of 
the associated public management systems by central government agencies. Each component 
will have well-defined objectives and specific outputs. However, based on the country’s reform 
trajectory, it is not anticipated that all the reforms will advance at the same pace so the program 
targets will be set so as to reflect what can be realistically achieved in each area.  
 
Components 7 and 8 support the vertical integration of the reforms and provide performance 
incentives across the program. In this sense, these components can be considered as the key 
foundations of the program given that they support activities to introduce a results-focus in 
public management and enhance performance accountability. What follows is a brief description 
of each individual component.  
 
Component 1: Customs and Tax administration modernization. This component will support the 
modernization of the customs and tax administrations through the improvement of tax-payer 
services and the security environment, implementation of international standards for cross-border 
trade, strengthening oversight of internal revenue, and the implementation of an internal revenue 
administration system based on taxpayers’ segmentation. Estimated total cost: $12.1 million.  
 
Component 2: Consolidation of the public expenditure financial management system. This 
component will support the consolidation of the ongoing financial management reform by 
institutionalizing the Integrated Financial Management System (SIAFI) in the central 
government and decentralized agencies, the implementation of the human resource module and 
the interface with Honducompras, and the development of the integrated financial management 
system for municipalities. Estimated total cost: $13.4 million.  
 
Component 3: Strategic and operational planning. This component will support the design and 
implementation of the national planning system throughout the public administration: the 
strengthening of technical and analytical capacities of the Technical Assistance Unit (UNAT) in 
the Secretary of the Presidency and the planning units in the ministries and decentralized 
agencies; the strengthening of the link between planning and budgeting under a scheme of 
performance-informed budgeting and; the further development information system that supports 
results-based management throughout the public sector (SGPR). Estimated total cost: $4 million.  
 
Component 4: Internal and external control framework. This component would strengthen the 
national public resources control system (SINACORP) and institutionalize the coordination 
Page  3
between external (Supreme Accounts Institution) and internal (Executive branch) controls under 
the recently created National Office for the Development of Internal Control (ONADICI). 
Estimated total cost: $3 million.  
 
Component 5: Procurement. This component will support the development of the procurement 
system (Honducompras), its implementation and the institutionalization of the procurement 
agency’s functions and personnel. Estimated total cost: $7.3million.  
 
Component 6: Integration of fiscal and monetary statistics. The objective would be to 
consolidate the program to modernize Honduras’ macroeconomic statisticsatthe Honduras 
Central Bank (BCH) through the consolidation of the historical series of macroeconomic 
aggregates, improving the calculation of key indexes, and the development of an integrated data 
management system. Estimated total cost: $1.7 million.  
 
To ensure that the results-based management approach and the professionalization program are 
integrated into the reforms supported by the other components, the following two components 
have been added as crosscutting:  
 
Component 7: Results-based management. This component will support the development and 
implementation of an integrated results-based management system in the Public Administration 
that incorporates a results-focus in the management of financial, human and physical resources. 
To this end, the component will support: (i) the integration of the planning and budgeting 
processes both at the strategic and operational level, in order to use output and outcome 
indicators to quantify the strategic objectives of programs; and incorporate efficiency and results 
measures that may be linked to budget decisions; (ii) the professionalization of technical staff 
that are critical for the consolidation and sustainability of ongoing public management reforms 
(procurement, planning, internal audit, and financial management), (iii) the adoption of a 
performance orientation in human resource management, procurement and control, and (iv) 
institutional pilots in key sectors for the implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. The 
pilots would focus on strengthening the ‘performance chain’ linking inputs, available resources, 
outputs and outcomes; the inclusion of objectives and outcomes in the strategic plans of the 
spending units; the integration of strategic plans and the budget; enhanced management 
flexibility in spending units; and the improvement of data quality and the introduction of 
interoperability between systems. Estimated total cost: $6.6 million.  
 
Component 8: Competitive Fund. In order to provide flexibility to the program and offer 
performance incentives, this component will establish a virtual competitive fund that will 
become operational in year 2. Only institutions that have achieved year 1 results will be allowed 
to apply for additional funds. Proposals will be reviewed by the Steering Committee and funds 
allocated to eligible expenditures according to the criteria set up in the Operations Manual. 
Similarly, consideration is being given to the possibility that funds from low performing 
components could be transferred to the Competitive Fund in year 3 to ensure full disbursement 
of the program and provide incentives to reward good performance. Estimated total cost: $5 
million.  
 
Page  4
The Bank has assisted the government of Honduras in the development of the strategic vision  
and in the design of the overall reform program. The Bank will continue assisting the 
government of Honduras in the implementation of the program, participating in supervision 
missions and policy discussion on public management reform options.  
 
The specific financial contribution of the Bank would contribute to the consolidation, 
integration and responsiveness of the custom and tax administration, the integrated financial 
management system, and the procurement system. In addition, the Bank’s contribution will assist 
the government of Honduras in the introduction of a results-focus in the Public Administration.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Tegucigalpa, Honduras   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Reidar Kvam (LCSDE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/20/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not safeguard-related studies will be needed under this operation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ana Bellver Vazquez-Dodero 
02/10/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Nicholas Paul Manning 
02/23/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
