Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3258 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P109058 
Project Name: HONDURAS ROAD RECONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT II 
Task Team Leader: Stephen J. Brushett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Export development and competitiveness 
(S);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Second Road Reconstruction and Improvement Project (RRIP-II) is to 
improve the quality and extent of the road network in support of the Government’s growth and 
competitiveness goals and thus reduce the costs of transport and improve access to rural areas for 
road users.  This is to be achieved through (i) investment in improvements in selected road 
corridors (and associated secondary road networks); (ii) funding of sustainable maintenance of 
the public road network; and (iii) investment in building capacity for road management in 
SOPTRAVI.  In all three areas, the project builds on the progress that has been achieved through 
the first Road Reconstruction and Improvement Project (RRIP-I), the only component of which 
not repeated in RRIP-II is the mitigation of the impact of Hurricane Mitch.  
 
The principal expected, measurable outcomes of the project would respectively be: (i) 
reductions in vehicle operating costs and travel times on the road corridors to be improved; (ii) 
proportion of the public road network in good/fair condition; and (iii) more efficient and 
effective road management by SOPTRAVI, with specific attention to contract management.  The 
key measurable outputs of the project would include the following: (i) kilometers of roads 
improved or rehabilitated and number of structures improved as well as their associated unit 
Page  2
costs; (ii) amount of funding provided to road maintenance used to this end and the average cost 
of such maintenance interventions; and (iii) introduction of new management systems and 
carrying out of specific capacity-building activities in SOPTRAVI.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
RRIP-II is estimated to have a total Project cost of about US$45 million, 100% of which will be 
funded through the proceeds of an IDA Credit.  In parallel to the Project however, there will be 
carried out a substantial number of parallel projects for road improvement funded by the 
Government, MCC, BID and CABEI among others.  It is expected however that all donors will 
follow the same or similar objectives in regard to maintenance funding and institutional 
development.  
 
The following are the expected components of the Project:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of primary and secondary roads (US$37 
million). The roads will be selected from those identified as priority civil works through the 
mentioned study of priority corridor improvements and also from the preparation of the Rural 
Competitiveness Project, consistent with the availability of funding and the readiness to 
implement. The potential projects fall into three groups as follows:  
 
A. Western (Lenca) Corridor and associated road links (direct support to the departments 
covered by the Rural Competitiveness Project), i.e.:  
 
--Paving of La Esperanza-Camasca (Dept. of Intibuca)  
 
--Rehabilitation of Cucuyagua-Nueva Ocotepeque-El Poy (Depts. of Copan and Ocotepeque)  
 
--Rehabilitation of Nueva Ocotepeque--Agua Caliente (Depts. of Copan and Ocotepeque)  
 
--Pre-reconstruction study of La Entrada-Santa Rosa-Cucuyagua (Dept. of Copan)  
 
B. Completion of works along the Central Highway whose preparation was funded under RRIP-
I:  
 
--Paving of El Porvenir-Marale (Dept. of Francisco Morazan)  
 
--Paving of Marale-Sulaco-Empalme Carretera Yoro (Depts. of Francisco Morazan, 
Comayagua, and Yoro)  
 
--Paving of San Lorenzo-Olanchito (Dept. of Yoro)  
 
Component 2  Maintenance by Micro-Enterprises on the Unpaved Network (US$2 million).  
Following the successful introduction of routine maintenance by micro-enterprises under RRIP I, 
it is intended to initiate a pilot project for the extension of the program to the unpaved network.  
This would likely focus on sections of the secondary network connected to the Western Corridor.  
 
Component 3: Implementation Support (US$4million). This is directly related to the 
implementation of the civil works and covers consulting services for design and supervision of 
the civil works in Component 1; as well as for the carrying out of any required technical, 
environmental or safety audits.  
Page  3
Component 4: Institutional Development (US$2million) providing support to strategically 
address key institutional issues, likely to include:  
 
(i)Strengthening and adapting SOPTRAVI and Fondo Vial capacity to manage private sector 
contracts, bearing in mind a probable move towards adopting more long term, performance 
based operations and maintenance contracts on the primary network.  
 
(ii)Continuing the work started under RRIP-I towards improved road transport policy and 
regulation covering inter alia: weight and dimension control; licensing and regulation of freight 
and passenger transport; road safety management.  
 
(iii)Continuing the work started under RRIP-I towards improved social and environmental 
management in the road sector covering inter alia: social assessment capacity; resettlement 
guidelines and practices; identifying and avoiding harm to critical natural habitats; work site 
safety, including HIV/AIDS mitigation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Various locations as listed in section C above.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Environmental management and resettlement framework documents exist and have been used 
under RRIP-
I.  There is already significant capacity within SOPTRAVI’s Environmental 
Management Unit (Unidad de Gestion Ambiental, UGA) to oversee (with the help of 
consultants) the work needed for the specific road sections to be rehabilitated or improved under 
RRIP-II.  Nonetheless, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) currently 
under preparation will include a plan (Plan para el Fortalecimiento de la Gestion Ambiental y 
Social) for further strengthening SOPTRAVI’s capacity to properly address the full range of 
environmentaland social issues that arise in road works.  For the project’s social assessment, 
SOPTRAVI has agreed to the use of contracted consultants with the requisite experience to carry 
out these activities.  The terms of reference have been reviewed by the Bank.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSAR) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Category B Environmental Assessment (EA) for this project will be completed and 
publicly disclosed prior to appraisal. The EA will include (i) an Environmental Impact Report 
(EIR) with an environmental assessment of the overall project and of those sub-projects which 
are expected to be initiated in the first year of RRIP-II implementation (La Esperanza-Camasca, 
El Porvenir-Marale, and/or Marale-Sulaco-Empalme Carretera Yoro) and (ii) an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will specify the criteria, procedures, and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
responsibilities for properly managing the environmental and social impacts of all RRIP-II 
subprojects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
For a variety of reasons, none of the RRIP-II road segments are expected to significantly 
affect critical or other natural habitats. The four above-mentioned road segments in the Western 
(Lenca) Corridor pass through extensive areas of montane pine forest, which is already 
accessible for logging and (unlike Honduras’ tropical broadleaf forest areas) is not an 
“agricultural frontier” where improved access would be expected to induce significant new 
colonization or deforestation. The already paved (but potholed) Cucuyagua-Nueva Ocotepeque 
road passes alongside the existing Guisayote (El Pital) protected area, but would only be 
rehabilitated (not at all widened) and is not expected to adversely affect the protected area. The 
El Porvenir-Marale and Marale-Sulaco-Empalme Carretera Yoro roads pass through a mosaic of 
agricultural habitats and some pine forests, but no critical natural habitats (as has been confirmed 
by a co-author of the forthcoming report, “Analysis of Ecological Gaps in the National Protected 
Areas System of Honduras”). The San Lorenzo-Olanchito road does indeed pass through a 
critical natural habitat, the Aguan Valley thorn forest that is the main habitat of the endangered 
Honduran Emerald hummingbird, along with up to 14 endemic plant species. Under RRIP-I, 
environmental studies were carried out and the Poligono Reserve was successfully established on 
Government land (1,200 hectares, about half of which is thorn forest suitable for the Honduran 
Emerald). Presently a trust fund is being established from which payments for environmental 
services (PES) are to be made to landowners who agree to maintain intact their remaining parcels 
of thorn forest. Under RRIP-II, bidding for the San Lorenzo-Olanchito road paving would be 
conditional upon placing under effective conservation a target area of approximately 2,000 
hectares of thorn forest (most of the remaining habitat within the area of influence of this road). 
Most of the PES contracts are expected to be agreed and to go into effect during 2008. Once this 
substantial area of Aguan Valley thorn forest has been placed under long-term protection, it 
would not be vulnerable to the land clearing that might otherwise be induced by the increased 
land prices anticipated as a result of the paving of the San Lorenzo-Olanchito road.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Because the above-mentioned natural habitats are also forests, the Forests Policy is triggered 
as well as the Natural Habitats policy.  For this project, both policies have exactly the same 
requirements.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Damage to physical cultural resources (archaeological relicts or fossils) is unlikely, since the 
roads to be rehabilitated or paved already exist, and the project would follow existing 
alignments. The ESMF will include cultural property -chance finds procedures- under its 
standard environmental rules for contractors.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Lenca communities live in the area of influence of the Western Corridor road 
segments, and a Tulupan indigenous community lives in the Montana de la Flor area near the 
Marale-Sulaco-Empalme Carretera Yoro road. Accordingly, an Indigenous Peoples Policy 
Framework (IPPF, Marco de Politica para Pueblos Indigenas) will be prepared and publicly 
disclosed prior to appraisal of RRIP-II.  The IPPF for RRIP-II will build upon the findings and 
recommendations of the IPPF prepared for the recently
-
approved Rural Competitiveness Project, 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
which supports productive investments in broadly the same geographical area as the Western 
Corridor road segments.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Even though most or all road works would be within existing rights-of-way, an Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy Framework (Marco de Politica para el Reasentamiento Involuntario) will be 
prepared and publicly disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/27/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The studies commenced in January, and it will be completed by mid March, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen J. Brushett 
01/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/30/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
