Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: 42317  
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: Jan 23, 2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100352 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: Karnataka Municipal Water Supply Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader: Da Zhu/Oscar E. Alvarado 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2008 
Estimated ERPA Signature: July 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset 
Sector: Water Supply; District Heating and Other Energy Efficiency Services 
Theme: Climate Change, Access to Urban Services and Housing 
Financing amounts by source:  
Equity: $0.7 million 
Debt 
–
long-term:  $1.5 million  
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ X]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [ X ] 
B.  Project Objectives: 
 
The proposed development objectives of the Project are: 
 
·
Contribute to GHG emission reduction and sustainable development by improving energy 
efficiency of water supply system in participating municipalities of Karnataka 
·
Improve water supply service in participating municipalities by improving water 
pumping energy efficiency and reducing operation cost  
 
This project is consistent with the India Country Assistance Strategy by ensuring environmental 
sustainability and reducing risks of climate change. Infrastructure investment in urban and WSS 
sectors is also identified in the CAS as a Strategic Principle. 
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
Pressure on water supply and energy cost in water supply system in urban areas of Karnataka 
state of India is increasing rapidly due to population growth and low energy efficiency in the 
water system. Currently, the pump systems are inefficiently designed, improperly sized, poorly 
maintained, operated at less than their optimal load, and many of the pumps are out of age and 
need to be replaced. Pumping schemes are poorly engineered with redundant pumps, pipes, 
Page  2
2
valves and high friction losses. These inefficiencies increase the amount of energy needed to 
deliver water to end users. As a result, electricity represents 40-60% of the operation cost of 
water supply. The high operation cost results in poor water service for the urban population. At 
the same time, the energy inefficiency also results in unnecessary Green House Gases (GHG) 
emissions, which increases the risk of climate change.   
 
To deal with the above issues, Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development & Finance 
Corporation (KUIDFC) proposed the Municipal Water Supply Energy Efficiency Project to 
improve water supply services through improving energy efficiency in the water pumping 
systems in 6 pilot cities: Belgaum, Gulbarga, Hubli/Dharwad, Mangalore, Bellary,  and Mysore. 
The proposed Energy Efficiency improvement project will supplement the ongoing water service 
sector reforms and delivery improvements in the first three towns as part of Karnataka Urban 
Water Sector Improvement Project (KUWSIP), a Bank funded project. It is estimated that, after 
this project, energy savings in the 6 water pumping systems will be about 20 million kWh, which 
could reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emission by about 17,000 tons.  
 
With the World Bank’s assistance, the GHG emission reduction can be sold through the World 
Bank-executed Carbon Fund, which will allow KUIDFC to implement the energy efficiency 
program with an additional revenue stream. 
 
The Bank has a long-term partnership with Karnataka government through its lending programs 
especially the Karnataka Urban Water Sector Improvement Project, of which KUIDFC is also 
the implementing agency. The KUWSIP, effective in May 2005, aims to support the water sector 
reform and improve water service in Karnataka. In alignment with KUWSIP, this proposed 
project is to focus on the energy efficiency solution in water pumping for the participating cities. 
 
GHG emission reduction and carbon finance:
 
The project consists of sale of emission 
reductions resulting from improvements of energy efficiency of water supply pumping systems 
in six municipalities in India, namely Belgaum, Bellary, Gulbarga, Hubli/Dharwad, Mangalore, 
and Mysore through World Bank-managed Community Development Carbon Fund.  The carbon 
revenue will then be arranged for the re-payment of the long-term loan borrowed in this project.  
 
Carbon revenues are crucial for the success of the project as the financial inflows from sale of 
carbon credits will provide much needed additional financial comfort to KUIDFC and its lender, 
as there is usually high repayment risk for these types of projects in India. The revenues from 
carbon credits will ultimately be shared among participating municipalities. 
 
Preliminary activities: 
The energy efficiency opportunities targeted for implementation by this 
project consist mainly the following activities: optimization and sizing of the existing water 
pumping systems and equipment based on the actual network configuration, requirement and 
operations parameters; implementation of new efficient pumps and motors; optimization of 
pumping systems operation through an improved metering and monitoring systems; optimization 
of the electrical consumption and power factor for motors; leak reduction in the water 
distribution network; increasing awareness for energy efficiency through training and capacity 
building programs for municipal operation and maintenance staff. 
 
Page  3
3
Monitoring and evaluation:
 will be undertaken through the specific plan for Verification of 
Emissions Reductions that will be developed in the clean development mechanism (CDM) 
Project Design Document. KUIDFC will be accountable for overall reporting on implementation 
progress, preparation of financial monitoring reports, and preparation of audited project 
accounts.  
 
Environmental Assessment:
 As part of KUWSIP, environmental assessments have been carried 
out for Water Supply Service Improvement investments in three of the proposed project towns - 
Belgaum, Gulbarga, and Hubli/Dharwad. The EAs recommended detailed Environmental 
Management Plans for Water Supply systems in these towns, including institutional mechanism 
for implementation and monitoring and reporting framework. These EMPs and their 
implementation setup provides effective framework for dovetailing the additional management 
measures, if any for the proposed Energy Efficiency Project. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
The proposed locations at Belgaum, Gulbarga, Hubli/Dharwad, Mangalore, Bellary,  and Mysore 
are medium to large cities in Karnataka State, India. The project includes water supply systems 
examination and installation of water pumps and other equipments, and appropriate collection 
and disposal of de-commissioned equipments.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
KUIDFC, as part of KUWSIP has established a strong institutional capacity for infrastructure 
projects implementation. KUIDFC has a separate Environment and Social Management Cell 
(ESMC) with three permanent employees. The cell has well defined safeguards responsibilities, 
including safeguards inputs for project preparation, implementation supervision and monitoring 
for safeguards management and reports to General Manager 
–
Projects.  As part of KUWSIP, 
ESMC has supervised the Environmental Assessment of Water Supply Improvements for the 
three towns - Belgaum, Gulbarga, and Hubli/Dharwad was involved The team comprises of for 
safeguard policies and implementing. It has experience with implementation of several Bank 
lending projects including safeguard policy.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist: Addepalli Sita Ramakrishna 
 
Social Safeguards Specialist:  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The proposed project is expected to improve the energy efficiency in waster supply systems. The 
proposed project activities related to system optimization by refurbishing and/or replacement of 
some of the electro-mechanical systems, reducing unaccounted water, and capacity building for 
better energy management. These activities are expected to lead to efficiency improvements and 
also achieve better water supply th
roughput. 
The proposed project activities could lead to limited 
Page  4
4
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental issues, including disposal of decommissioned equipment, resultant increase in 
wastewater due to better water supply throughput, as well as Occupational Health and Safety 
aspects, and impacts during implementation phase of the project. As part of the assessment of the 
environmental impacts of the proposed project, the existing EA/EMP documents for Water 
Supply Systems improvements for three towns - Belgaum, Gulbarga, and Hubli/Dharwad need to 
be reviewed to update the EMPs. In case of  Mangalore, Bellary,  and Mysore towns an 
Environmental Audit of existing water supply systems to prepare an Environmental Management 
Plan would be necessary to address the expected environmental issues.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
No land acquisition is contemplated and hence the OP is not triggered. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category: [B] 
–
Limited Environmental Assessment 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   N.A. 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  April 2008 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: EA, by 
March 2008 
 
Based on the existing Environmental Management Plans for Water Supply Systems 
improvement in three towns - Belgaum, Gulbarga, and Hubli/Dharwad , an Environmental 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
5
Audit is proposed to carried out for the proposed energy efficiency improvements in the six 
towns. The specific objective of the proposed audit will be to: Assess the potential 
environmental issues associated with the implementation of identified energy efficiency 
improvement measures; evaluation of the current level of compliance by Water Board with 
the applicable national and state regulations; identification of potential (both actual and 
perceived) environmental and social risks and liabilities with a view to define relevant 
environmental management measures/interventions needed to mitigate them. The key 
activities of the Environmental Audit will include:  
 
·
Establishing baseline environmental status with reference to the proposed project interventions  
·
Identifying and assessing the potential environment and social impacts/risks 
·
Preparing environmental management plan for the six towns focusing on addressing the risks associated 
with the proposed project interventions. The EMP will also include, budgetary estimates for implementation 
and define the monitoring and reporting mechanism. 
·
Assess the institutional capacity of the water supply board in all the cities, particularly in terms of their 
capacity to implement proposed interventions and sustain the improved environmental performance, with 
recommendations for institutional improvements and capacity building, if necessary  
 
The Environmental Audit will be coordinated by KUIDFC.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Da Zhu/Oscar E. Alvarado 
January 23, 
2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
January, 2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Songsu Choi 
January 23, 
2008 
Comments:   
