Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/26/2009 
Report No.:  AC4430
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P100589 
Project Name:  Sustainable Urban Transport (GEF) 
Task Team Leader:  Ke Fang 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 27, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (50%);Municipal governance and institution building 
(25%);Pollution management and environmental health (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
187.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
20.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
138.80
138.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project#s development objective is to promote environmentally sustainable transport 
and to improve the usage of environmentally friendly transport modes in at least four 
pilot cities by supporting implementation of the capacity building elements and the 
public- and non-motorized-transport- related aspects of the Recipient#s National Urban 
Transport Policy.   
 
3. Project Description 
#
Component 1: Providing technical assistance to the Recipient#s states and cities in 
order to improve their capacity to implement the National Urban Transport Policy. Such 
assistance will cover: (i) development of implementation strategies and plans to 
implement key urban transport reforms envisioned in the National Urban Transport 
Policy; (ii) piloting model urban transport databases; (iii) assisting cities in the 
identification and preparation of potential environmentally friendly urban transport 
investments; and (iv) developing a national research program on sustainable urban 
transport.  
Page  2
#
Component 2: City Demonstration Projects. This Component catalyzes high profile 
demonstration projects in 6 participating cities (in 5 states)  that will create models of 
sustainable transport solutions for other Indian cities to replicate. These projects focus on 
four themes: (i) Public transport development; (ii) Non-motorized transport development; 
(iii) Pilot Intelligent Transport System (ITS); and (iv) Integrated land use and transport 
planning and Transit-Oriented Development.  
 
The proposed GEF grant would finance Component 1 and technical assistance activities 
related to demonstration projects in Component 2. Participating cities will finance other 
project activities (including civil works) by utilizing government own funds and a World 
Bank loan being processed under a separate project (P110371).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The interventions under Component 2 will be in 6 cities in 5 states  # Pune, Pimpri 
Chinchwad (in Maharashtra State),  Indore (in Madhya Pradesh State),  Mysore (in 
Karnataka State),  Jalandhar (in Punjab State), and Naya Raipur (in Chhattisgarh State). 
Except Naya Raipur which is a green field capital of Chhatisgarh, other cities have 
typical urban character. Most cities have relatively densely populated city centers. 
Common roadside features include trees as well as public infrastructure like electric 
transmission and solid waste management facilities. In a few locations, locally important 
cultural properties like shrines are also present.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
Mr Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDI) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Interventions under Component 2 are focused on improving facilities for public transport, 
non-motorized transport and pedestrianisation of congested areas. Therefore, they are 
expected to reduce the green house gas (GHG) and local air pollutant emissions. 
However, some of these can also have small negative impacts, especially during the 
construction, and operation stages such as local air pollution, increased noise level, safety 
#
workers# as well as traffic/road user. Clearing of roadsides for installation of 
pedestrian-friendly and/or non-motorized transport infrastructure may also result in 
removal of trees, or other facilities like solid waste skips, and electric transmission poles. 
While these may not be large in scale, they may be locally significant and are 
unavoidable in many cases.  In a few cases, some of the encroachers and squatters using 
public right of way (ROW) for commercial purposes may be adversely impacted.  In 
exceptional cases, there will be  instances of private land acquisition.  Acquisition of 
private land and displacement of squatters will have adverse impact on livelihood and 
income sources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Over time, the interventions should act as benchmarks for improved urban transport 
system and should result in wider uptake of similar activities by the cities in the project, 
as well as other cities in the state. Once the interventions are implemented, they would 
contribute to reduction in GHG emissions, and presumably also local air pollutants. This 
should have positive impacts on citizens# health, damage to local heritage buildings etc.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In all cases, the interventions are likely to improve sustainability of the urban transport 
system in the cities. In case of major interventions the avoidance/minimization was a 
focus, such as provision for BRTS in Naya Raipur, where conformance with the 
development plan for the new city was ensured. Effort has been made to ensure that most 
of the civil works for the road components are undertaken within the existing legal right 
of way. In other cases, very few realistic alternatives for the interventions may have 
existed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the project interventions have similar limited impacts, an environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the MoUD and endorsed by each 
participating city for implementation of the project. The ESMF has been developed using 
information available from the city development plans/comprehensive mobility plans for 
each city, a review of the applicable policies and regulations # city, state, GoI and WB, 
visits to cities in the project, and discussions with participating cities# officials. It 
includes avoidance, mitigation, and management measures for common types of activities 
Page  4
as well as ToR for carrying out the EA / SA in cases where major interventions like BRT 
are planned. In cities included in Phase I of the project, where major negative impacts are 
envisaged, Environmental Management Plans / Resettlement Action Plans (as in the case 
of Pimpri) to adapt and include applicable avoidance/mitigation measures from the 
ESMF with adequate budgetary provisions have been prepared and disclosed during 
project preparation. It also includes a clear approach to build capacity of the participating 
cities to implement environmental protection / management and social mitigation 
measures as part of the institutional development.  All participating cities, except 
Jalandhar, have project implementation units for the JnNURM projects that are being 
separately funded by the GoI and these would be used to implement the project 
interventions. Capacity of these PIUs is variable and needs to be systematically raised as 
outlined in the ESMF. At the national Project Management Unit, an Environmental and a 
Social Development officer would be appointed to guide the participating cities# 
Environmental and Social Officers, co-ordinate with line ministries at the GoI level as 
appropriate, and document the lessons learnt from the implementation of these 
interventions for use by other cities all over the country. Since this is the first multi-city 
urban transport project, building capacity of participating cities for environmental and 
social management is vital for its successful implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In addition to the participating cities officials, key stakeholders would include line 
departments like traffic police, transportation, revenue, etc. in the participating cities. 
State departments of Urban Development for each city, NGOs, especially those with 
special interests such as those advocating bicycle use in Pune, and potential user of 
facilities as well as those living in the project influence areas are also very important 
stakeholders. Each of the participating cities has consulted widely on the ESMF draft 
following its publication on their websites. Stakeholder meetings have also been held in 
some of the participating cities to ensure that their views are considered before the ESMF 
is finalized. The finalized ESMF has been disclosed in the public domain and is available 
in all the participating cities office as well as website in local language and English.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/26/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2009 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/26/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  6
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ke Fang 
05/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi 
05/14/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Venkata Rao Bayana 
05/14/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh 
05/14/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/20/2009 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
05/20/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
