Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2763 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102771 
Project Name: Facilitating Infrastructure Financing 
Task Team Leader: Priya Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 6, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (30%);General energy sector (25%);General transportation 
sector (25%);Capital markets (20%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5,500.00
5,500.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective is to (i) support IIFC in its role to facilitate private participation in infrastructure 
through the provision of long-term financing for PPP projects, and through this (ii) stimulate the 
development of a long-term debt financing market for infrastructure in India.  Over the longer-
term, the project is likely to generate significant outcomes in terms of its contribution towards 
spurring private investment, helping to sustain high growth, and improved service delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The lending instrument to be used for this project is a Financial Intermediary Loan, or “FIL” (as 
per the World Bank Operations Policy directive OP 8.30), using an IBRD line of credit (LOC) of 
US$ 500 million to refinance IIFC’s disbursements for infrastructure projects as per its mandate 
under the GoI Scheme. IIFC will act as the implementing agency. As per the Bank’s guidelines, 
adherence to OP8.30 is required as a minimum condition to proceed – including meeting the 
guidelines on on-lending terms, managing foreign exchange risks, market interest rates for final 
borrowers, etc.  
 
Page  2
Since IIFC has approached other multilateral and bilateral institutions, the Bank is exploring 
‘parallel financing’ arrangements, involving harmonized operational procedures and 
environmental and social safeguards framework among donors to reduce the transaction costs for 
IIFC. Co-financing with other donors is not being considered.  
 
The project would likely include two components: (i) long-term finance to infrastructure 
projects - either through direct lending by IIFC to infrastructure projects along with the ‘lead 
bank’, or through refinancing of infrastructure lending of other financial institutions (FIs); (ii) 
capacity building of IIFC to fulfill its current mandate of long-term debt financing and support to 
IIFC’s staff to build up its capacity in the areas of project management, implementation and 
monitoring specifically for the Bank project. This component would include support for 
strengthening IIFC’s organizational needs in terms of structure, skills, and resources, both to 
fulfill its current role, and future requirements, as IIFC’s mandate evolves.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project locations would be across India. The specific sub-projects under the proposed project 
are currently not known.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
IIFC has been recently established and currently it has no experience in handling environmental 
and social safeguards (E&S) issues. A detailed E&S capacity building plan for IIFC will be 
developed and implemented. This will include, inter alia, the hiring of qualified E&S experts by 
IIFC, who will have to be empowered to make decisions on E&S issues and build their capacity 
to mange the safeguard aspects during appraising and implementation of the sub-projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
IIFC’s operations (sub-projects) relate to financing six major infrastructure sectors, including 
surface and air transport, power, urban, gas pipelines, infrastructure for SEZs, and tourism 
infrastructure. Implementation of projects in the referred sectors is expected to result in 
environmental impacts. Thus, the applicability of the OP 4.01. A comprehensive Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESF) will be prepared to address salient safeguards and 
related risk issues for sub-projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since  II
FC’s operations are in major infrastructure sectors such as transport,power, urban, 
gas pipelines, infrastructure for SEZs, and tourism, there is bound to be land acquisition and 
related impacts. The entitlement framework for the likely impacts associated with land 
acquisition will be developed as part of ESF and sub-project specific Resettlement Action Plans ( 
RAPs) will be developed in advance of  sub-project approvals to mitigate those adverse impacts  
and enable the affected people improve or retain their living standards.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Given the potential for high risk/category “A” type investments (sub-projects) under this 
project, the Bank team will follow-up with the client  in completing the following  tasks by 
QER/in advance of appraisal:  
 
•
The Bank team will provide guidance  to  IIFC and their consultants,  in developing e a 
comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESF) to address salient 
safeguards and related risk issues for sub-projects. The preliminary discussions in this regard  
have been initiated  and  a draft TOR for preparing the ESF  has been provided to IIFC..  The 
Bank team will pursue with IIFC that the ESF, which is being developed with PHRD grant 
funds, will be a corporate framework for IIFC, to be applied to all operations in their 
portfolio, irrespective of source of financing. The ESF will be reviewed and cleared by the 
Bank. The Bank has reached in-principle agreement with other donors (ADB, KfW and 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
JBIC) on the need for adopting a harmonized ESF supporting  all IIFC’s Operations. The 
Bank team in association with IIFC and other donors will hold a dialogue with the 
perspective Lead Banks to make them familiar with the ESF provisions in anticipation of 
their likely borrowings from IIFC. This will enable the Lead Banks to take into account of  
the ESF provisions while appraising the projects.  
 
•
The Bank team will discuss and agree with IIFC that all sub-projects proposedfor 
refinancing with Bank funds will need to be screened for safeguards compliance and related 
risk aspects. This work would be done by the IIFC experts in consultation the Bank 
specialists on the team.  Clearance and identification of any remedial measures needed for 
refinance operations would be made by the Bank on the basis of the task team specialists' 
assessment in consultation with the regional safeguards adviser, as required.  
 
•
IIFC’s E&S experts will carry out an initial screening and provide summaries and an 
initial categorization of all sub-projects proposed for Bank financing to the Task Team. 
These will be reviewed by the team, which will endorse the environmental category in 
consultation with the regional safeguards adviser, as needed.  The task team’s E&S 
specialists will advise IIFC on specifics of environmental and social studies and action plans 
needed to assure compliance.  
 
•
The Bank team will discuss and agree with IIFC  regarding carrying out an  annual 
independent E&S audit of all sub-projects' compliance with the corporate framework.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Priya Basu 
01/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/07/2008 
Comments:  This document incorporates comments received from F. Brusberg, Regional Safeguards 
Advisor 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
 
Comments:   
