Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC2259
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P088520 
Project Name:  Biodiversity Conservation and Rural Livelihoods Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Malcolm A. B. Jansen 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P088598 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Other social services 
(30%);Sub-national government administration (20%);Central government administration 
(10%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (33%);Participation and civic engagement (33%);Environmental 
policies and institutions (17%);Rural policies and institutions (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.36 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.14 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.59 
 Local 
Communities 
0.93
7.52 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to develop new models of conservation at the 
landscape scale through enhanced capacity and institution building for mainstreaming 
biodiversity conservation outcomes   
 
3. Project Description 
Overview:    
The Project supports four complementary components that are aimed at 
strengthening conservation and improving local livelihoods across a range of globally 
and nationally important landscapes under different management regimes and its 
replication elsewhere in the country.  
 
Component One:  Demonstration of Landscape Conservation Approaches in selected 
pilot sites:  This component will focus on developing and testing tools and techniques and 
enhancing knowledge and skills for improving biodiversity conservation and rural 
Page  2
livelihood outcomes in two demonstration landscapes (Little Rann of Kutch in Gujarat 
and Askote in Uttarakhand). These landscapes include protected areas, biological 
corridors and high value conservation sites in production landscapes.  As part of the 
demonstration and learning effort, this  component will support (i) Participatory 
ecological and social mapping to identify areas of high biodiversity value and resource 
dependencies and threats in order to define targeted interventions for improving 
conservation outcomes and community livelihoods in the landscapes; (ii) Improved 
management of biodiversity rich areas within and outside the protected areas in the 
landscape; (iii)  Mainstreaming of biodiversity considerations in production areas within 
the landscapes; and (iv) Development and implementation of livelihood strategies to 
enhance local community benefits from sustainable management of natural resources 
linked to conservation.  
 
Component Two: Strengthening Knowledge Management and National Capacity for 
Landscape Conservation: This component will support improved knowledge and capacity 
development building on learning and experience from the two demonstration landscapes 
(Component 1) and other local conservation models (including the previously funded 
GEF/IDA Ecodevelopment project). This component will support: (i) Field Learning 
Centres at Periyar (Kerala), Kalakad (Tamil Nadu) and Gir (Gujarat) to provide hands-on 
training through cross visits, exchange assignments, work experience and training 
sessions and distillation of conservation best practice; and (ii) National capacity building 
program through the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) to facilitate the promotion of 
landscape conservation approaches nationwide.  
 
Component Three:   Scaling Up and Replication of Successful Models of Conservation 
in Additional Landscape Sites:  This component would support the further testing and 
replication of landscape conservation approaches to two additional high biodiversity 
landscapes from the third year onwards with project financing.  The extension of the 
landscape approach to these two additional landscapes will build on, and expand 
experiences derived from the two demonstration landscapes (Component 1).  The two 
additional sites will be selected to demonstrate specific aspects of landscape 
conservation.  It is also envisaged that the training and skills development in Component 
2
could likely encourage the uptake of landscape level planning and management at 
additional capacitated sites with GoI or other non-project sources of funding.  
 
Component Four:   National Coordination for Landscape Conservation:  This 
component will support coordination for landscape conservation at the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (MoEF). Activities to be financed include: establishment of 
Management Information System (MIS) for project and landscape monitoring, impact 
evaluation, and limited operational and technical support to enable MOEF to coordinate 
and administer the implementation of project activities and facilitate replication 
elsewhere in India.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in two landscape sites in different bio-geographic zones 
of the country. Each landscape unit contains a mosaic of land uses, but typically would 
include one biodiversity rich protected area or critical conservation areas that are 
interspersed with areas of production such as reserved and production forests, agricultural 
lands and human settlements, and other forms of land use. Together these mosaics form 
viable ecological, socio-economic and administrative landscape units. The two landscape 
sites are: (i) Rann of Kutchchh (Wild Ass Sanctuary) in Gujarat; and (ii) Askote Wildlife 
Sanctuary in Uttarakhand. These landscapes collectively include two Protected Areas. In 
addition to biological and cultural diversity, each landscape has different management 
challenges and opportunities. In year 3 the project will be extended to two additional 
landscapes, selected on the basis of criteria described above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project investments are likely to have a beneficial impact on biodiversity and natural 
resource conservation. Some activities may potentially have limited adverse impacts on 
the environment but these could be easily mitigated and in some cases reversed.  An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed that would 
facilitate identifying site-specific adverse environmental impacts and developing 
appropriate mitigation measures to address them.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The basic premise of the project is that sustainable improvement in livelihood 
opportunities for the poor people living in and around protected areas leads to sustainable 
improvement in their ability to conserve natural resources. The overall impact of the 
Page  4
project therefore would be positive both on the local communities and the selected 
landscapes. To ensure this, a detailed Social and Environmental Assessment of the 
existing situation of a sample section of all the communities living in each of the project 
landscapes has been carried out. The results of which have provided the basis for project 
design and implementation through consultations and active involvement of all sections 
of the local community and other stakeholders in each of the landscapes. Indigenous 
knowledge on sustainable community management of natural resources will be utilized at 
each site to the best possible extent as a way of ensuring sustainable positive impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
It was considered that the regular approach of providing management support to the 
protected areas may be taken up, but this was rejected, as such approaches elsewhere 
have not shown desired results. The pressures on the protected areas continue to 
substantially undermine the conservation values of these ecosystems and their 
biodiversity. Therefore, the alternative approach of taking up the larger landscape and 
bringing together all relevant stakeholders was preferred. This approach is unlikely to 
result in any significant adverse impacts. The process of project design and 
implementation will be driven by close consultation with all sections of the local 
communities and other stakeholders and is therefore expected to result in positive 
impacts. To the extent that some limitations on the use of resources within PAs (to a 
small extent) becomes inevitable, the process of planning for this will be driven by 
community level consultations who would be provided choices to address impacts related 
to access to resources. The project is based on the premise that only approaches that 
actively let local communities take the driver#s seat in evolving innovative approaches to 
livelihood improvement that enables conservation are likely to be sustainable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
At the central level, the borrower (NTCA) has completed an Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) that has mapped the stakeholders and their relationships with and 
within the landscapes. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
has been developed and disclosed in-country, as part of the ESA that provides guidance 
on adequately mitigating any potential adverse impact from investments made under the 
project. The ESMF also provides guidance for undertaking additional or more detailed 
social and enviornmental assessments of specific investments, if required.  
 
The borrower is familiar with safeguards requirement based on its experience of 
implementing an earlier bank financed project (India Ecodevelopment Project). In 
accordance with OP.4.10, the borrower has developed a participatory process framework 
that would be applied across all participating communities (including indigenous and 
vulnerable groups) to ensure free, prior and informed consultation leading to broad based 
support for community and landscape based interventions. The application of the process 
framework to all groups will preclude any difficulties that could otherwise arise between 
non-indigenous and indigenous groups in the landscape  
 
Page  5
The ESMF would be implemented by involving the National, State and Landscape level 
institutions and beneficiaries. At each of the participating landscape sites, landscape 
societies have been esatbalished.  these societies will hire the services of Ecologist and 
Sociologist who would primarily be responsible to ensure compliance with the ESMF at 
the landscape level. In addition two Environment Officers would be nominated at the 
field level (community groups/VFCs/JFMCs etc) to assist the Ecologist in routine 
monitoring and implementing the ESMF.  
 
To ensure that environmental and social safeguard issues are not only addressed 
satisfactorily but the positive outcomes of the project investments are also captured and 
maximized, spearhead teams will be constituted for each landscape that will include, 
among others, social mobilizers. All the contracted staff will undergo training and 
capacity building to advance their technical capacities for dealing with safeguard issues 
in bank supported operations. These experts will ensure that livelihoods related impacts 
that form part of safeguards issues are adequately addressed during microplan preparation 
and implementation.  
 
The project agency is sensitized to the high level of importance attached to addressing 
provisions of implementing each of Bank safeguard policies that are triggered and has 
committed to ensuring adequate capacity building inputs amongst officers and staff at all 
levels of implementation to follow these policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
detailed stakeholder analysis has been carried out at the two sites and the specific 
stakeholders with their interests identified. In Askote landscape in Uttarakhand there is a 
mix of indigenous and non-indigenous communities. There are four different sects of 
indigenous communities i.e. Bhutia-Buians or the transhumant populations, the Bhutia-
Darmas or the high altitude graziers, Chaudans who help manage the Kailash pilgrimage 
and the Thakurs or the ex-landlords offer different opportunities for participatory 
approaches to conservation depending on the activities they are involved with.  In the 
Rann of Kutchch landscape in Gujarat, the unorganized salt farmers (Agarias) are the 
most socio-economically disadvantaged section of the local communities and their 
relationship with other communities in the area is being studied. Based on the 
information gathered from the Social Assessment and consultation with all local 
stakeholders the project design ensures adequate opportunity for all sections of the 
community to actively participate and benefit from the interventions undertaken. The 
Bank's safeguard policies applicable to this project including in particular OP 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples whas been discussed amongst the participating communities 
including the provisions and entitlements contained therein.  
 
Consultations with the local communities and other stakeholders at the two participating 
landscapes has confirmed a broad level of community support for addressing livelihood 
concerns of the vulnerable sections of the community as a way of enabling them to 
contribute to conservation of local  biodiversity. Local communities, including 
indigenous and vulnerable people will  continue to inform the design and implementation 
Page  6
of project interventions. The process framework for free, prior and informed consultation 
with local communities, including indigenous and vulnerable people and will take into 
account all of their concerns. The application of the process framework will enable  broad 
based community support with all stakeholders, including the indigenous and vulnerable 
groups and would provide the basic instrument for continuing consultations right through 
the implementation phase of the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The pest management plan is part of the EA/ESMP and no separate PMP plan has been 
prepared.  
 
The IPPF was disclosed in-country as part of the ESMF, and will now be also disclosed 
as a stand alone document as well, both at infoshop and in-country   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Malcolm A. B. Jansen 
06/25/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anupam Joshi 
06/21/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Varun Singh 
06/21/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan 
06/22/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/14/2009 
Comments:  Cleared; formal clearance memo to be issued. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Parmesh Shah 
07/16/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
