Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
Date prepared/updated: 04/21/2009   
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P112844 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Policy and Institutional Reform for Mainstreaming and Upscaling Sustainable 
Land and Ecosystem Management in India (Medium Size GEF Project) 
Task Team Leader: 
 
Yuka Makino/Adriana J Damianova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: NA 
Managing Unit:  SASDI 
Lending Instrument:  SIL 
Sector:  Agriculture Extension and Research; Sub-National Govt. Admin; Gen Agriculture, 
Fishing and forestry sector 
Theme: Environment policies and institutions; Rural policies and institutions; Land 
Administration and management; Other Environment & Natural resources management 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 981,000 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
Other financing amounts by source: GOI 
 
Environmental Category: C 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ X] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises 
and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X ] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
The goal of the Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management Country Partnership Program 
(SLEM CPP) is to ensure realization of a holistic approach to sustainable land and ecosystem 
management throughout India. The proposed MSP will enhance the institutional and policy 
framework for harmonization, coordination and monitoring of interventions in agricultural and 
natural resources management strategies. The aim is to promote sustainable land management 
and enhance agricultural productivity while minimizing environmental impacts. 
 
3. Project Description: 
 
The Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management Country Partnership Program (SLEM CPP) 
is an umbrella project which comprises several component projects led by three GEF 
Implementing Agencies (IA): the World Bank, UNDP and FAO. The proposed MSP Policy and 
Institutional Reform for Mainstreaming and Upscaling Sustainable Land and Ecosystem 
48273
Page  2
2
Management project is designed to strengthen the institutional and management functions of the 
Indian institutions responsible for the SLEM CPP, necessary to ensure effective mainstreaming 
of SLEM policies, monitoring and evaluation of the outcomes of SLEM partnership activities as 
well as to streamline the partnership coordination of GOI agencies and stakeholders. Each of the 
three IA organizations leads projects funded under CPP which contribute to the partnership 
objective.  The CPP will pursue a multi-sectoral approach with involvement of several ministries 
and state departments as well as government and non-government partners. The overall program 
objectives could be only achieved if a strong coordination function is in place with a 
responsibility for ensuring that the available resources (GEF and non-GEF resources) are 
invested in activities that bring an added value to achieving the global environmental benefits.  
 
The MOEF being the nodal Government agency for the SLEM CPP through a Technical 
Facilitation Organization (TFO) has put in place a robust implementation, monitoring and 
oversight framework for the program. The Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education 
(ICFRE), Dehradun, an autonomous society, under the MoEF is
 
the
 
TFO selected for the 
implementation of the MSP. The activities to be undertaken by the TFO will include 
coordination, planning, cooperation, outreach, and implementation and M&E functions of the 
program (each project under the program will have its own dedicated M & E function). The 
proposed implementation arrangements are designed to ensure that the lessons learnt from these 
projects are mainstreamed into institutional strategies and scaled up into land management 
policy.  
 
The responsibility of the Technical Facilitation Organization (TFO) is to support the realization 
of the vision at national and state levels. The TFO will ensure the collection of knowledge and 
learning of experiences from all of India and on that basis formulate recommendations for 
policy, strategy and approaches for sustainable land and ecosystem management for each sector. 
The TFO will also disseminate the learning to other agencies including the civil society in order 
for them to benefit from the knowledge and incorporate them into their programs. The TFO will 
derive lessons learnt from the projects participating in SLEM and also provides them with 
technical backstopping when requested. 
 
The MSP will have three blocks of activities: 
 
(1) Institutional policy and mainstreaming
:
This will include services for developing 
analytical baselines for harmonization of SLEM policy, and technical instruments to monitor the 
progress of mainstreaming SLEM into policy. It will also support an inter-institutional 
mechanism for SLEM policy coordination with MoA, MRD, MoEF and other key GoI agencies. 
 
(2) Outreach and knowledge management for scaling up of sustainable land management 
solutions
:
This will include inventorying of technical solutions and applicable practices for 
SLEM and establishing a database which will be accessible to sectoral organizations and public. 
The technical base will be used for training and outreach activities. Learning and experiences in 
the social dimensions of sustainable land degradation will also be gathered and applied to the 
development of state and national policy, strategy and approaches. Outreach activities will be 
conducted to include NGOs and multilateral agencies to participate in the program. 
 
Page  3
3
(3) Program management and monitoring and evaluation: 
An SLEM-CPP Operational 
manual, M&E and reporting system to monitor global, state, and local level parameters of SLEM 
programmatic outcomes will be developed as priority during year one.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
The implementation of the project will be the responsibility of MOEF and will housed in the 
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun. 
 
This project focus is on institutional establishment for coordination of the program and 
foundations of policy improvements and will not be implementing any physical activities. 
Therefore, it will not have any significant environmental or social impacts. Each of the 
individual GEF projects under the partnership will be coordinated by the sectoral implementing 
agency and will project specific environmental and social assessments based on the safeguards 
rating assigned to the project. The MSP will not support any physical interventions or inputs 
related to field activities that may affect people, ecosystems, built or non-built environment and 
thus require specific environmental and social management frameworks. Therefore the proposed 
safeguards category for the Policy and Institutional Reform for Mainstreaming and Upscaling 
Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management (MSP) 
is “C”. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Yuka Makino (SASDI) Natural Resources Management Specialist 
Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh (SASDI) Social Development Specialist 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
N/A 
 
Page  4
4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
N/A 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
The Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) is the nodal point of this project and is 
responsible for the preparation, and leading the implementation of Government policies related 
to sustainable land management, biodiversity conservation and climate change. The MoEF has 
designated the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun as the 
Technical Facilitation Organization for coordinating, planning, cooperation, outreach, and 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Country 
Partnership Program (SLEM-CPP). The organization is lead Indian organization in 
environmental conservation, applied research covering various aspects of climate change, 
biological diversity, combating desertification and sustainable management of natural resources. 
Therefore the ICRFE’s capacity is deemed appropriate to manage the project and program 
aspects related to global and local ecological concerns.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
This project is a partnership program and the key stakeholders are the government and donor 
organizations undertaking projects related to land degradation and sustainable development. 
Currently confirmed partners are UNDP, FAO and the World Bank. The projects that will be 
monitored under this program are: UNDP – “Sustainable Land Management in Shifting 
Cultivation Areas of Nagaland for Ecological” and “Livelihood Security and Integrated Land 
Use Management to Combat Land Degradation in Madhya Pradesh”; FAO – “Reversing 
environmental degradation through the propagation of Sustainable Land Management among 
resource poor communities in Southern India: A hydrological unit pilot project approach”; and 
the World Bank – “Sustainable Rural Livelihood Security through Innovations in Land 
Management’ and “Ecosystem Management for Improved Livelihoods in Uttarakhand 
Watershed Sector”. 
 
The individual parent projects supported under the SLEM CPP and financed by the World Bank  
have carried out environmental and social due diligence and have prepared the necessary 
Environmental and Social Assessments including consultations and disclosure of safeguard 
policies in their specific regions:  
 
Page  5
5
·
National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) 
–
“in-country” disclosure 12/01/05 and 
submission to Infoshop – 12/12/05. 
·
Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development Project (UDWDP) - “in-country” 
disclosure 01/28/04 and submission to Infoshop – 02/12/04. 
 
For the purposes of additional financing to above parent projects the existing ESMFs will be 
used as needed.  
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:                              
N/A
 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 
N/A
 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
 
N/A
 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Pest Management Plan:                                                                                             
N/A
 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Page  6
6
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Page  7
7
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
 
Page  8
8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Yuka Makino/Adriana Damianova
 
April 20, 2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Yuka Makino 
April 20, 2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh 
March 31, 2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Sanjay Srivastava 
April 14, 2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Karin Kemper 
April 20, 2009 
Comments:   
Page  9
9
