Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/22/2009 
Report No.:  AC3884
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P102331 
Project Name:  Madhya Pradesh - District Poverty Initiatives Project II (MP-DPIP II) 
Task Team Leader:  Nathan M. Belete 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (30%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
2. 
The development objective for the proposed project would be to improve the 
capacity and opportunities for the targeted rural poor to achieve sustainable livelihoods. 
This will be achieved by enhanced participation by the rural poor in economic activities, 
skill enhancement for taking-up higher value employment, and increased income among 
project target households through assets and market linkages. The key outcome indicators 
to assess achievement of the PDO will be the following:  
 
a) 
at least  60% of the graded  SHG members report a minimum of 20% increase in 
household income (at constant prices); and  
 
b)
at least 60% of the graded SHGs are viable and sustainable   
 
3. Project Description 
3. 
Approach: The proposed project will continue with the same proven 
methodology, while keeping in mind the specific context and needs of Madhya Pradesh 
(MP) and the lessons of the first MP-DPIP and other livelihood projects around India.To 
Page  2
ensure effective and efficient design and project implementation arrangements, the 
proposed project will be prepared based on the following key principles:  
 
a)  
replicate the key design features of the MP-DPIP;  
 
b)
identify the rural poor and mobilize them into community groups (i.e. SHGs);  
 
c)  
provide initial capital to community groups to leverage asset financing from the 
commercial banks, government, and the private sector; and  
 
d)
provide critical linkages to the poor to establish partnerships with the private 
sector.  
 
4. 
Targeting:  The project proposes to target beneficiaries based on the MP-
DPIP’s 
wealth-ranking methodology for further inclusion in the official Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) classification of the GoMP. Identification of the project beneficiaries would be 
based on the MP-DPIP’s participatory wealth ranking methodology and the number of 
districts targeted for intervention. This will ensure a uniform, transparent and consistent 
approach to beneficiary identification.  
 
5. 
Scale: The project will continue to be implemented in the 14 districts as per the 
first phase, however, a saturation approach will be undertaken during the second phase to 
extend the project activities to all the villages in the chosen 14 districts. The villages 
supported under the first phase (2,900) will also be included in the second phase and the 
estimated number of total beneficiary households is 1.5 million.  
 
6. 
Project Components: The project will comprise the following four components: i) 
Social Empowerment and Institution Building; ii) Livelihoods Investment Support; iii) 
Employment Promotion Support; and iv) Project Implementation Support.The key 
features of each component are provided below (see Annex 4 for more details):  
 
7. 
Component 1: Social Empowerment and Institution Building (US$25.27 million): 
The objective of this component is to empower the poor by helping to organize 
themselves into SHGs and federate into higher levels of institutions such as Village 
Development Committees (VDCs), cluster-level organizations and producer collectives.  
In addition, it will promote the development of the poor’s capacity and skills based on the 
principles of self-help to enable them to initiate common livelihoods activities.  The 
component will consist of the following two sub-components: (i) Support to Project 
Facilitation Teams (PFTs) and (ii) Community Mobilization and Institution Building.  
 
8. 
Component 2:  Livelihoods Investment Support (US$135.40 million): The 
objective of this component is to develop the capacity of SHGs to start livelihoods 
initiatives, and to strengthen their business operations through producer based 
federations, companies, and cooperatives.  Mechanisms to identify and support 
innovative approaches to help the rural poor to organize themselves around livelihood 
based businesses will also be supported in this component. In addition, the component 
will facilitate and promote People-Private sector Partnerships (PPP) through facilitating 
linkages with commercial banks and the private business sector.  This component has 
four sub-components: (i) Rural Productivity Development; (ii) Value Chain 
Page  3
Development; (iii) Innovation Support Fund; and (iv) Public-Private Partnership 
Development.  
 
9. 
Component 3:  Employment Promotion Support (US$14.58 million): The 
objective of this component is to enable the project beneficiaries to capture new 
employment opportunities arising out of the overall growth of the Indian economy 
through the establishment of a structured mechanism for skill development and job 
creation.  It will consist of the following three sub-components: (i) Employment 
Facilitation Centres (EFCs); (ii) Skill Training and Placement; and (iii) Placement 
Facilitation Services.  
 
10. 
Component 4:  Project Implementation Support (US$5.40 million): The 
component will facilitate various governance, implementation, coordination, learning and 
quality enhancement efforts in the project. It will consist of the following four sub-
components: (i) Governance Management; (ii) Project Management; (iii) Monitoring and 
Evaluation; and (iv) Technical Assistance.   
 
Implementation Arrangements  
 
11.
The Madhya Pradesh Society for Poverty Alleviation Initiatives (MP-SPAI), a 
Society registered under the MP Society Registration Act of 1973 by the GoMP for the 
implementation of the first phase project, will continue to be the apex body responsible 
for coordinating and implementing the MP-DPIPII at the state level. The State Project 
Support Unit (SPSU), established within the Madhya Pradesh Society for Poverty 
Alleviation Initiatives (MP-SPAI), will have the overall responsibility for management 
and implementation of the project.  
 
12. 
In each project District, a District Project Support Unit (DPSU) will be 
responsible for the implementation of the project and at the sub-district level the primary 
institutional arrangement will be the Project Facilitation Teams (PFTs).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project proposes to cover 14 districts of the state of Madhya Pradesh. The salient 
features of the project area relevant to the safeguard analysis:  
 
•
6
of
the project districts (Chhatarpur, Guna, Panna, Shivpuri, Sidhi, Tikamgarh) 
have more than 10% of their area under fallow land and cultivable wasteland.  
 
•
In nearly all the project districts, the net irrigated area is higher than the state 
average of 30%.  
 
•
Five districts (Shajapur, Narsinghpur, Sidhi, Tikamgarh and Shivpuri) have 
rainfall below 800 mm.  
 
•
The ground water development in most of the project area is above the state 
average of 48%.  
 
•
One project district – Shajapur – has blocks with semi-critical, critical or over-
exploited groundwater status. The rest of the blocks are classified as safe with 
exploitation below 70%.  
Page  4
•
In terms of water quality, the ground water in two of the project districts –Guna 
and Vidisha – has high flouride levels. High levels of salinity is found inthe ground water 
in the project districts of Shajapur and Guna.  
 
•
The 14 districts of MPDPIP II together account for 33% of the state's forests.  
 
•
The project area has 3 National Parks and 13 Wildlife Sanctuaries.  
 
•
Over 23% of the state's population is tribal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI) 
Ms Kalyani Kandula (SASDI) 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A.  
Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
16.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):  The types of community-based 
investments in MP-DPIP II would be the same as those in MP-DPIP. However, the 
projects differ in two ways: First, the scale of the MP-DPIP II is larger within the same 
14 districts. Second, the types of sub-projects that will be implemented through it range 
from SHG level activities to activities at larger levels of operation (federations of SHGs 
that will take up value chain investments). An Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF) for the MP-DPIP II would be based on the EMF established and applied in MP-
DPIP. Thus, development of the EA/EMF for MP-DPIP II would be confined to 
incremental work to strengthen the existing environmental toolkit by taking into account: 
(i) the specific objectives and orientation of MP-DPIP II including institutional 
mechanism (ii) available information as part of the existing EA and EMF; and (iii) 
findings and recommendations of the recently concluded environmental audit of MP-
DPIP.  
 
17. 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Six of the 14 project districts (Damoh, Panna, Sidhi, 
Raisen, Sagar, Narsinghpur) have more than 25% of their area under forest cover. Project 
Page  5
activities are not expected to involve significant conversion or degradation of critical 
forest areas. However, some degradation of forests and protected areas may occur due to 
unsustainable extraction of non-timber forest produce, unregulated open grazing of 
livestock, construction activity, and therefore the safeguard policy has been triggered. 
The Environment Management Framework includes a number of acceptable mitigation 
measures such as not supporting activities that are not permissible in forests as per the 
national and state regulatory framework for forests, ensuring that requisite permissions 
are taken for proposed livelihood activities, ensuring sustainable use of forest resources 
(capacity building, regulations, etc.).  
 
18. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):  The 14 project districts are home to 16 protected 
areas including 3 National Parks and 13 Wildlife Sanctuaries (of the 9 national parks and 
25 wildlife sanctuaries in the state). Project activities are not expected to involve 
significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. However to ensure 
avoidance of any degradation in the state’s prime natural habitats the safeguard policy 
has been triggered. The Environment Management Framework includes a variety of 
acceptable mitigation measures such as not supporting activities that are not permissible 
in protected areas as per the country’s regulations, ensuring that requisite permissions are 
taken for proposed livelihood activities undertaken in the allowable vicinity of these 
protected areas, ensuring sustainable use of natural resources (capacity building, 
regulations, etc.).  
 
19. 
Pest Management (OP 4.09):  The MP-DPIP II will focus strongly on producer 
organizations that would have a role in collective procurement and distribution of 
chemical pesticides. It is thus important that the EMF address this safeguard and 
therefore the policy has been triggered.  
 
20. 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Social Assessment: The project will reach 
out to approximately 11.5% of the tribal population out of the total population in the 14 
districts, thus triggering the OP 4.10. An intensive sample-based Social Assessment has 
been conducted under the project, which included social, stakeholders and institutional 
reviews and analyses. The findings of the Social assessment indicate that while the 
proposed project interventions are expected to result in overall social empowerment and 
strengthening of the public institutions in the project districts.  Potential adverse impacts 
could occur if the interventions are not properly implemented and monitored. The 
Scheduled Tribes (STs) and Scheduled Castes (SCs) live in very difficult and challenging 
socio-economic and political environment and thus the results of the interventions may 
vary across the villages, blocks and the districts. The Social Assessment has also 
prescribed steps that would be appropriately incorporated in the Project Implementation 
Plan to respond specifically to such local contexts and ensure better results. The Social 
Assessment has identified ‘social exclusion’ of the poor people belonging to the STs and 
the SCs as the most significant social issue prevalent in the project districts.  
 
21. 
The central social issue of ‘exclusion’ would be addressed through social 
empowerment and institution building (and strengthening) at the grassroots level and 
above. For doing these, the project will build capacities of the DPMUs and the PFTs 
Page  6
through hiring skilled human resources and providing need based trainings to them. The 
core interventions at the SHG level 
–
in forming and/or strengthening them would have 
its impact on overall well being of the members as well as others in their families and the 
households.  
 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
22. 
Environment: Trading in non-timber forest produce, manufacture of bamboo 
artifacts, eco-tourism, etc., are some of the CIG activities supported in the MP-DPIP. 
Such activities involving extraction of resources from forests and natural habitats by local 
community may feature in the MP-DPIP II districts as well. However, these activities 
will be undertaken by local community institutions (SHGs) and do not involve significant 
conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or critical natural habitats. Other related 
issues and impacts are associated with: i) unplanned use of chemical fertilizers and 
increased use of hazardous chemical pesticides leading to soil degradation, pollution and 
impact on human and environmental health; ii) promoting tubewell irrigation may lead to 
overexploitation of groundwater in semi-critical, critical and overexploited basins; iii) 
unregulated open grazing may lead to land degradation; and iv) accumulation of adverse 
individual impacts of several small livelihood activities on the local natural resources 
which could be significant.  
 
23. 
Social: As no land will be acquired for any project purpose, voluntarily or 
involuntarily, and hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. The project will reach out to 
approximately 11.5% of the tribal population out of the total population in the 14 
districts, thus triggering the OP 4.10. The tribal population in the 14 project districts is 
very scattered and excluding the district of Sidhi, the programs and special schemes 
under the Tribal Sub-Plan are not operational in the other 13 project districts. The project, 
through Social Assessment conducted through comprehensive consultations and 
participatory processes, has developed Tribal Development Plan along with the Tribal 
Development Planning Framework. The project has also developed Gender Action Plan 
to respond to the recommendations of the Social Assessment and consultations with the 
key stakeholders.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
24. 
Environment: No long term negative impacts on environment aspects are likely to 
occur as a result of the program interventions.   
 
25. 
Social: No adverse / negative impacts on the social side are likely to occur as a 
result of the program interventions. This is based on the fact that the project is being 
initiated in the same 14 districts though with scaled up in terms of coverage of villages. 
The DPIP I promoted and strengthened participatory processes while pursuing its 
activities and these have been well documented. The positive impacts are likely to occur 
in the areas of local level human and inclusive institutional development, including 
strengthening of Gram Panchayats, and improved economic and social well being.   
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
26. 
Environment: Several mitigation alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts are proposed in the EMF such as:  
 
(a) 
Emphasizing adherence to country systems (national and state forest legislation) 
that are known to be comprehensive and capacity building of local community 
institutions for sustainable management of the resource.  
 
(b) 
Not supporting activities that are not permissible in forests and in protected areas, 
ensuring that requisite permissions are taken for proposed livelihood activities, ensuring 
sustainable use of forest resources (capacity building, regulations, etc.).  
 
(c) 
There may be poor compliance with environmental safeguard requirements. 
Mitigation measures include clear institutional arrangements and capacity building at all 
levels for project staff and community institutions.  
 
(d) 
Technical support for fertilizer planning and integrated pest management with 
safer pesticides. Technical Environmental Guidelines to cover those aspects that are 
incremental to what the project supports at the lower-level organizations. For instance, to 
the extent that the existing EA/EMF already covered the application of pesticides by 
CIGs, the additional EA/EMF related work that would be required would be associated 
with the activities that a higher level organization could be engaged in (i.e. procurement 
of pesticides).  
 
(e) 
Not supporting irrigation tubewells in critical and overexploited basins, ensuring 
that requisite permissions are taken for digging irrigation tubewells in semi-critical basins 
and promoting adoption of conservation measures (maintaining safe distance between 
wells, rain water harvesting, efficient irrigation, etc.).  
 
(f) 
Ensuring that livestock population is within carrying capacity of the village 
grazing resources, rotational grazing, pasture development, fodder cultivation, stall 
feeding, etc.  
 
(g) 
Assessment of cumulative impacts needs to be done at the village level and the 
identified mitigation measures implemented.  
 
27. 
From the above set of comprehensive alternatives given in the EA/EMF, 
alternatives will be appropriately selected for the subproject investments by the Self Help 
Groups or Producer Organizations in the Livelihood Action Plans, according to their 
specific needs, demand and geographical situation.  
 
28. 
Social:  It is being recognized that establishing and strengthening the SHGs, 
federating them and establish linkages with the financial institutions and the markets to 
ensure sustainable livelihood 
–
the core objective of the project will be a challenging task 
not only for the government (SPMU) but also for all other key stakeholders including the 
communities. To translate the positive benefits into reality, the project has envisioned 
activities focused upon community mobilization and development support as well as 
human and institutional development efforts. These will be complemented with change 
management initiatives as well.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
29. 
Environment:  In order to ensure that the environment is not compromised in the 
process of livelihood generation and to contribute to the ecological sustainability of the 
supported livelihoods, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been 
developed for the project. The framework approach has been adopted so that the 
environmental aspects can be addressed with clarity and simplicity for the range of 
livelihood activities that could be potentially proposed by the communities and supported 
by the DPIP II.  
 
30. 
Environmental Management Framework: Environmental assessment is viewed as 
an integral part of the appraisal process of both the Self Help Group (SHG) Livelihood 
Plans and the Producer Organization (PO) Business Plans. All SHG Livelihood Plans and 
PO Business Plans first go through a Screening process. The screening involves (a) 
checking that the activity is permissible (as per the legal and regulatory requirements of 
the project) and, (b) determining the level of environmental assessment that the SHG 
Livelihood Plan or PO Business Plan requires based on the level of expected impacts. 
SHG Livelihood Plans would be classified as either 'low' category (basic environmental 
assessment required) or 'medium' category (detailed environmental assessment required). 
It is expected that most SHG Livelihood Plans would be in the 'low' category. PO 
Business Plans would be classified as either 'medium' category (detailed environmental 
assessment required) or 'high' category (detailed environmental assessment by an external 
technical agency required). It is expected that most PO Business Plans would be in the 
'medium' category. The EMF provides for a Screening Tool and detailed sector-specific 
Technical Environmental Guidelines (TEGs) to aid in the assessment of SHG Livelihood 
Plans (for both 'low' and 'medium' categories) and PO Business Plans (for the 'medium' 
category). The assessment process ensures that appropriate mitigation measures are 
identified and are integrated in the design and implementation plans of both the SHG 
Livelihood Plans and the PO Business Plans.  
 
31. 
Environmental supervision: A sample of 10% of VDCs and 100% of POs will be 
visited at six-monthly intervals by a team from the District Project Support Unit (DPSU) 
(for supervision of both VDCs and POs) and from the State Project Support Unit (SPSU) 
(for supervision of POs) to check if all safeguard requirements are met and to identify 
any issues that need to be addressed. The EMF includes roles and responsibilities at state, 
district, sub-district and village levels for EMF implementation, sampling procedure, 
guidelines for conducting the supervision, format of the supervision report and 
environmental performance indicators that have been integrated with the overall project 
indicators for monitoring and evaluation.  
 
32. 
Environmental monitoring: Once every year, the State Project Support Unit 
(SPSU) will prepare a report of the environmental situation in the state including data and 
analysis of relevant parameters such as status of groundwater basins as well as a listing of 
relevant new legislation and regulations that have a bearing on the environmental 
performance of the project. The EMF will be suitably revised annually on the basis of this 
document by the SPSU.  
Page  9
33. 
Environmental audit: An external agency will be appointed by the SPMU to 
undertake an independent audit of the environmental performance of the project. Two 
such audits will be conducted during the project duration. In addition, the SPMU will 
conduct a process review of the environment management framework at the end of the 
first year of the project.  The EMF presents details of sampling and a list of performance 
indicators to be used in the audit.  
 
34. 
Social.  Tribal Development Plan: Furthermore, based on the Social Assessment 
and learning from the DPIP I, the project has evolved a comprehensive Tribal 
Development Plan to achieve its objective on inclusion of the STs in project processes 
and activities as stakeholders, mainly though the processes of social empowerment and 
institution building.  
 
35. 
Key elements of the Tribal Development Plan: In villages with populations from 
multiple social groups, the project will create provisions for guaranteed participation of 
members/representatives from the SCs and STs and women. This will also help in 
reducing possibilities of  elite capture’ of the public institutions. The project will develop 
specific strategy based on the information from the base line survey in the project 
districts.  
 
36. 
The project shall be facilitating identification of activities/sectors where tribal 
communities would be able to participate effectively, especially relating to land and 
forest resource based options.  
 
37. 
The project will have a phase wise start-up of the livelihoods related investments 
and for this it would identify prioritize and focus , based on the base line survey, the most 
needy and vulnerable groups among the SCs and the STs.  
 
38. 
Supervision: A sample of 10% of VDCs and 100% of POs, as in case of 
environment supervision (refer point 25) will be visited at six-monthly intervals by a 
team from the District Project Support Unit (DPSU) (for supervision of both VDCs and 
POs) and from the State Project Support Unit (SPSU) (for supervision of POs) to check if 
all social safeguard requirements are met and to identify any issues that need to be 
addressed. The Tribal Development Plan includes roles and responsibilities at state, 
district, sub-district and village levels for their implementation and guidelines for 
monitoring performance indicators have been integrated with the overall project 
indicators for monitoring and evaluation.  
 
39. 
The implementation, monitoring and success of the Tribal Development Plan will 
be facilitated and anchored by the Social Empowerment Coordinator at the SPMU. All 
PFT members working in the areas with more than 10% tribal population will be 
sensitized and provided with special need based training for skill building to enable them 
to work with the tribal communities with appropriate sensitivity and responsiveness.  
 
Page  10
40. 
Gender Action Plan: Furthermore, based on the Social Assessment and learning 
from the DPIP I, the project has evolved a comprehensive Gender Action Plan to achieve 
its objective on inclusion of the women mainly though the processes of social 
empowerment and institution building.  
 
41. 
The Key elements of the Gender Action Plan: The Social Assessment has 
highlighted prevalence of gender based exclusion and marginalization in all communities, 
including the SCs and the STs. Among all social groups, women are subjugated, 
marginalized and excluded from access to basic services, have extremely restrictive 
mobility and most often their labor and hard work has no economic value. There is 
distinct and significant gap between men and women in terms of human development 
indicators, viz., literacy, education, and health and nutrition. The women from the SCs 
and the STs are most excluded and marginalized. The state of Madhya Pradesh shows up 
poorly on these indicators when compared with the national averages.  
 
42. 
The project will have two pronged strategy to work for overall empowerment of 
women in its area. One would be to strengthen and bring in the required skill within the 
project team with focus at the DPMUs and the PFTs levels. Each DPMU will have a 
Gender Coordinator to facilitate and support gender focused activities and also monitors 
the progress being made by the interventions. The PFTs, on the other hand, will be 
capacitated to facilitate and create enabling environment that would ensure better results 
for activities on the ground. The project shall be making efforts to recruit and have more 
number of women staff in its DPMUs and the PFTs.  
 
43. 
The project, based on the recommendation of the Social Assessment, shall be 
focusing on three core areas for women’s empowerment – (a) targeting strategy and 
ensuring reach & coverage; (b) women’s access and control over assets; and, (c) 
institutional support for enhanced participation in public decision making bodies, 
including the Gram Sabhas and the Panchayats.  
 
44. 
Supervision: A sample of 10% of VDCs and 25% of POs will be visited at six-
monthly intervals by a team from the District Project Support Unit (DPSU) (for 
supervision of both VDCs and POs) and from the State Project Support Unit (SPSU) (for 
supervision of POs) to check if all social safeguard requirements are met and to identify 
any issues that need to be addressed. The Gender Action Plan includes roles and 
responsibilities at state, district, sub-district and village levels for their implementation 
and guidelines for monitoring performance indicators have been integrated with the 
overall project indicators for monitoring and evaluation.  
 
45. 
The project will develop a Learning Culture within DPIP to promote learning 
during the current phase of the project would be to have periodic reviews and reflections. 
A
core team of experienced persons from government and the civil society would be 
created at the State level to provide overall guidance and facilitate learning processes.  
 
Page  11
46. 
The state government is revising the BPL Household Survey with the objective to 
identify and include the right and correct households who are poor and have been left out. 
The government has provided for concurrence of the Gram Sabha as mandatory condition 
before the lists are accepted by it. The other state programs on tribal development, 
women’s empowerment, employment guarantee, primary education, primary health 
including nutrition of children and women are being implemented under the overall focus 
on equity and empowerment of the poor, marginalized and vulnerable communities. The 
grassroots level democratic institutions like the Gram Panchayats, Water Users 
Association, Village Development Committees and the likes have guaranteed spaces for 
participation of the SCs, STs and women. The MP DPIP II too has the strategy and 
necessary capacity for implementing its commitment for social empowerment. The 
project will have adequate human resources at the SPMU, DPMU and the PFT levels to 
ensure the project achieve its objectives under the safeguard policy. The Right to 
Information Act has provided people a strong instrument to hold the system accountable 
and responsible to them. Under the Act, the project will disclose documents and 
information on proactive voluntary basis.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the course of project preparation, which builds on the previous DPIP I, there have 
been a series of consultations with the key stakeholders – various government 
departments (as nodal agencies for state sponsored development and welfare schemes), 
NGOs, community associations, various interest groups such as farmers and producer 
companies, activists, academia and researchers – and field visits. More specifically, the 
social assessment while adopting the participatory rural appraisal tools during community 
level consultations also engaged with them on developing village level social and 
resource maps. Further, the stakeholder and institutional analyses too were done through 
consultative processes with the key stakeholders. The project made efforts in ensuring 
participation and engagement of community people and their leaders especially from the 
SCs and STs.  
 
48. 
A regional (23 September at Sagar) and a state level (6 October at Bhopal) 
disclosure workshop were organized with key stakeholders – various interest groups, 
project beneficiaries, civil society organizations, media as well as the government. 
Minutes and further details of these disclosure workshops/consultations were documented 
as part of the final drafts of the safeguard documents. Further, the key safeguards 
documents will be translated into local languages and sent to concerned block offices for 
further dissemination in the project areas/villages. These reports will be made available 
on-line. Free and informed consent will be taken from all participating stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2009 
 
Page  12
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/12/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/12/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/12/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
N/A 
Page  13
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  14
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nathan M. Belete 
01/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Priti Kumar 
01/12/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh 
01/12/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/22/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
01/13/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
