Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/22/2008 
Report No.:  AC3483
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P099857 
Project Name:  Jammu & Kashmir Participatory Watershed Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Norman Bentley Piccioni 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.80 
 Local 
Communities 
5.30
31.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary objective of the proposed project is to reverse the process of degradation of 
the natural resource base and improve the productive potential of natural resources and 
incomes of the rural households in the project area. The secondary objective is to support 
policy and institutional development to harmonize watershed development projects and 
policies across the State in accordance with best practices.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component One: Watershed Development & Management  
 
The goal of this component is the successful implementation of watershed treatment as 
prioritized in Village Watershed Development Plans, as well as treatment of critical lands 
that fall between Gram Panchayat (GP) administered areas. In absence of elected GPs, 
the project will be implemented by Village Development Councils (VDCs).  
 
This component includes the following sub-components:  
 
Page  2
(i) 
Non-arable land development: The primary objective is ecological rehabilitation 
of the degraded catchments by carrying out soil and water conservation measures through 
site specific treatment plan. The secondary objective is to narrow the gap between 
biomass production and consumption through various treatment options within the GP 
areas;  
 
(ii) 
Arable land development: This subcomponent will improve cropping systems 
through promoting adoption of latest recommended agronomic practices, crop 
diversification including high value crops, reducing post harvest losses, increasing value-
addition including support for processing and marketing of the produce without 
disturbing eco system. It will also improve water availability in the project area using 
evolving water harvesting technologies and promoting optimal use of available water;  
 
(iii) 
Fodder and livestock development: The aim is to improve productive potential 
through improvement of fodder management practices and genetic upgrading. It will also 
contribute towards restoration of the overall eco-system. As targeted support to nomadic 
groups, this subcomponent will include the implementation of a Tribal Action Plan, 
which is part of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The 
Tribal Action Plan is aimed at better flock management, improved animal health care, 
and promotion of income-generating activities for transhumants; and having a voice in 
the development action.  
 
(iv) 
Rural infrastructure development: This subcomponent covers construction of farm 
roads, footpaths, and small bridges to improve the accessibility to market and other 
public institutions. Sub-investments that include roads, footpaths, small bridges, and in 
general small rural infrastructure, will follow specific guidelines in the Project 
Implementation Manual to follow standardized environmental management practices.  
 
Component Two: Enhancing Mountain Livelihoods  
 
This component is aimed at promoting value addition in crop, livestock, and non-timber 
forest products (NFTPs) produced in the Project area. In contrast to the arable land 
development subcomponent, it will focus on the demand side, marketing, and 
establishing linkages between farmers and buyers. Given that watershed is a land-based 
approach, this component will also reach out to vulnerable groups (typically the landless 
and transhumants) and develop income-generating activities for them.  
 
There are four sub-components: (i) rural infrastructure development related to livelihood 
activities and connectivity: (ii) fodder and livestock development: (iii) value addition and 
marketing for surplus agriculture produces: (iv) transhumant action plan. These sub-
components will be implemented through participatory approach models determined by 
village development council or by Gram Sabha.  
 
Component Three: Institutional Strengthening  
 
Page  3
This component is aimed at ensuring that Watershed Development Plans have been 
prepared in an informed, participatory, and transparent process, that they can be 
implemented with adequate technical backstopping, and that Project performance can be 
adequately monitored and evaluated. The critical outputs of this component will be 
awareness and capacity of all stakeholders in participatory natural resource management, 
and capacity of participating VDCs and other local village institutions to plan, 
implement, monitor and maintain watershed treatments.  
 
Component Four: Project Coordination  
 
This component will finance construction of office/residential accommodation (where 
leasing is not possible), purchase of equipment, and vehicles, and incremental operating 
costs of the Project. Guidance on good construction practices and eco-procurement has 
been incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Administratively the state is divided into Jammu and Kashmir provinces. However, it is 
useful to distinguish three natural/cultural regions: i.e. Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, 
since this will determine how the proposed Project is implemented.  
 
•
Jammu region is a predominantly Hindu region in the southern part of the State. It 
is sub-tropical with some areas falling in the moist temperate zone. A small portion of the 
humid sub-tropical region lies in the plains along the borders of Punjab while the rest of 
the area is hilly or mountainous. The topography makes rural access quite difficult and 
productivity is generally very low. The Shivalik (foothill) region of Jammu has good 
forest cover, but needs treatment to increase the productive potential of the soil. Water is 
a
perennial constraint. Rain water run-off is typically stored in small ponds in the area.  
 
•
Kashmir valley is a region as well known for its civil conflict as for its natural 
beauty. The population is mainly Urdu or Kashmiri-speaking Muslims. The valley is 
bounded by the high snow-capped ridges of the Himalayan range in the east and the Pir 
Panjal range in the west and south. It is a dry temperate region having alpine zones in the 
higher reaches, with some snow coverage. The region depends on irrigation and a large 
area of the level land has good alluvial soil.  
 
•
Ladakh region is also famous for its geographical, ethnic and cultural variety. The 
cold arid desert areas of this zone are characterized by bare, rocky mountains and gravel 
slopes. Ladakh covers 70 percent of the total geographical area of the state, but has only 
2.5 percent of the population, living mainly in villages located near the rivers. The 
productivity of the region is low due to agro-ecological limitations. However, the 
productive potential of the area can be increased substantially through water-harvesting.  
 
The physical and climatic conditions constrain agricultural development in much of the 
state. The very small size of land holdings and availability of new land for cultivation 
makes it imperative to increase productivity of farm land. The fragile Himalayan 
Page  4
ecosystem is a rich repository of biodiversity and also forms the catchment of major north 
Indian rivers such as Beas and Jhelum. J&K is therefore an important source of water 
supply.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASDA) 
Ms Soma Ghosh Moulik (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
-
Environmental Assessment (BP/OP 4.01) - Activities to be undertaken include 
prevention of soil erosion, reducing run off, promoting proper water resource 
management, development of arable and non-arable lands, and restoration of pastures. If 
not implemented properly, such activities could have adverse impacts on the soil and 
hydrologic regime of the area, such as changes in surface flow, moderation of peak flow, 
impact on water quality, slope instability etc. Assessment and mitigation measures are 
clearly spelled out in Project Implementation Manual and Community Operational 
Manual (COM). They will be applied rigorously by the Project staff and beneficiaries. 
The assessment and mitigation measures have been incorporated in the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework, the Project Implementation Manual, and the 
Community Operational Manual.  
 
-
Forestry (OP 4.36) - Activities have the potential to impact significantly upon 
forest areas. The forestry component proposed in the project promotes afforestation, 
enhances environmental contribution of forest areas, and encourages economic 
development. Logging operations are not part of Project activities. Most of the area 
where project is to be implemented is categorized as forest land.  
 
-
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) - The project is not likely to support/finance any 
activity that would entail significant conversion, loss or degradation of natural habitats 
(directly or indirectly). However, silvi-pasture based activities, management of 
Page  5
grasslands, and chance introduction of exotic species to augment fodder sources may 
have implications for native species, many of which are already threatened or 
endangered. As a mitigation measure, the mobilization process and the training activities 
for the Forest Department staff will have a module to provide the tools to identify 
potential risks and propose mitigation measures.  
 
-
Pest Management (OP 4.09) - Application of pesticides is envisaged under the 
project to promote production of high value crops and increase farm incomes. Care must 
be taken in order to ensure proper handling of pesticides and avoid harm to humans, 
livestock and the environment. Improper disposal of left-over insecticides have the 
potential to pollute natural drinking water sources. The Project Implementation Manual 
will provide a negative list of pesticides not to be used under the project, and instruction 
for proper disposal of the permitted ones.  
 
-
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.10) - There are indigenous peoples (tribal people in the 
Indian context) in the Project area currently facing potential adverse impacts due to 
conflicts over resources and unequal access to government schemes. Indigenous people 
are among the intended beneficiaries and the Project is likely to improve their situation 
through targeted interventions. A specific Transhumant Action Plan has been prepared as 
part of the ESMF.  
 
-
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) - The whole of Jammu and Kashmir is 
regarded as disputed areas between Indian and Pakistan. The disclaimer identified in the 
legal policy has been introduced in the PAD and will be used in any public document 
(such as the PID).  
 
Safeguard policies such as Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Cultural Properties 
(OPN 11.03), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and Projects in International Waters (OP/BP 
7.50) are not applicable in the current project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
high degree of human dependence on natural resources in J&K (Jammu and Kashmir) 
has led to overall degradation of environment and natural resource base. Considering that 
the project plans enhance land based productive system through watershed development 
and strengthen community based institutions with equity, it will only bring positive long 
term impact. Project activities are likely to reverse the degradation process are unlikely to 
exert any significant negative impact on the social and physical environment. On the 
contrary, the principle aim of the watershed development and management component is 
to enhance the natural resource base. The project plans to follows a comprehensive social 
mobilization strategy based on inclusive principle.  
 
As was seen in the previous project (IWDP), there are more benefits when treatment 
covers the whole watershed rather than only Panchayat or VDC lands. Treatment of 
degraded lands shall form part of the holistic treatment plan. Other areas cannot be 
excluded. Safety of structure and vegetative measures cannot be ensured unless treatment 
Page  6
follows top to bottom (ridge to valley) approach and is location/site specific, need based 
and demand driven. Sporadic treatment could cause failures of structures and not produce 
desired results in view of highly degraded conditions of landscapes.  
 
The environment and social category B was assigned to this project because no 
significant adverse or irreversible impacts are envisaged, and impacts are manageable 
within the existing institutional and technical framework.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Various social and environmental alternative options were discussed and prioritized in 
light of the issues highlighted in environmental and social assessment. A Pest 
Management Plan is being developed to help minimize the direct or indirect adverse 
impacts of promoting high-value crops.  
 
Watershed development tends to be a land-based intervention. To help avoid 
contributing to inequity through this project, special income-generating activities will be 
promoted (as in the previous project) to target landless and other vulnerable groups. A 
specific Transhumant Tribal Action Plan targeting the (landless) nomadic groups has 
been prepared and defined with monitorable outputs. The Plan is part of the ESMF and  
disclosed separately.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The findings of ESMF highlighted and justified the need to sensitize the social and 
environmental issues at all levels. The institutional set up under this project designed to 
focus on ensuring that concerns raised and identified in the ESMF are considered in sub-
project selection and implementing the ESMF during its execution with appropriate 
mitigation measures. These are integrated into the monitoring and MIS system. The 
Institutional Cell is capacitated with Environment and Social Development Specialist at 
the PMU, Regional offices and in the 11 Sub-Watershed Offices.   In addition the 
Institutional cell shall ensure compliance of the project activities with the existing legal 
and policy environment, including the safeguard policies of the World Bank. The cell 
would undertake assessment of capacity building requirements of the project staff and 
other stakeholders to ensure that the project benefits are shared by all in a transparent 
way and those activities do not negatively impinge on environment.  
 
The key social interventions envisaged under the project are the followings,  
 
•
Ensuring inclusion with benefit sharing mechanism as well as SHG/CIG 
formation processes,  
 
•
Timely implementation of Transhumant Action plan  
 
•
Mainstreaming social audit finding into over all monitoring system  
 
Page  7
•
Ensuring one third women representation in VDC formation  
 
•
Ensuring a minimum of one women motivator per village for community 
mobilization  
 
•
Specific user groups/SHGs for the vulnerable group  
 
•
One woman should preferable be the co-signatory of the project account at 
theVDC level  
 
•
Specific code of conduct designed in the ESMF must be complied in Gram Sabha 
/
Village assembly meetings.  
 
No potential indirect and/or long term environmental impacts are envisaged due to 
anticipated activities in the project area. Project will intervene neither in any basin 
management nor on any major drains. Only existing degraded catchments would be 
rehabilitated under the project with various soil conservation techniques and with no 
major structural interventions.  These catchments are largely in remote rural areas with 
modest cultivable lands orchards. Hence, large scale agricultural 
intensification/diversification leading to substantial industrial development is not 
expected.  While some small scale agro-industry activities could emerge, it is not possible 
to define what those activities would be or what their environmental impact may be.  
However there may be some intensification of fertilizer and pesticides for which a 
detailed IPNM plan has been developed.  
 
All environmental check lists and the ESG will be circulated along with the bidding 
document for any small procurement on catchment treatment.  All environmental and 
social mitigation measures specifications are integrated with the overall project cycle and 
will be implemented at various stages of individual catchment treatment planning, 
operation and post operation. The project Implementation Plan includes all specifications 
outlined in the ESG.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
stakeholder analysis was completed as part of ESMF to determine the right and 
responsibilities of beneficiaries, their relationship with the natural resources, and their 
capacity-building needs. The primary stakeholders are the households living in (or 
passing through, in the case of transhumant populations) selected degraded watersheds in 
both Jammu and Srinagar regions of the State. The analysis has focused on villages, 
nomadic groups, women, the Panchayats and village institutions. Secondary stakeholders 
include service providers, the Forest Department, and other line departments.  
 
Disclosure requirements, meeting the requirements of the World Bank’s policy onpublic 
disclosure, have been fulfilled by organizing a workshop. In-country disclosure, 
specifying the timing and locations, and translating a summary of the key documents in 
local languages has been done for the ESMF. In addition a Transhumant Action Plan has 
Page  8
been prepared based on the strategy outlined in the ESMF. The needs of the Transhumant 
population were consulted and an Action Plan has been developed. A separate in -country 
disclosure of the Transhumant Action plan has been done by organizing a workshop and 
the plan is available online through the Project Portal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/26/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/26/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/26/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  9
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Norman Bentley Piccioni 
05/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray 
05/20/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Soma Ghosh Moulik 
05/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/03/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
03/24/2008 
Comments:  approved 
