Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/29/2008 
Report No.
44019
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P100352 
Project Name:  Karnataka Municipal Water Energy Efficiency Project (KMWEEP) 
Task Team Leader:  Da Zhu/Oscar E. Alvarado 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit:  SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Carbon Offset 
Sector:  Water Supply (50%); and Other Energy Efficiency (50%) 
Theme:  Climate Change, Access to Urban Services and Housing 
Financing amounts by source:  
IDA/IBRD: N/A 
GEF: N/A 
CDCF Amount : US$ 1.4 million (final amount is to be confirmed after negotiation ) 
 
Other financing amounts by source: N/A  
 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objectives of the Project are: 
 
·
Contribute to green house gases (GHG) emission reduction and sustainable 
development by improving energy efficiency of water supply systems in 
participating municipalities of Karnataka 
·
Improve water supply service in participating municipalities by improving water 
pumping energy efficiency and reducing operation cost  
 
This project is consistent with the India Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) by ensuring 
environmental sustainability and reducing risks of climate change. Infrastructure 
investment in urban and WSS sectors is also identified in the CAS as a strategic priority. 
 
3. Project Description 
Water supply operational cost in urban areas of Karnataka has increased rapidly due to 
population growth and low energy efficiency in the water system. Currently, the pumping 
systems are inefficiently designed, improperly sized, poorly maintained, operated at less 
than their optimal load, and many of the pumps are out of age and need to be replaced. 
Pumping schemes are poorly engineered with redundant pumps, pipes, valves and high 
friction losses. These inefficiencies increase the amount of energy needed to deliver 
Page  2
2
water to end users. Overall, this results in high energy cost in water supply system and 
poor water service for the urban population. At the same time, the energy inefficiency 
also results in unnecessary GHG emissions.  
 
To deal with the above issues, Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development & Finance 
Corporation (KUIDFC) proposed the Karnataka Municipal Water Energy Efficiency 
Project (KMWEEP) which aims to improve water supply services through better energy 
efficiency in the water pumping systems in 6 middle-size cities: Belgaum, Gulbarga, 
Hubli/Dharwad, Mangalore, Bellary, and Mysore. Altogether, these cities have a 
combined population of around 4.5 million. It is estimated that, after this project, energy 
savings in the 6 water pumping systems will be about 16 million kWh, which could 
reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emission by about 13,620 tons per year.  
 
With the World Bank’s assistance, the GHG emission reduction can be sold through the 
World Bank-executed Carbon Fund. This, in turn, will bring an additional revenue stream 
to KUIDFC and the participating cities to implement this energy efficiency program.  
 
The Bank has had a long-term partnership with Karnataka government through its 
lending and TA programs. Particularly relevant for this project is the Karnataka Urban 
Water Sector Improvement Project (KUWASIP) where KUIDFC is also the 
implementing agency. The KUWASIP, effective in May 2005, aims to support the water 
sector reform and improve water service in 3 cities (Belgaum, Hubli/Darwhad and 
Gulbarga). The proposed KMWEEP is to focus on the energy efficiency aspect in water 
pumping systems of the 3 cities; and, in addition, it will support the energy efficiency 
program in the other three cities: Mangalore, Bellary, and Mysore.  
 
GHG emission reduction and carbon finance:
 
The project consists of sale of emission 
reductions resulting from improvements of energy efficiency of water supply pumping 
systems in six municipalities in Karnataka through the World Bank-executed Community 
Development Carbon Fund (CDCF).   
 
Carbon revenues are crucial for the success of the project as the financial inflows from 
sale of carbon credits will provide much needed additional financial comfort to KUIDFC 
and participating municipalities. The revenues from carbon credits will ultimately be 
shared among the participating municipalities.  
 
Preliminary activities: 
The main energy efficiency activities are the following: 
optimization and sizing of the existing water pumping systems and equipment based on 
the actual network configuration, requirement and operations parameters; implementation 
of new efficient pumps and motors; optimization of pumping systems operation through 
an improved metering and monitoring systems; optimization of the electrical 
consumption and power factor for motors; and leak reduction in main pipe from pumping 
station to the city. 
 
Monitoring and evaluation:
 will be undertaken through the specific plan for Verification 
of Emissions Reductions that will be developed in the clean development mechanism 
Page  3
3
(CDM) Project Design Document. KUIDFC will be accountable for overall reporting on 
implementation progress, preparation of monitoring reports, and preparation of audited 
project accounts.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis. 
The proposed locations at Belgaum, Gulbarga, Hubli/Dharwad, Mangalore, Bellary, and 
Mysore are medium to large cities in Karnataka State, India. The project includes water 
supply systems examination and installation of water pumps and other equipments, and 
appropriate collection and disposal of de-commissioned equipments. Some of the 
replacements have already been completed, as reported in the EA document.  
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDN) 
Mr. Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts: 
 
1. 
Environmental Assessment OP 4.01: 
The proposed project is expected to improve 
the energy efficiency in water supply systems. The proposed project activities related to 
system optimization by refurbishing and/or replacement of some of the electro-
mechanical systems, and reducing unaccounted water. These activities are expected to 
lead to efficiency improvements and also achieve better water supply throughput. The 
proposed project activities would lead to limited environmental issues, including disposal 
of decommissioned equipment, increased water consumption, as well as occupational 
Health and Safety aspects, and impacts during implementation phase of the project. The 
proposed water supply systems improvement has been implemented in three towns - 
Belgaum, Gulbarga, and Hubli/Dharwad under Karnataka Urban Water Sector 
Page  4
4
Improvement Project (KUWASIP) funded by World Bank. The environmental 
assessment of proposed improvements has already been covered as part of the assessment 
of the environmental impacts of KUWASIP. In KMWEEP, a separate Environmental 
Audit and Environmental Management Plan (EA/EMP) has been carried out. The existing 
EA and EMP documents for the three towns under KUWASIP have further been 
reviewed to update the EMPs as part of EA/EMP. In case of Mangalore, Bellary, and 
Mysore towns the EA/EMP has been prepared to address the potential environmental 
issues. The EA/EMP for the six towns indicates that environmental management 
measures have been considered during implementation. The residual environmental 
issues are very limited to the proposed activities, and a specific EMP is prepared to 
mitigate the environmental risks. 
 
2. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):
 Not applicable. 
 
3. 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
:
Not applicable. 
 
4. 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
:
Not applicable 
 
5. 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
:
Not applicable 
 
6. 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12):  
No land acquisition is contemplated and hence 
the OP is not triggered 
 
7. 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10):
 Not applicable. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area: 
 
Potential indirect and/or long term negative impacts are not expected. The project indeed 
improves the energy efficiency. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts. 
The project alternatives relate to choice of equipment which do not have any specific 
bearing on environmental impacts and hence the alternative analysis is not applicable. 
 
Page  5
5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. 
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described
.
There are no specific requirement of safeguard measures to be followed except safety and 
compliance with equipment installation and operational procedures to ensure the noise 
emissions are within standards. The borrowers already have an established system for 
safety, and operational and maintenance protocols as part of regular operational works. In 
addition, the EMP for the proposed project specifies measures to minimize noise 
emissions at work place as well as safety protocols to be followed. These measures would 
be integrated in the existing system. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the conduction of EA for the proposed project, consultations have been 
conducted with the respective municipalities, employees who are involved in plant 
operation. In addition, the EA outcome has been discussed with the respective 
municipalities as well as Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Corporation 
(KUIDFC). The final EMP documents will be disclosed by the respective municipalities 
at their head offices and at the operational sites of the proposed project. The document 
will also be disclosed on KUIDFC’s web site 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/08/08 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
In process 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/08 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
N/A  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
 
Not Applicable 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
 
 
Not Applicable 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest 
Management 
Plan: 
     Not 
Applicable 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 Yes/No 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
N/A 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
N/A 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
N/A 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
Page  7
7
OP 7.60 
–
Projects in Disputed Areas 
N/A 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
N/A 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Da Zhu and Oscar E. Alvarado (SASDU) 
05/13/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr.Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDN) 
05/13/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr.Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS) 
05/13/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr. Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
05/30/2008 
Comments:   
