Page  1
I
NTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information 
Date prepared/updated:  06/01/2009 
 
Report No.: 48783  
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P115566 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Fifth Power System Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Julia M. Fraser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 21, 2009 
Estimated Board Date:  September 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
1,000.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
 Borrower 
575.00 
 
Environmental Category:   A 
–
Full Assessment 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and 
Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
The project development objective is to strengthen India's electricity transmission system in order 
to increase reliable power exchange between regions and states.   
 
3. Project Description: 
The project will finance five regional transmission schemes for strengthening the transmission 
system and/or facilitating inter-regional power exchange for the National Grid. The five schemes are as 
follows: 
·
System Strengthening in Western Region for Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project (UMPP) 
·
System Strengthening in Western Region for Mundra UMPP 
·
System Strengthening in Northern Region for Sasan and Mundra UMPP 
·
System Strengthening in Southern and Western Region for Krishnaptanam UMPP 
·
Transmission System for South-West Interconnection 
While the names of the various schemes refer to three ultra mega power projects (UMPPs)
1
,
they are not 
associated facilities as these transmission investments are mostly required to facilitate the transmission of 
power to meet demand in other regions of the country. By design, the operations of the UMPPs are not 
dependent on the construction of the regional transmission schemes. Indeed, the first three schemes are 
being constructed to meet the demand in the Western and Northern Regions where the Sasan UMPP and 
1
Ultra Mega Power Plants in India are large coal-fired thermal power plants, employing super critical technology to 
achieve high levels of fuel efficiency, with a capacity of approximately 4,000 MW each.  Of the nine identified 
UMPPs, four are at pithead and five are at coastal locations. 
Page  2
Mundra UMPP
2
are physically located. Both plants are expected to be commissioned progressively by 
2014-15.  To facilitate the exchange of power between regions, the transmission networks have to be 
strengthened in the western, northern and central part of the national grid system, as the difference in 
demand profiles across regions requires large bulk power transfers over short periods of time and the 
transmission networks need to have significant available transfer capacity to sustain them.  
Similarly, the fourth scheme listed below relates to another 4000 MW (5 x 800 MW) UMPP to be 
located at Krishnapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, in the Southern region which is also planned to be 
commissioned progressively by 2015-16.  The power from this project will be transferred to load centers 
in Southern and Western Regions.  The fifth scheme 
–
the South-West Interconnection – will transfer 
power surpluses in the Southern region to deficit regions in the West.  By 2011-12, surpluses are 
projected to be 1000 MW at peak periods and 6000 MW at off-peak periods. 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
The project is to be spread over various parts of the northern, western and south-west regions of 
the country. The project is primarily aimed at building a strong national transmission network.  The five 
schemes include works in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
and Uttar Pradesh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDI) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social 
Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any 
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Transmission schemes are generally environmentally clean and non-polluting in nature. Their 
impact on the environment is generally restricted to rights of way (ROW) and land acquisition for sub-
stations.  Environmental issues during the construction phase of power transmission line projects may 
include impacts on terrestrial and aquatic habitat and impacts on humans due to electric and magnetic 
fields and hazardous materials. Given the large geographical spread of the transmission system (voltages 
above 400 kV and relatively large substations), and given the assumption that some of the project 
2
The 3960 MW (6 x 660 MW) Sasan UMPP is located in Madhya Pradesh, the 4000 MW (5 x 800 MW) Mundra 
UMPP is located in the upper part of Gujarat. 
Page  3
transmission lines may pass through forest areas, the project has been assigned environment category 
“A”.  
 
POWERGRID has had a corporate Environmental and Social Policies and Procedures (ESPP) in 
place since 1998 (revised in March 2005) to proactively respond to the environmental and social issues 
that may be encountered in all its operations. The ESPP has been revised very recently (February 2009) to 
incorporate observations and suggestions following the Safeguards Diagnostic Review (SDR) by the 
World Bank. Some of the potential environment and social issues that would be mitigated using the ESPP 
framework, irrespective of source of funding for its schemes include the following: 
 
·
Mitigating opening up of canopy in natural forests; lopping of trees; habitat loss, vegetation 
damage and fragmentation 
·
Avoid increased access to wild lands, paths/access roads; 
·
Avoid run off and sedimentation from grading of  access roads; 
·
Avoid chemical contamination from chemical maintenance techniques; 
·
Ensure that there is no PCBs in electrical equipment; 
·
Mitigate the impact as a result of change in land use and population relocation due to towers, 
substations and induced secondary development during construction; 
·
Minimizing avian hazards from transmission lines and towers, aircraft hazards from transmission 
lines and towers; 
·
Avoid impairment of cultural and aesthetic resources, health and safety, fire hazards and pollution 
·
Prevent loss of agriculture/community land by avoiding physical displacement of population  
·
Avoid, if not minimize, displacement of population and ensure that the livelihood of those 
affected is improved or restored   
 
Several changes have been included in the revised ESPP such as annual monitoring of the works 
by POWERGRID-appointed committee of eminent experts in the field of environmental management and 
social development.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project 
area: 
 Not 
anticipated. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts: 
POWERGRID has developed its ESPP formalizing its “commitment to the goal of sustainable 
development
 
through conservation of natural resources and involvement of stakeholders, continually 
improving its management system, accessing specialist knowledge for management of significant 
environmental and social issues and introducing new state of the art and internationally proven 
technologies while strictly following the basic principles of Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation.” As 
part of the EA, several alternative alignments are analyzed and choice is made on the basis of several 
criteria including environmental sensitivity of the routes.  
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of 
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
At the corporate level, POWERGRID has established a strong Environment and Social 
Management Division (ESMD) headed by a General Manager, and supported by seven environment and 
social specialists under the overall control of an Executive Director (Corporate Planning).  In each of the 
nine regions of POWERGRID, there is one separate unit headed by a Deputy General Manager/Chief 
Manager responsible for managing social and environmental activities and ensuring coordination with 
ESMD in the corporate office.  POWERGRID is also in the process of recruiting additional 
Page  4
environmental and social specialists and thus strengthen the ESMD, both at the corporate and regional 
levels. 
 
The ESPP provides a framework for identification, assessment and management of environmental 
and social concerns at both organizational as well as project levels. In addition, POWERGRID has also 
appointed a committee of independent eminent experts to oversee environmental and social management 
policies and their implementation. Following the latest revision, the committee is mandated to annually 
review POWERGRID’s performance in complying with the ESPP provisions.  Other enhancements in the 
2009 revision include the addition of procedures for handling chance finds and adherence to provisions of 
international treaties to which India is a party.  
The environmental assessment process for transmission line schemes includes two stages, 
particularly where the lines go through forest reserves or may go through sensitive habitats.  During the 
first stage, the POWERGRID team prepares an initial environment assessment report (IEAR) based on 
the available GIS survey for fixing line routes and sensitive areas such as reserved forests, wild life 
sanctuary, national park,  protected areas supported by public consultation and ground survey, particularly 
with reference to sensitive areas and other sensitive receptors, if any. The IEAR captures all significant 
environmental issues and contains an ‘
Environmental Management Plan
’, including budget provisions for 
implementation. The second stage produces a final environmental assessment report, submitted after 
completion of the detailed survey of entire route. This report incorporates site specific minor changes 
before commencing actual scheme implementation and requirements for compliance with conditions of 
clearances, including forestry clearances accorded by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The 
Initial Environmental Assessment reports for each scheme include a set of indicators and a mitigation 
plan to be supervised during the implementation stage. 
POWERGRID has adopted a third party certified comprehensive “Integrated Management 
System” (IMS) as per PAS 99:2006 integrating the requirement of ISO: 9001 for Quality Management 
System, ISO: 14001 for Environment Management System and OHSAS: 18001 for Occupational Health 
&
Safety Management System. POWERGRID has also been certified for SA 8000:2001 for Social 
Accountability standard by Social Accountability International. POWERGRID is progressively rolling 
out the IMS to regional offices. Implementation of these systems will enhance the effectiveness of 
implementation of ESPP in POWERGRID-supported investment projects. In recognition of 
POWERGRID's efforts on social and environmental safeguards mainstreaming, they have been awarded 
the "Annual Green Award" for 2006 by the Environment Sector Board of the World Bank. 
The World Bank has formally reviewed POWERGRID’s ESPP to establish its equivalence and 
acceptability for use as a Borrower System with reference to each safeguard policy of the World Bank. 
The Safeguards Diagnostic Report (SDR) for POWERGRID accepting its ESPP as the Use of Borrower 
Systems under OP 4.00 has been prepared and disclosed at the Bank’s Infoshop. POWERGRID agreed to 
the key findings and recommendations of the Bank’s review of ESPP and has also publicly disclosed the 
revised (draft final) ESPP addressing the gaps identified and suggestions given in the SDR. The key 
findings and recommendations for equivalence and acceptability of the ESPP are as follows: 
To attain and sustain full equivalence with the objectives and operational principles of OP 4.00 Table A1, 
the following enhancements are identified: 
Environmental Assessment 
·
Include assessment of trans-boundary environmental and social impacts in EA as appropriate;  
·
Cite all GoI laws and regulations applicable to POWERGRID operations that are intended to 
implement international environmental agreements ratified by GoI  such as the Convention on 
Biodiversity; Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol on Protection of the Ozone Layer; World 
Page  5
Heritage Convention; and when finalized, GOI regulations designed to  implement the (Ramsar) 
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance;  
·
Expand alternatives assessment to reference “no action” alternative (using baseline data included in 
the EA) and the institutional, training and monitoring requirements associated with each alternative;  
·
Cite use of independent expertise, such as academic and social science research institutions and 
individual experts in providing advice on complex projects; and 
·
Ensure that consultations with project affected people are conducted in a format and state language 
accessible to key stakeholders.  
Natural Habitats 
·
Add reference to “critical” natural habitats such as “Critical Wildlife Habitat (under FRA),” 
“Critical Tiger Habitat (under WPA),” including core areas; Ecologically Sensitive Areas, 
Biodiversity Heritage Sites (BDA), as well as “conservation reserves” and “community reserves” 
along with existing ESPP references to National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries; and Coastal 
Management Zones (when pending Notification is finalized);  and  
·
Ensure that consultations with project affected people on NHs are conducted in a format and state 
language accessible to key stakeholders.  
Forests 
·
With respect to public disclosure of Forest Clearances reference the FCA clearance process as per 
Supreme Court orders 
Involuntary Resettlement 
·
Include socio-economic impacts of infrastructure related indirectly to projects, such as access roads, 
within the scope of Monitoring and Evaluation in of a Rehabilitation Action Plan:  
·
Incorporate relevant provisions of the pending Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill and Land 
Acquisition Act Amendments in the ESPP, when enacted; 
·
Disclose critical aspects of RAPs in State languages of PAPs or other key stakeholders; and  
·
Incorporate baseline socio-economic conditions into RAP monitoring criteria. 
Indigenous Peoples: 
·
Reference the objectives and specific provisions of the Provisions of Panchayats (Extension to 
Scheduled Areas) Act 1996 (PESA) as applicable to states; and the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (FRA); 
·
Ensure that “prior, free and informed consultation” with tribals takes place prior to project 
implementation resulting in “broad community support” for the project; and 
·
Document public consultation process with tribals in Tribal People Development Plan (TPDP). 
Based on the Acceptability Assessment (and as informed by the Equivalence analysis and proposed gap 
filling measures for Equivalence), the following measures were proposed and subsequently adopted by 
POWERGRID to attain and sustain full Acceptability in the implementation of its EMPP. 
·
Add the terms of reference for the Final Environmental Assessment Report (FEAR) to the ESPP 
that is explicitly designed to address potential environmental impacts of “high-risk” (“Category A”) 
projects impacting ecologically and/or socially sensitive areas (e.g. National Parks, Wildlife 
Sanctuaries, Conservation and Community Reserves and or Scheduled Areas);  
Page  6
·
Strengthen institutional structure for environmental and social management at site and regional 
levels to improve implementation of reporting of EMP measures through enhanced staffing, 
training and other capacity building. A process for recruiting dedicated human resources has been 
initiated and is expected to result in the posting of additional staff and regions and sites in the near 
future; 
·
Undertake annual independent environmental audit of sample of transmission lines and include 
aggregated results and case studies in proposed annual Environment and Social Sustainability 
Report.  POWERGRID has initiated steps in this direction and a tender has already been issued for 
selection of a consultant to provide assistance in the development of an Annual Sustainability 
Report; 
·
RAPs should provide sufficient detail on the types of income-generating schemes beyond generic 
information provided in the Social Entitlements Framework; 
·
RAPS should provide clear justification for use of Land Acquisition Act (LAA) Section 17 
“emergency waiver” provision that permits land acquisition prior to payment of compensation, 
consistent with conditions stipulated in proposed LAA revision; 
·
Improve coordination between, completion of final RAP, RAP implementation, land acquisition 
and initiation of civil works.  POWERGRID has begun to initiate more timely execution of 
development works as per RAP provisions; and 
·
Complete community development works per the RAP implementation schedule. 
It is noted that the SDR recommends that five of the six policies triggered be implemented under OP 4.00.  
It does not include the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10) since there is not yet enough information 
regarding POWERGRID’s performance in this regard.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard 
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
The ESPP was prepared and has been revised (in 2005 and 2009) based on regional level 
consultation with the stakeholders including affected community, NGOs, people’s representatives and 
others. A national level consultation workshop was also organized to discuss the draft ESPP. For 
obtaining stakeholder feedback on the SDR, consultations were held in Gurgaon and Hyderabad. 
POWERGRID has also disclosed the ESPP and SDR in public including their website. During EA 
process for individual sub-projects, and preparation of RAP, consultations are held in settlements along 
the alignment as well as at Regional Offices of POWERGRID. EA documents are also posted on the 
POWERGRID website.  
 
POWERGRID has also begun the process of preparing an Environmental and Social Sustainability 
Report. The report will provide a historic snap shot of POWERGRID’s efforts thus far to manage 
environmental and social issues related with its operations. Once the value of the endeavor is recognized 
by various stakeholders – regulators, communities, NGOs, decision makers, etc. – this report has the 
potential to become a regular feature that will facilitate communication of POWERGRID’s commitment 
and action on environmental management and social development.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Equivalence and Acceptability Report: 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2009 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2009 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Project Information Document to 
the Executive Directors 
05/29/2009 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the 
project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager 
(SM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.00 
–
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in 
Bank-Supported Projects
 
Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit (QACU) and the 
ESSD and International Law Practice Group (LEGEN) review and 
approve the Safeguard Diagnostic Review report? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation 
of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [X]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of 
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include 
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards 
specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to physical cultural 
resources? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous 
Peoples? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Sector Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been 
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Sector Manager review and approve the plan/policy 
framework/process framework? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and 
constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [X]          N/A [  ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome 
these constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it 
include provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of 
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and 
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be 
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been 
prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in 
the OP? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World 
Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place 
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to 
project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the 
project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include 
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to 
safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  9
D
.
Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms. Julia M. Fraser 
05/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr. Gaurav Joshi 
05/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr. Mohammed Hasan 
05/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
The SDR was prepared as per OP 4.00 in 
coordination with OPCS-Safeguard and 
Compliance Unit (Harvey Himberg) and LEGEN 
(Alberto Ninio). 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr. Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/11/2009 
Comments:  cleared for Safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr. Salman Zaheer 
05/11/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
