Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/12/2009 
Report No.:  48587
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P096021 
Project Name:  Andhra Pradesh Road Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Binyam Reja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (95%);General transportation sector (5%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Trade facilitation 
and market access (25%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
320.30 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
400.20
400.20 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to improve the state government#s road 
sector institutional capacity to provide better quality, capacity and safe roads to users in a 
sustainable manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components (a) Road Improvement, (b) PPP Enabling Support; (c) 
Institutional Strengthening, and (d) Road Safety.  
 
Road Improvement Component: This component comprises two activities designed to 
upgrade and maintain the CRN: (a) upgrading about 422 km of priority state highways in 
two phases (277.7 km in Phase I and 147.2 km in Phase II) under public sector financing; 
and (b) maintenance of 6,073 km of the CRN under Long-term Performance-based 
Maintenance Contracts (LTPBMC).  
 
PPP Enabling Support Component: This component will assist APRDC in developing 
high density traffic corridors under Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement, via toll 
Page  2
revenues and viability gap support from the central and state governments in order to 
make the selected roads financially viable. There are five roads totaling 863 km of roads 
selected for developing under PPP. The loan will finance the costs of (a) transaction 
adviser to assist APRDC to carry out feasibility study and to develop and transact the 
selected PPP roads; and (b) the services of NGOs for R&R implementation and 
independent engineer consultancy services for monitoring the implementation for the 
selected PPP roads. In terms of the viability gap support, the GOI will provide up to 20 
percent of project cost as grant subsidy, and the GOAP (from its own budget) will 
provide up to 20 percent additional viability gap subsidy if required. The actual amount 
of Viability Gap support will be determined during the bidding process, where the 
winning concessionaire will propose the lowest subsidy requirement.  
 
Institutional Strengthening Component: This component will (a) facilitate the full 
operationalization of the APRDC, with requisite capacity for its responsibilities in 
managing the CRN, and (b) provide targeted technical assistance, training and advisory 
services for the implementation of the Asset Management Program, the Governance & 
Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) and the Institutional Strengthening Action Plan 
(ISAP), plus associated monitoring and coordination.  
 
Road Safety Component: This component will help GOAP provide safer road corridors 
by initiating measures to reduce road accidents on major corridors by assisting the 
concerned GOAP agencies to (a) undertake #demonstration projects# on selected CRN 
corridors, (b) carry out an extended black-spot improvement program, and (c) implement 
institutional and policy action plans for improving the state#s road safety responsibility 
framework and capacities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Sate of Andhra Pradesh in Southern India. The proposed 
project components will be located in all the three regions of the state: Rayalaseema, 
Telangana, and Andhra regions. All the three regions have varying social and 
environmental settings, while Telangana and Rayalaseema being dry regions compared to 
Andhra, where rainfall intensity is relatively higher. All the three regions have rich 
natural resource base including forest and water resources.  The topographical settings 
are predominantly plains, with some parts in rolling and hilly terrain. The socio-economic 
settings in the project areas also have wide variations. Andhra region is more advanced 
on several socio-economic parameters including literacy and education level, work 
participation, diversification of economic activities, etc. Northern parts of coastal Andhra 
and Telangana have significant tribal population. Roads in Andhra region to other 
regions, pass through built up area and have high density of population.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDI) 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDI) 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI) 
Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is Category A for Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project has 
triggered six safeguards policies as indicated above. The physical interventions proposed 
under the project could result in environmental and social impacts including tree cutting, 
forest land diversions, impact on community and cultural resources, land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement of local population, and impacts on local communities, 
particularly indigenous peoples (referred as tribal) in certain stretches. As part of the 
project preparation, social and environmental assessments were undertaken to identify 
and assess the impacts associated with the proposed project activities, and develop 
mitigation measures and plans.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). Complying with Category #A# # Full 
Assessment, and the country systems, the EA undertaken included: (i)Environmental 
Screening carried out in parallel with the engineering feasibility study; (ii) Environmental 
Assessment to prepare EMPs as an integral part of designs; and (iii) Environmental and 
Social Management Framework for Maintenance Roads. A concurrent independent 
review of the environmental assessment process and outputs has been conducted by 
APRDC through an independent consultant. The outcomes of EA process, in the form of 
EMPs have been integrated with relevant implementation mechanisms including project 
implementation contracts, and institutional set up for implementation of the project.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Some of the project roads pass through the forested 
areas. However, the project roads do not pass through any designated wildlife sanctuaries 
and do not lead to any conversion or degradation or adverse impacts on natural habitats. 
The EA process adopted by APRDC included systematic stakeholder consultations in 
determining the impacts on forest areas. The project specific EMPs include, detailed 
management measures, and exclusion principles prohibiting construction related 
activities such as construction camp sites, location of plant and machinery, disposal of 
debris, extraction of construction material, night time construction, etc in the forest areas.  
Page  4
Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The proposed corridors under Road Upgrading and PPP 
components would entail limited acquisition of forest land. The first phase corridors 
require about 3 Ha of forest land in four locations. These forest land acquisitions are 
marginal and the impacts on the quality of forested areas is insignificant. Currently land 
for compensatory afforestation has been delineated and forest diversion proposals are in 
advanced stage of progress. The road side plantations in Andhra Pradesh are regulated 
under Water Land and Tree Act (WALTA) with a provision for compensatory plantation 
in 2:1 ratios for each tree cut. The EMP measures include sufficient provisions and 
budget to meet the requirements.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The proposed roads under the project have 
several religious structures along the sub-project roads. Some of these could be affected 
physically or access to such properties could be affected. All such areas of cultural and 
religious importance have been identified as part of EA/SA for specific measures. All 
these measures will be planned and implemented in consultation with and close 
involvement of local communities. There are no known archeological sites affected by 
any of the proposed project corridors.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  The project involves acquisition of land and 
road side structures for the proposed improvements, alignments and by passes. 
Encroachment of the RoW is the main issue. Based on the findings of SIA, an R&R 
entitlement framework has been developed to ensure that those affected by project 
interventions are helped to enhance, if not at least restore their livelihood. RAP for the 
first year packages of upgrading component have been prepared. Preparation of RAP for 
the subsequent year packages is under progress. Adequate institutional mechanism will 
be in place to implement RAPs. This includes a Social Management Unit at the project 
level, Nodal NGO, Package Management Unit and Package level NGO.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). As part of IESA, a separate study on indigenous 
people (referred locally as tribal) was undertaken. The results indicate that tribal as 
groups/communities will not be adversely affected due to project interventions. However, 
those affected on individual basis will be supported as per the R&R entitlement 
framework which provides additional support to tribal affected families.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed project interventions and or activities would not lead to adverse long-term 
environmental impacts due to future activities on the selected roads and state highways. 
The project is expected to improve some of the local drainage issues along/across the 
proposed road. Further the road safety would also improve. However, the improved road 
could lead to development along the project roads. These developments are expected to 
be adequately organized by the other line agencies. During project implementation, the 
resettlement issues are expected to be addressed to the satisfaction of the affected 
communities and ensure that those affected/displaced improve their standard of living. 
Similarly, measures proposed under tribal plan(s) would help the tribal communities to 
Page  5
access project benefits at par with others. However, issues like HIV/AIDS and road 
safety will continue even after project is completed. In this regard, the concerned state 
agencies are involved in both planning and implementing measures proposed under the 
HIV/AIDS and Road safety plans so that they are organized adequately by the concerned 
state agencies in the post project period.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Upgrading and PPP project components entails widening of select roads, largely long 
the existing alignments. However, there are: (a) several minor realignments for geometric 
improvements, and (b) limited number of by-passes to avoid congested settlement/town 
areas. In such areas, route alignments and cross sections have been optimized considering 
technical, cost, social and environmental criteria. For the rest of the project, during the 
detailed feasibility studies and the EA and SIA, cross-sectional, structural and geometric 
design alternatives were considered. The factors which have influenced the designs of 
various components of the road improvements include resettlement, tree cutting, loss of 
arable land vis-a-vis the traffic-carrying performance and safety of the roads, and impacts 
on cultural and community properties. As far as feasible, concentric widening has been 
adopted in the built up stretches to minimize impacts on properties, land acquisition, and 
green tunnels. These measures have helped to minimize adverse impacts (in terms of 
displacement # both physical and economical) on the local population.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard policy issues have been addressed by conducting Environmental Assessment 
considering relevant provisions under OP 4.01, OP 4.36, OP 4.11; and Social Impact 
Assessment (OP 4.12 and OP 4.10) resulting in corridor specific EMPs, RAPs and TDPs 
respectively. The safeguard documents are completed for first year Upgradation 
corridors; and Environmental Management for OPRC. Social assessment has been 
completed for the first year Upgradation corridors which concluded no adverse impact 
from the proposed works. In addition, specific Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) has also been finalized, which will be adopted by APRDC. The 
R&R policy framework developed for the project corridors will be adopted by APRDC 
for all its projects, irrespective of the source of funding. The Safeguards assessment for 
first year PPP component is in advanced stage of completion. The assessments for second 
year corridors for all the project components are currently ongoing.  
 
The EMPs and Social Management Plans (including RAPs) have been prepared through 
consultative process and have been integrated into the project in the form of various 
avoidance, minimization, and enhancement measures stated in the EMPs. The corridor 
specific EMPs include specific management measures for addressing issues related to 
cultural and community properties, natural habitats, construction related activities, and 
safety management. To ensure that these measures are implemented, they are reflected 
and cross referenced in the design drawings, contract conditions and items of Bills of 
Quantities, and technical specifications. In addition, penalty provisions have also been 
Page  6
integrated in to the contract documents to address construction stage non-compliances 
effectively.  
 
Detailed stakeholders consultations were held, both during social assessment and 
RAP/TDP preparation, at different levels # community, village(s) along the project 
corridors, mandals and districts. The stakeholders included road side communities, 
affected population, road users including truckers, road side commercial establishments, 
NGOs and civil society, staff of the project (RBD/APRDC), revenue department, AP 
State AIDS Control Society and other line agencies. Feedback received during these 
consultations have been adequately considered in developing R&R policy framework and 
TD strategy and preparing social management plans including RAP, TDP and HIV/AIDS 
plan.  
 
In case of PPP projects, various actions that are required to be completed from land 
acquisition and resettlement point of view prior to invitation of RFP (keeping in view the 
developers# prospectives have been identified. These include:(a) Resettlement Action 
Plans ( RAPs) would be reviewed and endorsed by the Bank and approved by the 
Government and disclosed; (b) the first notification under Land acquisition Act would be 
issued for all the private lands to be  acquired for the respective roads; (c) the contract 
would be signed  with the respective NGOs providing  implementation support; and,(d) 
the identity cards would be issued to all eligible project affected households.  The 
payment of compensation and assistance will be extended to all project affected people 
prior to financial closure and thus enable the Government to hand over the unencumbered 
land to the developers.  
 
Borrower Capacity: ARDC has set up an Environment and Social Management Unit 
(ESMU) with expertise in forestry, environmental engineer, land acquisition and social 
sciences. This unit functions with direct reporting to the Project Director. The ESMU 
capacity building has been integrated as part of the institutional capacity building for 
APRDC. To facilitate implementation of social management plans, the project has 
already initiated the process to contract a Nodal NGO at the project level and facilitating 
NGOs at the package level. These NGOs are expected to be contracted soon.  
 
The Borrower will also be supported by: (a) Independent Supervision Consultants (SC) 
who will be responsible for overseeing Upgradation/Strengthening component of the 
project; (b) Technical Audit Consultants for OPRC component; and (c) Independent 
Engineer for PPP component.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include (i) project affected people (ii) roadside communities (iii) 
road users and citizens groups (iv) NGOs and civil society groups (v) local government 
(vi) implementing agency (vii) District Administration (viii) Project staff (RBD/APRDC) 
and (ix) relevant state government departments including, Departments of Revenue, 
Energy and Environment, Forest, Tribal/Rural Development, AP Pollution control Board, 
AP State AIDS Control Society.  
Page  7
Corridor specific consultations were conducted during screening, feasibility, and 
preparation of DPRs. The consultations were conducted in formal meetings with 
communities, informal focus group discussions and interviews. The content of 
consultations relate to alignment issues, impacts on community, cultural, and natural 
resources; and possible enhancement measures. The DPR stage consultations are focused 
on providing information and discussing the draft environmental management plans 
addressing various environmental issues, resettlement plans tribal development strategy 
and plan, HIV/AIDS Action Plan and involvement of local communities in road safety 
measures. All consultations have been properly documented. The outcomes of these 
consultations are accounted as part of the corridor specific EAs, RAP, TDP, road safety 
measures and project level HIV/AIDS Action Plan.  
 
APRDC has made public disclosure of all the Environmental and Social Safeguards 
documents of the project prepared so far. The disclosed documents have been made 
available for disclosure on Bank#s Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/04/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/10/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/04/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/04/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  8
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binyam Reja 
03/03/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli 
03/03/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
03/03/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
03/03/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/23/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. Please refer to clearance memorandum of 23 Aprl for details. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
05/05/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
