Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4269 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P113028 
Project Name: Mumbai Urban Transport - MUTP2A 
Task Team Leader: Hubert Nove-Josserand 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 15, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
296.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
403.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
403.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed MUTP-2A will build upon the progress made under the Mumbai urban transport 
project (MUTP) and will cover the suburban rail system within Mumbai Metropolitan area. Its 
objective will be to maximize the efficiency of the suburban rail system of Mumbai Metropolitan 
Area on the infrastructure that has been created under MUTP, thereby contributing to further 
growth and improvement in quality of life within the Region.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project includes (i) the procurement of 720 additional Electric Motor Units (EMU) cars, (ii) 
expansion of maintenance facilities and provision of stabling lines for these additional 720 EMU 
cars, (iii) completion of conversion from 1500V DC to 25KV AC traction of the remaining 
sections of Central Railway in Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR), and (iv) technical 
assistance studies for activities to further improve system capacity, quality and efficiency.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
The project will be implemented in different parts of MMR which spreads over an area of 4,167 
sq. kms. Mumbai is the largest city in India with a population of about 18 millions with 
contradictions of extravagant homes and half of the population of the city is living in slums.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Mumbai Railways Vikas Corporation Limited (MRVC), the implementing agency has fair 
experience in coordinating land acquisition and resettlement activities with the state government. 
It was involved with the land acquisition for the implementation of the rail component of the on-
going MUTP. MRVC has gained considerable exposure to the sensitiveness of urban 
resettlement by way of coordinating with MMRDA the resettlement of a large number of project 
affected people from along the railway sub-projects of the on-going MUTP. The expected 
environment and social impacts of the proposed project will be minimal. MRVC also has prior 
experience of implementing EMPs in line with Bank requirements in MUTP, and some of the 
activities proposed in this project such as conversion of DC to AC traction are residuals from the 
on-going MUTP. MRVC has agreed to put in place an environmental management system 
compliant with ISO 14001. Based on the findings of the on-going EA, the capacity of MRVC 
will be enhanced if needed to deal with the safeguards.  
 
An Environmental Assessment study undertaken (draft prepared) has broadly indicated the 
likely nature and magnitude of adverse social impacts. The draft EA report indicates that: (a) no 
private land will be acquired; (b) a very limited number of squatter families living on Railway 
Lands will be relocated; and (c) a small number of agricultural laborers working on the lands 
leased out to its employees by the Railways for preventing encroachments will lose their 
incomes. Appropriate mitigation measures will be undertaken by the client, based on a focused 
baseline survey of the affected families and their likely losses. The Client has indicated that the 
proposed mitigation measures will be in line with the R&R framework adopted for the ongoing 
MUTP, which is acceptable to the Bank.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental assessment is underway for the project to ensure that potential impacts are 
assessed and appropriate mitigation measures identified.  Building on the experience of MUTP, 
the EA will also facilitate the integration of environmental management measures into the 
contract documents as required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
In some of the sub-project locations close to the sea/creek, mangroves may exist. In order to 
assess the potential impacts of the project activities on these important locations, the EA is 
assessing individual sites already identified. Appropriate mitigation measures will be developed 
depending on site conditions.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
While it is unlikely that the project activities will directly impact any significant cultural 
properties as most of the activities are within land owned by the  Railways, the remote possibility 
of #chance finds# and/or locally important resources exists. The EA will assess this and provide 
management measures to guide sub-project implementation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The focused baseline survey will indicate if any indigenous people are affected.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The draft EA report indicates that: (a) no private land is affected; (b) a very limited number 
of squatter families living on Railway Lands will be relocated; and (c) a small number of 
agricultural laborers working on the lands leased out to its employees by the Railways for 
preventing encroachments may lose their incomes. Appropriate mitigation measures will be 
undertaken by the client, based on a focused baseline survey of the affected families and their 
likely losses. The Client has indicated that the proposed mitigation measures will be in line with 
the R&R framework adopted for the ongoing MUTP, which is acceptable to the Bank.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/15/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Assessment is currently underway to determine the nature of likely 
impacts and propose measure for their mitigation. Based on the findings of the study, the 
PAD stage ISDS will be prepared.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hubert Nove-Josserand 
06/04/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/05/2009 
Comments:  Endorsed as Category "B" at this stage. Findings of social and environmental assessments 
may necessitate revisiting category, when they are provided to SAR Safeguards Office 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
06/05/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
