Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/07/2009 
Report No.:  AC4088
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P100584 
Project Name:  INDIA Chiller Energy Efficiency - GEF Component 
Task Team Leader:  Charles Joseph Cormier 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (50%);District heating and energy efficiency services 
(50%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.30 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
87.38
87.38 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objectives of the CEEP are to:  
 
i). 
support India’s efforts to comply with the Montreal Protocol obligations 
pertaining to complete phase-out of CFCs by 2010 (production and consumption of new 
CFCs), with minimum impact on economic development;  
 
ii). 
remove market and techno-economic barriers to early replacement of inefficient 
chillers, with priority given to CFC chillers, through the provision of financial incentives 
directly to chiller owners in order to lower their opportunity costs and up-front capital 
costs and remove perceived technology risks; and  
 
iii). 
establish an in-country mechanism to support a permanent transformation of the 
chiller market in India by availing carbon finance revenues and strengthening national 
capacity for carbon finance intermediation; 
 
The Project Objectives are directly and primarily related to the global environmental 
agendas related to the stabilization of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases 
Page  2
(GHG) and the phase-out of Ozone Depleting substances (ODS). By accelerating the 
phase-out of old CFC-based inefficient chillers, the CEEP will reduce the consumption of 
ODS in the domestic market by 189 tonnes ODP and help control the continued 
emissions of ODS in old equipment. Additionally the project will support the reduction of 
the atmospheric load of GHGs through an increase in energy efficiency. The CEEP has 
significant scope for replication as it will develop and implement an approach that 
bridges the gap between the techno-economic and institutional aspects related to energy 
efficiency.   
 
3. Project Description 
The overarching objectives of the Chiller Energy Efficiency Project (CEEP) are two-fold, 
namely to reduce greenhouse gas emissions whilst simultaneously supporting the phase-
out of CFC consumption as required under the Montreal Protocol.  The CEEP will 
achieve this by:  
 
i). 
stimulating the acceleration of conversions of chillers to more energy efficient 
technology by dealing with the well-documented techno-economic barriers; and  
 
ii). 
reducing and/or eliminating consumption of ODS as required under the MP.  
 
It also aims at improving the investment climate for energy efficiency in India through  
involving the commercial banking sector in carbon finance business and building its 
capacity for intermediation and demonstrating the feasibility of the programmatic 
approach employed by this Project to scale up carbon finance.   
 
The CEEP will assist Indian chiller owners and operators by providing an incentive for 
early replacement of CFC-based chillers to be funded by the GEF and MLF in the start-
up phase and subsequently by carbon finance revenues when the grant funds are 
exhausted. Additionally the grant funds and carbon finance revenues (under the Clean 
Development Mechanism CDM) will be allocated for development of country-level 
institutional delivery mechanism, capacity building and logistical aspects of the project, 
including extensive outreach and technical assistance. The project aims to accelerate 
replacement of approximately 440 chillers, with a possibility that more chillers may be 
phased out after the initial 8 year period. The CEEP has four key components, as defined 
below:  
 
Component 1:  Provision of Incentive to Accelerate Replacement of Energy Efficient 
Chillers  
 
This component will provide financial incentives (about 20% of the equipment 
standardized cost) to accelerate the replacement of old centrifugal chillers to non-CFC 
energy efficient ones, in advance of the natural attrition rate of the existing equipment. 
Following the full implementation, the project will consider expanding the scope of work 
to include non-centrifugal chillers, provided that significant gains in energy efficiency 
can be achieved.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Incentive to Chiller Owners  
 
The grant funds from GEF and MLF will be used to provide incentives for inefficient 
chillers, with priority given to CFC chillers, in the initial phase of project implementation 
(until grant funds are exhausted). Additional units will be replaced in subsequent years 
Page  3
through revenues generated by carbon credits earned from installations of new chillers in 
the earlier years of the project. In the initial phase, chiller owners will have the following 
two choices of incentives which they must decide upon as soon as they join the program: 
 
i). 
Up-front grant subsidy of 20% of the normative cost of new non-CFC based 
energy efficient centrifugal chillers; or  
 
ii). 
Future carbon finance revenues to be generated by energy savings from replacing 
old chillers with new non-CFC based energy efficient centrifugal chillers. 
 
For the first option, chiller owners would have to agree to relinquish future carbon 
finance revenues that would be generated from their subprojects to the program. These 
revenues would then be used to replace additional chillers.   
 
For the second option, chiller owners would receive annual payments of approximately 
80 % of carbon credits earned over the previous twelve-month period until 2016, or until  
the validity of the Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) under the CDM.  
The balance of 20% will be disbursed to the FI for CDM related costs, including 
monitoring and verification and administrative services, including the requirements 
prescribed in the approved methodology. This option will also support the special 
circumstances of public sector institutions who could be constrained by procedural and 
legal implications in accepting up-front incentives from the private sector, but which are 
encouraged by the GOI to participate in the carbon market. 
 
The project will encourage the signing of service contracts between chiller owners and 
suppliers/manufacturers to ensure continued energy-efficient operations of the new 
chillers. Procurement of new centrifugal chillers will be carried out by project 
participants, based on prevailing commercial practice. Since financial incentives will only 
be a certain percentage of the total investment cost, chiller owners will seek the 
remaining funds from other sources including their own cash resources; commercial loan 
finances from banks or from the FI (IDBI Bank) at commercial rates, special financial 
arrangements with energy service companies; arrangements with leasing companies; or 
special financial plans that may be offered by chiller manufacturers.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Incentive to Chiller manufacturers and suppliers  
 
Non-CFC-based centrifugal chillers are being offered by national and international 
manufacturers. These include inter alia: Carrier, McQuay, Trane and York from the U.S., 
Hitachi, Mitsubishi Heavy Industry, and Ebara from Japan; and Voltas and Blue Star 
from India. In order to promote their participation in the program, eligible manufacturers 
and suppliers will be eligible to a success fee of  Rs.22.5  per ton of Certified Emission 
Reductions (CERs) per year provided they undertake the following steps:  
 
i)provide up-front a list or database of existing clients or chiller owners; For 
confidentiality reasons, this list will be subject to non-disclosure up to 18 months from 
the date of the submission.  
 
ii)attract participants to the program from their own list already provided (as detailed 
in (i) above).  
Page  4
Project participants (chiller owners and manufacturers/ suppliers) will be obliged to 
meet established environmental and safety requirements related to decommissioning of 
baseline chillers, refrigerant management and installation of new chillers, as defined in 
the Environmental Management Plan. Chiller owners must allow access to the chiller 
throughout the lifetime of the project for monitoring purposes. The project also requires 
that CFCs extracted from retired units must be inventorized, stored and managed properly 
and can be used only for servicing other RAC equipment in-site or destroyed, as per 
specified guidelines in the EMP.  
 
Component 2: Measurement, Monitoring and Verification (MM&V)  
 
As per the methodology approved by the CDM EB, the program is required to monitor 
data related to the power-output function of the old chiller to be replaced, electrical 
consumption of the new chiller, and cooling output. It necessitates a database to be 
established to keep track of all the data generated from the individual replacement 
activities and to be used to generate the reports that would support the CER claims. A 
qualified energy service or audit company will be contracted by the project to establish a 
system for (i) measuring energy consumption of baseline and new equipment; (ii) 
monitoring performance of new chillers by collecting performance parameters of new 
chillers on an on-line basis; and (iii) analyzing the data collected during the lifetime of 
the project.  
 
The MM&V consultancy company will develop specifications for data loggers and data 
transmitters and will be responsible to ensure that all new chillers are equipped with 
them. The project will finance the acquisition of these data loggers and transmitters for 
up to 100% of the chillers, in accordance with the CDM methodology. Data loggers and 
transmitters could be provided and installed directly by chiller suppliers or could be 
procured and installed by the MM&V consultant. The data will be collected and 
processed by an MIS, which will be developed by the consultant.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance  
 
This component will focus on enhancing the knowledge of project participants of the 
different MM&V requirements and the financial assistance offered by the Project. To 
ensure sustainability, it will help build capacity of relevant stakeholders in energy 
conservation measures and refrigerant management.  
 
The project will explore opportunities to expand its coverage to other energy 
conservation options in large building and industries. The project will utilize experience 
and expertise of US EPA’s Energy Star Programs and those of chiller manufacturers and 
suppliers of ancillary equipment. A financial analysis tool has been developed to support 
participants in making decisions with regard to the two options being offered by the 
Project. A launch workshop will be undertaken jointly by IDBI Bank and MoEF to 
inform the public of the commencement of the project and to invite interested parties to 
participate. This will be followed by project-cycle workshops, undertaken on a regular 
basis to inform new project participants about project requirements, processes, eligibility 
and funding criteria. Technical workshops will also be undertaken to inform participants 
about measurement, monitoring, and verification of power consumption, energy savings 
Page  5
and accounting for emission reductions. Annual recognition awards will be presented to 
those chiller owners that are able to sustain high performance of their chillers through 
proper operations and maintenance. These awards will also encourage project participants 
to closely monitor performance of their chillers, which will maximize CDM revenues for 
the project in a sustainable manner.  
 
Component 4: Project Management  
 
A
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for implementing the project. 
Since the project aims at establishing a sustainable financial mechanism to provide the 
needed financial incentive for continued replacement of CFC-based chillers, the role of 
the Financial Intermediary is critical in project management. The PMU, therefore, will be 
established within IDBI Bank. The PMU will support marketing and effective outreach, 
screening of potential candidates and undertaking sub-project processing procedures with 
identified project participants and implementing a data management system for the 
program. It will also disburse funds according to established indicators, supervise the 
MM&V consultancy and fulfil all reporting requirements as per the requirements of the 
Bank, MLF, GEF, and CDM.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Across India, vast majority in urban sector. Given that most CFC-based centrifugal 
chillers are located in the following states: Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, and Tamil Nadu, implementation of this sub-component during the first two 
years of the Project will focus on these states.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Typical environmental issues related to the project activities include: recovery and reuse 
or disposal of used ODS refrigerant; decomissioning and scrapping of old chiller units 
and proper installation of the new units; management of new refrigerants and associated 
health and safety aspects. All of these issues are manageable, in site - i.e. at the chiller 
level, and will need to be managed through the implementation of an effective 
Environment Management Plan. World Bank’s Operational Policy on Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered by this project.  
 
Poor management of chiller refrigerant can impact the global environment in a number 
of direct and indirect ways. Release of ODS refrigerant due to leakage or poor servicing, 
will have a direct adverse impact the Ozone layer. Some refrigerants (including non-ODS 
substitutes) can also have high Global Warming Potential (GWP), meaning that their 
accumulation in the atmosphere traps and reflects heat, potentially causing global climate 
change. Poorly maintained chillers can consume significant amounts of electricity, global 
has an indirect effect on global warming, depending on the mode of power generation 
utilized.  The use of chillers also impacts the local environment. The energy required to 
run a chiller during its lifetime can result in creation of pollutants such as particulate 
matter, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, lead, airborne toxic chemicals, 
and ground level ozone. Health risks from these pollutants include lung cancer, chronic 
pulmonary disease, pulmonary heart disease, and bronchitis, which are leading causes of 
death and sickness in developing countries. These pollutants also cause economic damage 
to buildings and environmental and economic damage to vegetation, animals, and natural 
resources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
If new chillers are not installed properly or not maintained and operated efficiently, they 
can have potential direct and indirect impacts. Lack of proper installation and improper 
fittings can be a safety hazard for workers and for the premises, given the size and bulk of 
this equipment. If the new chillers are poorly maintained or sub-optimally operated, they 
can leak refrigerant which might have GWP or they can utilize more electricity than 
required, which will have indirect adverse impact on the global environment   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Ideally refrigerants to be used should be those with zero Ozone Depleting Potential and 
zero Global Warming Potential (GWP). However, the technology is not yet very 
advanced and the refrigerant blends are not yet easily available commercially or well 
known or acceptable. Some alternatives have high flammability and may not be a suitable 
option either. The most viable option therefore remains to use the existing technology and 
existing commercially marketed refrigerants, but ensure good practices during 
decommissioning, installation and maintenance.   
 
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The environmental issues associated with the project are manageable and will be 
implemented at each chiller owner level, with support of chiller manufacturers/suppliers 
and service technicians. The EMP requires that Chiller suppliers are required to abide to 
safety standards prescribed by ANSI/ASHRAE 15 
–
1994.
This standard is directed 
towards safety of persons and property on or near the premises where refrigeration 
facilities are located. Project beneficiaries need to develop and submit Equipment 
Disposal plan which will ensure that equipment is dismantled and rendered unusable.  
Any components to be retained as spare parts for servicing remaining CFC chillers within 
the same buildings, and those to be sold as scrap, must be listed in the plan. Destruction 
of key components (i.e., compressors) must be done not later than successful 
commissioning of new non-CFC chillers and should be certified by chartered engineers. 
Representatives of FI or the Ozone Cell may be present during such activities. Recovery 
of CFC must be undertaken by a certified technician. The quantity of CFCs recovered 
from retiring units must be recorded and maintained either by the chiller owners and/or 
suppliers. The purpose of the proposed inventory is to track future movements and 
utilization of these gases, and to ensure that they are not intentionally vented into the 
atmosphere.  The inventory must be well maintained by project beneficiaries and be made 
available to the FI, Ozone Cell and World Bank. 
 
At the end of their useful life-time, these CFCs will need to be destroyed in an 
environmentally sound manner.  The ultimate responsibility for the destruction of the 
CFC inventory maintained by this project will be the Ozone Cell. Government of India is 
committed to the following:  
 
1.
Establishment of a domestic incineration/destruction facility, if and when, 
appropriate funding from the Multilateral Fund is approved. 
 
1.
If option 1 does not materialize, review environmentally sound (acceptable by 
international standards) alternative options, for destruction of ODS, such as retrofitting of 
existing cement kilns. 
 
2.
As a last option, export the contaminated CFCs for destruction (not re-use) to 
countries which own the appropriate technology, after obtaining all necessary 
international clearances.   
 
The EMP requirements will be included into the contractual agreements which are to be 
drawn up with all project beneficiaries (manufacturers and owners) The monitoring of the 
EMP will be the responsibility of the IDBI Bank, and the Ozone Cell. Both institutions 
have some level of experience in this activity, through their involvment in previous 
similar World Bank funded Montreal Protocol projects.  The World Bank will undertake 
regular supervision missions during the lifetime of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In the course of preparing the India chiller sector study in 2002, multiple stakeholders 
were consulted on the general subject of chiller replacement, including building owners, 
equipment suppliers, energy service companies, financial intermediaries, and relevant 
government authorities, including the Ozone Cell at the MOEF.  As part of the project 
Page  8
preparation, consultations were undertaken with chiller manufacturers, ESCOs and chiller 
owners with regard to the requirements and conditions of the project and the EMP 
requirements. The draft EMP has been officially disclosed on the websites of Ozone Cell 
and of IDBI Bank.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  9
credit/loan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Charles Joseph Cormier 
01/07/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruma Tavorath 
01/07/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/07/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
01/07/2009 
Comments:   
