Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/26/2009 
Report No.:  AC3903
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P101650 
Project Name:  Andhra Pradesh Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Smita Misra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Andhra Pradesh Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Project (hereafter called Project) 
development objective is to assist the Government of Andhra Pradesh in improving rural 
water supply and sanitation services through progressive decentralization, community 
participation and enhanced accountability.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises of the following three main components: (A) Capacity and Sector 
Development; (B) Infrastructure Development; and (C) Project Implementation Support.  
 
Component A: Capacity and Sector Development (US$12m): This component will 
provide institutional capacity support to implement, manage and sustain the project 
activities, along with sector development studies. The main sub-components include: (a) 
Capacity Building and Training activities for state level institutions, PRIs and sector 
stakeholders; (b) Communications Strategy and Information, Education and 
Communications (IEC) Program; (c) Sector Development Studies to inform policy 
decisions.  
 
Component B: Infrastructure Development (US$153m): This component will support 
investments for improving water supply and sanitation services in the project habitations, 
including construction of new infrastructure or rehabilitation and augmentation of 
Page  2
existing schemes with safe disposal of waste-water. These investments would be made in 
an integrated manner with source strengthening and catchment area protection activities; 
soak-pits; construction of latrines for BPL households; community awareness programs 
for improving sanitation and hygiene practices; and incentives for achieving ‘open 
defecation free status’.  Solid waste management and surface drainage activities will be 
taken up in major GPs.  Underground piped drainage will be supported in select Mandal 
Headquarters.  About 80% habitations are expected to be served by SVS using local 
groundwater sources. The MVSs, mainly relying on surface water sources, will be taken 
up for habitations where the local source is either not sustainable or of not acceptable 
quality.  
 
Component C: Project Implementation Support (US$15m): A Program Support Unit 
(PSU) under the SWSM, assisted by staff in the districts (D-PSUs), will implement and 
manage the WB Project.  The main functions of the PSU will be to coordinate with 
various stakeholders including the SWSM, DWSMs; procure external services (as 
required) to support the implementation of the WB Project; and review and report the 
progress of the WB Project.  This component includes establishing and operationalizing 
the following activities: (i) Sector Information System (SIS) and Monitoring and 
Evaluation System (M&E) for the Sector Program and WB Project; and (ii) financial 
management system for administering funds and expenses for the WB Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project aims to implement water supply schemes in 1,600 Not Covered (NC) /No 
Safe Source (NSS) habitations and 1000 Partially Covered (PC) habitations.  The project 
will support RWSS District Programs in 6 self-selected districts and will benefit about 
2.1million rural population.  
 
The salient features of the state relevant to the safeguard analysis:  
 
Water Quantity:  
 
Of the 71710 habitations in the state, only about 46% are Fully Covered (FC) with 
respect to water supply. About 45% of the habitations are Partially Covered. The rest of 
the habitations fall in the Not Covered or No Safe Source categories .  
 
The coverage of rural households with household water supply is 22%, while the 
coverage of urban households is 57% .  
 
The state’s average for ground water development stands at 45% .  
 
Excessive ground water withdrawal is an issue in parts of the state. The districts of 
Chittoor, Kadapa, Anantapur, Nizamabad, Medak and Ranga Reddy range between 70% 
and >100% groundwater development . Of the 1108 mandals in the state, 15% (172) are 
classified as over-exploited  and 5% (58) are classified as criticalwith respect to 
groundwater status .  
 
Water Quality:  
 
About 80 percent of the rural water schemes are dependent on groundwater sources 
while 20 percent are dependent on surface water sources .  
Page  3
About 4700 habitations (6.5% of the total 71710 habitations) are reportedly affected by 
water contamination 
–
including chemical, physical and biological contamination. Of 
these, about 1900 habitations (41% of total affected habitations) do not have access to a 
safe source of water (classified as NSS).  
 
The districts of East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Prakasam are affected 
by high salinity of ground water .  
 
High concentration of fluoride in ground water beyond the permissible limit of 1.5 mg/L 
is a significant health problem in Andhra Pradesh. The groundwater in 3121 habitations 
has high fluoride concentration . Of the affected districts Prakasam, Nalgonda, 
Khammam, Karimnagar, Anantapur are more severely affected .  
 
Physical and biological contamination of water is reported in 218 habitations.  
 
Sanitation:  
 
The rural sanitation coverage in the state is about 54%, while only 30% of these 
households actually use toilets.  
 
A
large percentage of the rural population (about 80%) still practices open defecation. 
The health implications of this are evident from the fact that about 20% of cases of 
illnesses in the rural parts of the state are on account of water borne diseases .  
 
Forests and Tribals:  
 
Andhra Pradesh has over 5 million tribals accounting for about 7% of the total 
population in the state. While 93% of them live in rural areas, highest concentrations are 
found in 10 districts. Apart from undulating terrain, high rainfall and poor reach, majority 
of these areas are in and around forests. Of the 11,540 tribal habitations located in this 
area, 701 have NC status (Not Covered). Hence, interface with the forestry assumes 
significance, from the view points of identifying water sources and developing the 
facilities.  
 
Lands:  
 
In some cases, water may not be available locally or that the available watermay not be 
potable. Then, water may have to be brought from far off sources which may entail 
securing lands.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDI) 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI) 
Ms Kalyani Kandula (SASDI) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
ENVIRONMENT SAFEGUARD ISSUES  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The Project will include single and multi 
village water supply schemes, sanitation schemes and, solid and liquid waste 
management. While these interventions are expected to result in overall environmental 
and public health improvements in the state, there is a risk of negative environmental 
impact if the schemes are not properly designed, sited, implemented, and maintained. 
Conducting an Environmental Analysis (EA) and developing an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) is necessary for identifying the project’spotential 
negative and positive environmental impacts and recommending measures to mitigate 
adverse impacts. The framework approach will enable the environmental aspects to be 
addressed with clarity and simplicity for the range of infrastructure development 
activities that are planned to be supported by the project.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Some of the schemes taken up under the Project will be located in 
forest areas. Mitigation measures have been appropriately included into the 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to ensure that (a) to the extent possible, 
new interventions in wildlife sanctuaries and national parks will be avoided (b) in cases 
where this is inevitable (for example, if water sources are available only within the 
sanctuaries/national parks), the minimum required construction activities will be planned 
for with the approval of the Forest Department (c) in case of reserve forest areas the 
approval of the Forest Department at the state level (for conversion of forest land up to 1 
ha) or of the Ministry of Environment and Forests at the central level (for conversion of 
forest land beyond 1 ha) will be taken as per the stipulated procedure under the Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980 . Also, any required felling of trees in forest or non-forest areas 
will be done with the permission of the Forest Department.  
 
SOCIAL SAFEGUARD ISSUES  
 
Page  5
Lands
–OP 4.12:  Land requirement arises for four purposes: (i) water source; (ii) water 
treatment plants (WTPs); (iii) construction of ground level or overhead tanks (G/OHT) or 
cisterns; and (iv) Water transmission and distribution pipelines as well as sullage/ storm 
water drains.  Water sources could be either ground water or surface water source based. 
The ground water sources do require ‘land’and so  is the case with WTPs. In the case of 
tanks, if they are constructed in a place other than that of the ‘source, separate land will 
be essential. Transmission and distribution lines are laid mostly in public land or along 
public streets and no land needs are to be secured. In a few cases, pipelines  may have to 
pass through private agriculture fields.  Since the pipelines are laid  at least 90 cms below 
ground  elevation, no land acquisition is needed, but permission from the land owner is 
taken. If such permission is not forthcoming, then alternative pipe routing is used, even if 
it is  more expensive to do so. This means, lands are required for Sl No (i), (ii) and (iii). 
But, nature and extent of lands required/ to be acquired varies substantially across the 
schemes, and so will be the arrangements. While lands may not have to be acquired in a 
majority of the cases, some acquisition is not ruled out. Hence, OP 4.12 is triggered.  
 
Tribals-OP 4.10: The social assessment study discovered the presence of tribals  (in 
World Bank’s parlance- Indigenous Peoples) in significant numbers in the state. The 
scheduled tribes (STs) are a group with a distinct cultural identity and social and 
economic disadvantages. These constitute one of the largest social groups in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh with a population share of about 7%.  The social assessment study 
brought out that some of the ST groups: (i) have a distinct cultural identity as compared 
to other groups; (ii) are socially and economically disadvantaged in comparison to others. 
(iii)  require special developmental needs especially their settlement pattern is not always 
near the water source but their livelihood is organically linked to such sources; and  (iv) 
are perpetually excluded from the decision making and have least representation in 
formal and semi-formal village institutions. Further, the need for special developmental 
attention for tribals arises for the following reasons: poor socio-economic conditions, 
prolonged vulnerability and marginalization.  This has led to the national constitutional 
provisions and safeguards for tribals. Keeping these in view, the OP 4.10 is triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment: The Project is likely to have an overall positive impact on environment by 
yielding positive outcomes in drinking water quality, sanitation and waste management. 
Among the various environmental risks, the following have potential for long term 
negative impacts:  
 
Saline water intrusion in coastal areas due to tapping over-exploited aquifers.  
 
Quality deterioration (excess fluoride) in upland hard rock areas due to over-
exploitation.  
 
Drying up of drinking water wells due to over-extraction of groundwater for irrigation.  
 
The mitigation measures specified in the Environmental Management Framework to 
manage these impacts include selection of water sources with due regard to sustainability, 
Page  6
conservation of existing water resources (especially in case of critical and overexploited 
aquifers) and promoting efficiency of use.  
 
Social: No adverse/ negative impacts are likely to occur as a result of the program 
intervention. Instead, positive benefits are likely to occur in the fields of local level 
human and institutional development (in particular, strengthening of Gram Panchayats), 
and improved health and hygiene.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environment: Due to the participatory nature of the schemes and framework approach 
adopted for environmental management, the alternative options for villages would be 
considered during the design and planning phase of each scheme.  
 
Social: It is well recognized that the RWSS reforms are being attempted for the first 
time in the state, and that it will be a difficult and challenging task for the government, 
PRIs and communities. Hence, towards ensuring that potential positive benefits do 
translate into reality,  program plans for trying alternative means of community 
development support as well as human and institutional development efforts. This will be 
complemented with an ample provision for ‘change management’ initiatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: The PSU, APRWSSP, with help from consultants, has carried out an 
Environmental Analysis (EA) identifying key environmental issues for the project and 
has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF). The methodology 
basically comprised collection and collation of secondary data on water availability, 
water quality, sanitation coverage, health aspects, and problems in O&M of existing 
water and sanitation systems. The study also included an analysis of policy and legal 
framework related to water and sanitation with specific focus on Andhra Pradesh. An 
analysis of this information led to defining the baseline environmental status and 
provided the basis for identifying potential environmental impacts due to the proposed 
project.  These have been considered for the preparation of the EMF for mitigating 
adverse impacts and enhancing beneficial impacts.  
 
The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) specifies a set of scheme-type 
specific environmental codes of practice (ECOP) as well as tools for environmental 
assessment. These include measures to help ensure that the project activities are in 
compliance with the laws and regulations of the Government of Andhra Pradesh and of 
the Government of India including water quality standards, effluent standards, waste 
management guidelines, forest conservation, wildlife protection, etc. The EMF also 
includes capacity building and institutional arrangements that would enable the project 
functionaries and community institutions to monitor potential impacts and take proactive 
mitigation measures.  
 
Social  
Page  7
Lands: The SA study indicated that the project would require land for various facilities 
such as: head works, treatment plants, summer storage tanks, transmission lines, 
overhead or ground level storage tanks, distribution lines, etc. However, nature and extent 
of land requirements,  vary substantially across the schemes. Water supply schemes can 
be classified  into two broad categories -- Single Village Scheme (SVS) and Multi 
Village Scheme (MVS). As the name suggests, SVS serves one or more villages within a 
Gram Panchayat (GP) while MVS serves villages beyond a single GP. There are two 
types of MVS: Small MVS and Large MVS. Generally a small MVS caters to about 5 to 
10 villages and a large MVS caters to 10 to 50 villages and beyond.  Single Village 
Ground Water Schemes would require about 0.03 Ha of land per scheme, SV-Surface 
source based schemes would require 0.65 Ha of land. Similarly, small multi village 
schemes would require 2 Ha of land per scheme or 0.2 Ha per village. Similar figures for 
Large Multi Village schemes are 3- 14 Ha and 0.3 Ha per village respectively. Thus, land 
requirements are substantial only in Large Multi Village Schemes which account for 5-10 
%
of
the schemes in the project. Overall, about 480 Ha of land is required for about 3,800 
schemes, and large MVS’s share would be 39 Ha . Given this background, two methods 
are proposed for securing lands.  
 
Small Schemes: APRWSSP envisages to cover about 3800 habitations. Of these, 80% 
are likely to be single village schemes. Of the remaining 20% schemes, half would be 
simple multi village schemes. Thus, securing land in about 90% of the cases is likely to 
be quite simple, as public land is expected to be available in a majority of cases (about 
60%). The discussions with the communities and experts as well as experiences from 
previous project reveal that, (i) almost all villages do have an existing water supply 
system and the project intervention will be restricted to 
improving/rehabilitating/augmenting the existing supplies which would mean land 
requirement will be limited; (ii) most villages do have sufficient public/Panchayat land; 
and (iii) in case, it becomes inevitable, the local community will secure lands either 
through voluntary donations or outright purchase.  
 
Rules governing taking possession of land through donations and/ or purchases are 
developed based on the experience of the Bank assisted projects: Kerala Rural Water 
Supply and Sanitation Project, Karnataka/Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project; and UP Sodic Lands Reclamation Project.  These rules will be binding 
on the part of GOAP, with the following major elements:  
 
o
All donations and purchases will be voluntary.  Mechanisms will be developed 
not only to ensure the voluntariness but also that it will not involve any significant 
adverse impact upon incomes or physical displacement.  
 
o
All voluntary land transactions will meet the following criteria:  (i) the land in 
question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of encumbrances; (ii) land 
will be chosen by the community after ensuring that water will be available in that 
particular piece of land; (iii) verification of the voluntary nature of land donations in each 
case; (iii) due transparent measures will be in place; (iv) land transfers will be complete, 
Page  8
land title will be vested in the community; and (v) provision will be made for redressal of 
grievances (ROG) if any.  
 
o
All voluntary transactions will be documented and signed by both the parties. 
Agreements on above will be reached during appraisal and legal documents will include 
the necessary clauses.  
 
Large Schemes:  
 
In the case of large schemes, donations and/ or purchase may not work as the scheme 
would be spread over many villages and arriving at a consensus across the communities 
will be difficult. So, land may have to be acquired, in case public lands are not available. 
In addition, it could be the same situation in some small village schemes too. However, as 
the project is fully demand driven, the list of project villages will become known as and 
when the villagers come forward and express willingness. This demand driven selection 
process will start once the project becomes effective and will occur over a period of 5 
years. Thus, at this stage, the project do not have full details about the lands to be 
acquired for the project. Hence, a generic frame work is prepared instead of a village 
specific resettlement action plan.  RPF will be adopted by the project as and when a 
village/ scheme is selected and the detailed project report preparation begins  
 
The framework has been developed based on the following policies/ legislations 
–
•
Andhra Pradesh Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy 2005  
 
•
The Land Acquisition Act 1894  
 
•
R&R framework developed for the World Bank assisted Andhra Pradesh 
Community Based Tanks Management Project  
 
•
RPF prepared recently for the World Bank assisted Orissa Community Tank 
Management Project.  
 
•
Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas ( PESA) Act, 1996  
 
The proposed framework comprises: (i) identification/definition of project affected 
households; (ii) compensation in lieu of lands; (iii) resettlement/rehabilitation assistance; 
and (iii) institutional and implementation arrangements. Entitlements proposed for the 
affected families are provided in the Resettlement Policy Framework. The identification 
of the affected people and preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be done 
by the VWSCs with technical assistance from non-government support organizations. 
The identification of project affected persons (PAPs) will be vetted/ reviewed by the local 
engineer as well as local revenue officials and finally approved by the District Collector.  
The RAP will be integrated into the overall Village Water Supply and Sanitation Plan and 
approved by the Institutional Development Specialist in the District Project Unit.  This 
will also be monitored by the State Project Management Unit.  
 
Tribals: Andhra Pradesh has 33 tribes out of which Gond, Koya, Sugali, Yenadi, 
Yerukula Konda Dhora are the main tribes. Of these Sugali, Koya, Yenadi, Yerukula and 
Gond constitute over 75% of tribal population of the state. The tribals normally live in 
contiguous areas unlike other communities. Their lives are closely associated with the 
Page  9
nature as they eke out their livelihoods from the natural environ 
–
streams, trees, plants, 
animals etc.  It is, therefore, recognized that maintaining their identities would invariably 
mean keeping their environ intact with them. They also have contiguous inhabitations 
which not only help in designing an area based approach but also protecting their cultural 
identity and resources.   In order to protect the interests of the Scheduled tribes with 
regard to land alienation and other social factors, provision of “Fifth Schedule” is 
enshrined in the Constitution under article 244 (2). AP has Scheduled (or normally called 
Tribal) Areas spread over 97 Mandals in 10 districts.  
 
While the project interventions will not affect adversely the tribals, these groups do 
require special attention from the viewpoint of ensuring inclusion and equity.  Hence, to 
ensure their inclusion, specific targeting is essential.  Against this context, in accordance 
with the Bank’s OP 4.10, a Tribal Development Plan (TDP) has been prepared with the 
following objectives:  (i) ensuring inclusion through selective targeting/prioritization; (ii) 
establishing anew/strengthening the existing tribal institutions to undertake RWSS 
management; (iii) reducing the drudgery for tribal women and children by reducing time 
spent in fetching water; and (iv) hygiene and behavioral changes.  The key elements 
underpinning the tribal development plan (TDP) relate to: (i) discriminatory targeting – to 
ensure inclusion and equity; (ii) governance – ensuring that the project’s implementation 
arrangements are in accordance with existing government stipulations, particularly the 
Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas Act which provides special functional powers 
and responsibilities to ensure effective participation of tribals; (iii) implementation 
arrangements – rules of engagement, including community contributions will be flexible 
to accommodate the tribals; and (iv) capacity support/building – to enable tribals to 
participate and derive full benefits. Separate budget provision too has been made for 
implementing TDP.  
 
Given the constitutional provision for Scheduled Areas, the TDP has been designed 
exclusively for these areas.  Overall, about 400 habitations are expected to be taken up 
under the project in the Scheduled Areas of AP.  It may be noted that initially, the project 
had been designed for 3,800 schemes and the TDP for 600 schemes. As the scope of the 
project got reduced to 2,600 schemes, the TDP has been reduced proportionately. Thus, 
some 400 schemes will be taken up in the most needy Mandals in the Scheduled Areas.   
 
Implementation Arrangements:  
 
Roles and responsibilities for ensuring implementation of the environment and social 
safeguards have been detailed out at state, district, mandal and village/scheme levels. At 
the state level, the Program Support Unit (PSU) is being set-up within the RWSSD, with 
a
mandate to manage the proposed project. The PSU staff will include Environment and 
Social Development Specialists charged with the overall responsibility of ensuring the 
implementation of the environmental and social aspects. Similarly at the district level, 
each of the  District PSU (D-PSU) will include an Environmental/ Social Development 
Specialist in their staff, who will be responsible for ensuring social and environmental 
capacity support to the project partners-PRIs and communities. At the village level, the 
Page  10
awareness and capacity for environmental management in the local GPWSC and SO 
would be enhanced through a targeted training and capacity building program.  
 
The social and environmental management will form an integral part of the overall 
scheme cycle. Each detailed scheme report shall contain environmental/ social checklist 
highlighting the issues and mitigation measures. Scheme appraisals will take due note of 
this and shall guide in decision making. Grassroots/village level checklist preparation will 
rest with the concerned Junior Engineer and the Support Organization. Implementation 
monitoring will rest chiefly with the GPWSC who will be capacitated and supported for 
this by RWSSD. The post implementation supervision (including water quality) would be 
integrated with the overall monitoring of performance indictors. Training and 
information, education, communication (IEC) activities are planned to build the capacity 
of community institutions as well as project staff for effective integration of safeguards 
measures into the scheme-based activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key program stakeholders were identified and consultations held to seek their views and 
incorporate the same into designing of the program. Grassroots level stakeholders 
include: (i) benefiting households (including women, poor, Scheduled Castes, and 
Scheduled Tribes); (ii) Gram Panchayats (men and women elected representatives), (iii) 
Junior Engineers of RWSSD, and (iv) other community based organizations. Block/ 
district level stakeholders are: the respective Panchayat Raj Institutions; other concerned 
line departments such as health, rural department, power, irrigation; district/ block 
administration; the RWSSD; and non-governmental organizations, contractors/ suppliers 
and consultants. Departments of Finance, Drinking Water Supply & Sanitation, Rural 
Development and Panchayat Raj, Science and Technology, Irrigation, Health, Tribal 
Welfare, political leaders, NGOs and consultants. There have been consultations 
throughout the project preparation both by the Bank Missions as well as by the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh.  
 
The environmental and social assessment studies have been conducted with active 
participation by relevant stakeholders Summaries of the assessments, in particular, EMF, 
Resettlement Policy Framework, and Tribal Development Plan have been translated into 
local language and disseminated throughout the state. Stakeholder consultation 
workshops have been held at all levels 
–
grassroots, regional and state.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/19/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  11
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Page  12
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Smita Misra 
02/25/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Priti Kumar 
02/12/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
02/25/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Kalyani Kandula 
02/12/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/26/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. Please see clearance memo. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Oscar E. Alvarado 
03/26/2009 
Comments:  Oscar Alvarado, Acting SM, SASDU 
