Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3346 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P101653 
Project Name: POWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IV 
Task Team Leader: Pedro E. Sanchez 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
600.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,200.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1,200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to further facilitate and strengthen the transmission system in 
order to increase reliable power exchanges between the regions and states of India. In order to 
achieve this objective, the project is designed to focus on (i) strengthening the transmission 
system in the power deficit regions and increasing inter-regional transmission capacity, and (ii) 
developing the institutional capacity of POWERGRID to facilitate the implementation of open 
access and inter-regional trading.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Government of India has requested IBRD to provide a loan of approximately US$ 600 
million to POWERGRID to finance a part of POWERGRID’s five-year (2007-12)investment 
program, which is aimed at strengthening the national transmission network by raising country’s 
inter regional power transfer capacity from 9,500 MWcurrently to 30,000 MW.  A strengthened 
grid would facilitate more efficient usage of economic resources (energy sources and power 
generation facilities), take advantage of differences in peak-demand timings across regions, 
Page  2
support the open access regime mandated in the Electricity Act 2003, and help facilitate the 
development of a power trading market within th
e
country and with India’s neighbors. 
 
The proposed loan for PSDP-IV would finance investments that meet the basic criteria for 
IBRD funding i.e. that the scheme is technically and operationally justified, economically and 
financially optimized as part of the least cost investment program, has received all the necessary 
Government clearances, and complies with POWERGRID’s environment and social policy, 
which is in compliance with the World Bank standards. The major schemes to be financed under 
PSDP-IV include: (i) Transmission system strengthening schemes (Eastern Region System 
Strengthening scheme; Western Region System Strengthening scheme; East-West Transmission 
corridor) and (ii) the completion of balance works of schemes under PSDP-III project.  
 
Procurement of the bulk of goods and services investments to be financed under PSDP-IV has 
been initiated in accordance with the World Bank’s Guidelines: Procurement under IBRD Loans 
and IDA Credits” dated May 2004, Revised October 2006.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This project location is to be spread across various states all over the country.  The project is 
primarily aimed at building a strong national transmission network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Over the last few years, the transmission sector in India has developed significantly and is poised 
for rapid growth in the years ahead. This will create new opportunities and complex challenges 
including on social and environmental issues for POWERGRID. POWERGRID had managed 
those challenges by developing a robust policy framework and a strong institutional department.  
 
On the policy front, POWERGRID has developed a corporate Environmental and Social Policy 
and Procedures (ESPP), which conforms to the safeguards requirements of the World Bank. This 
policy applies to all POWERGRID investment program regardless the source of funding.  
 
On the institutional front, POWERGRID has a strong Environment and Social Management 
Division (ESMD) under an Executive Director and headed by a General Manager.  The ESMD is 
supported by seven environment and social specialists.  Since the PSDP-II, ESMD has been 
involved in undertaking regular environmental monitoring, supervision and reporting of progress 
on implementation of environment and social action plans.  Each of the seven regions of 
POWERGRID has one person assigned with a responsibility to manage social and environmental 
issues and to ensure coordination with the ESMD corporate office in New Delhi.  ESMD 
continues to work closely with other functional divisions within POWERGRID to mainstream 
most environmental and social issues into the design and planning process, with particular 
reference to route alignment and reducing involvement of forests areas, in order to mitigate 
environmental and social impacts.  POWERGRID, as part of its regular plan, will also 
periodically assess the capacity of its ESMD to identify, plan, implement, monitor and manage 
environmental and social aspects and identify areas for further capacity building.   
 
POWERGRID has a proven track record as a well-performing Client and has successfully 
implemented a program of Bank operations. PSDP-III project, which is the third in a series of 
Page  3
Bank loans to POWERGRID, has been rated satisfactory on implementation and achievement of 
development objectives and has met all relevant World Bank disbursement, safeguard, 
procurement and fiduciary obligations.  Moreover, the project’s predecessors, PSDP-I and 
PSDP-II, were also rated satisfactory(even highly satisfactory on several aspects), when their 
ICRs were reviewed by the IEG.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDS) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The geographical extent and coverage of the project scope is expected to extend to several 
hundred kilometers and therefore, each investment would require an assessment of both adverse 
and positive impacts on the surrounding environment.  Environmental issues during the 
construction phase of power transmission line projects may include impacts on terrestrial and 
aquatic habitat and, impacts on humans due to electric and magnetic fields and hazardous 
materials.  Although construction of transmission lines by POWERGRID in the past has led to 
very limited and manageable environmental impacts, the ESPP is expected to guide ESMD in 
undertaking Environmental Assessment ( EA) and Social Assessment (SA) and developing 
specific EMPs to offset potential environmental and social risks during the construction stage 
and operational stages.  ESMD at POWERGRID would undertake an EA and SA of each 
investment project using the guidance provided under ESPP.  EMP will include mitigation 
measures and the institutional arrangements for their effective implementation and monitoring.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Some of the transmission lines may go through ecologically sensitive habitats requiring 
specific interventions to mitigate any adverse environmental impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Transmission Line projects of POWERGRID may not involve large scale diversion of forest 
areas but some of the POWERGRID transmission lines may pass through environmentally 
sensitive areas like forests/national parks/game reserves, where alternative routes may not be 
feasible.  If such the case the EA will identify appropriate mitigation measures to ensure 
compliance.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The implementation experience from earlier POWERGRID projects, indicate that it is 
unlikely that the construction of transmission lines towers or sub station would impact physical 
cultural properties.  However, in case of a chance find of a cultural property during construction, 
appropriate procedures would be followed in accordance with ESPP to mitigate adverse impacts 
and protect physical cultural resources discovered during project implementation and operation 
and monitor progress.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some transmission lines may pass through areas that are inhabited by indigenous people.  
POWERGRID will follow procedures defined in the ESPP, for each investment to ensure that 
POWERGRID projects fosters ful
l
respect for the dignity and cultural uniqueness of indigenous 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
peoples, and ensure that they receive culturally compatible social and economic benefits and do 
not suffer adverse effects during the development process.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Construction of Sub stations may involve limited land acquisition.  The ESPP provides 
guidance on procedures to be followed to minimize involuntary resettlement where feasible; 
explore all viable alternative project designs; and assist displaced persons in improving their 
former living standards, income earning capacity, and production levels, or at least in restoring 
them; encourage community participation in planning and implementing resettlement; and 
provide assistance to affected people regardless of the legality of title of land.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/31/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project do not require QER as it is a repeater project   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pedro E. Sanchez 
01/08/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
01/13/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
