Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2009 
Report No.:  AC4356
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P092735 
Project Name:  National Agricultural Innovation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Jordanova Damiano 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P112060 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (50%);Crops (30%);General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Land administration and management (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Biodiversity (S);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.34 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
60.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
0.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund 
25.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
3.00
88.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed additional financing from the Global Environmental Facility is to support 
the development and implementation of innovations in agriculture through collaboration 
among farmers, private sector, civil society, and public sector organizations. The project 
is complementary to the parent project: India National Agricultural Innovation Project 
(NAIP) in that it will focus on promoting approaches and techniques for sustainable 
management of degraded coastal land and water, on conserving and sustainably using 
local biodiversity (plant, animal and fish) for agricultural intensification and livelihood 
security, and on enhancing capacity to respond to climate change and variability in 
drought and flood prone areas. The GEF support will finance activities that address land 
degradation, biodiversity and adaptation to climate change. The GEF support will also 
pilot the local operationalization of adaptation strategies to climate change.  
 
Page  2
The global objective of the proposed project for additional financing is to strengthen 
institutional and community capacity on sustainable land and ecosystem management 
approaches and techniques for restoring and sustaining the natural resource base, 
including its biodiversity, while taking account of climate variability and change. The 
project is in the pipeline of the Sustainable Ecosystem and Land Management Country 
Partnership Program and as such will provide inputs for mainstreaming SLEM in sector 
policies.   
 
3. Project Description 
In line with the planned outcome of the parent project NAIP, the proposed “Sustainable 
Rural Livelihoods Security through Innovations in Land and Ecosystem Management” 
through the additional grant financing from GEF will support the development and 
implementation of innovations in agriculture through collaboration among farmers, 
private sector, civil society, and public sector organizations. The GEF financing will 
support activities that address land degradation, biodiversity and adaptation to climate 
change. As one of the program projects of the Sustainable Ecosystems and Land 
Management Country Partnership program (SLEM-CPP) its outcomes will provide inputs 
contributing to the overall objective the partnership.  
 
The additional financing follows the same project implementation structure as in the 
parent project NAIP. No major design changes have been proposed. The GEF additional 
financing will strengthen the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in its role 
as a catalyst for change in the national agricultural system and integration of sustainable 
land management, biodiversity conservation in productive landscapes and reducing 
agricultural vulnerability through adaptation of farming practices to climate variability. 
Three blocks of activities will be implemented and supported by the GEF grant, which 
are as follows:  
 
(A) Land degradation:  Strategies for sustainable management of degraded coastal land 
and water for enhancing livelihood security of farming communities  
 
The objectives of this component are:  
 
(i) Sustainable enhancement of the productivity of degraded land and water resources of 
the coastal region through integrated approaches; (ii) enhancement of livelihood security 
and employment generation for the poor farming communities of the coastal region; and 
(iii) empowerment through capacity building and skill development of stakeholders 
including men and women farmers.  
 
These objectives will be accomplished through the following menu of possible 
interventions, and the same will be firmed up through a consultative process while site 
(village/ settlement) specific micro plans are formulated during the implementation of 
each sub-project:  
 
(i) Land shaping for improving drainage efficiency, rainwater harvesting leading 
enhanced productivity of low-lying degraded land including tsunami affected land; (ii) 
Page  3
cultivation of multiple and diversified crops, including horticultural crops, of varieties 
adapted for degraded saline and tsunami affected lands; (iii) integrated cultivation of 
crops and fish (freshwater and brackish water fish); (iv) improved irrigation system for 
efficient water utilization in horticultural and plantation crops; (v) promotion of 
composting including vermin-composting, green manuring, etc. for enhancing 
productivity of agriculture and aquaculture; (vi) introduction of low cost farm 
machineries for drudgery reduction and economic farm operations; (vii) nursery raising 
for horticultural crops and fish seeds; (viii) introduction and improvement in 
livestock/poultry management including nutrition and disease management; (ix) 
introduction of mushroom cultivation and bee-keeping; (x) introduction of protected 
cultivation for high value crops; (xi) establishment of rural technology transfer centers in 
villages at project sites; and (xii) skill and capacity building of farmers and other 
stakeholders.  
 
(B) Biodiversity:  Harmonizing biodiversity conservation and agricultural intensification 
through integration of plant animal and fish genetic resources for livelihood security in 
fragile ecosystems:  
 
The objectives of this component are:  
 
(i) Assessment, documentation and valuation of on-farm biodiversity for livelihood and 
foods security; (ii) assessment of economic potential of target species vis-a-vis cost and 
effect of conservation; (iii) development of an information management system to 
facilitate planned interventions for conservation, sustainable utilization of target 
species/populations and enhanced market access; (iv) adding value to target 
species/populations through technological interventions for enhanced rural livelihood 
security; and (v) capacity building of local farmers in agro-biodiversity management for 
livelihood security.  
 
These objectives will be accomplished through the following menu of possible 
interventions, and the same will be firmed up through a consultative process while site 
(village/ settlement) specific micro plans are formulated during the implementation of 
each sub-project:  
 
(i) Identification and improvement of landrace material and production systems through 
farmers’ participation; (ii) “adding value” initiatives for animal genetic resources through 
exploiting germplasm of indigenous breeds of livestock andthrough health management 
practices; (iii) “add value” options for fish geneticresources through propagation of 
indigenous fish species for conservation and stock enhancement; (iv) development of an 
information management system to facilitate planned interventions for conservation and 
sustainable utilization of targeted species/populations; (v) capacity building in agro–
biodiversity management for livelihood security through organization of grassroot level 
trainings; (vi) empowerment of farm communities through documentation, and validation 
of local varieties through characterization and registration; (vii)  putting in place a 
management system for genetic resources of agro-biodiversity aiming at diversification 
and benefit sharing using local resources, community seed banking, marketing etc.; and 
Page  4
(vii) developing a replicable model for livelihood security based on sustainable use of 
agro-biodiversity and agricultural intensification.  
 
(C) Adaptation to climate change:  Enhancing adaptive capacity to climate change and 
variability in drought and flood prone areas  
 
The objectives of this component are:  
 
(i) Identification of current and future risks to livelihoods due to climatic variability and 
change; (ii) development of drought indices to facilitate early warning system (EWS) for 
drought & promoting it’s use in adaptation by farmers and other stakeholders; (iii) 
develop community based sustainable rural livelihood strategies to minimize adverse  
climatic impact in drought as well as flood prone vulnerable districts; and (iv) capacity 
building of on strategies for alternate livelihood strategies to cope with climate variability 
and change.  
 
These objectives will be accomplished through the following menu of possible 
interventions, and the same will be firmed up through a consultative process while site 
(village/ settlement) specific micro plans are formulated during the implementation of 
each sub-project:  
 
(i) Introduction of drought/heat tolerant improved seeds; (ii) new and tested 
technological intervention (laser leveling, sprinkler/drip irrigation, nursery raising etc.) to 
enhance adaptation to climate change; (iii) develop community based drought 
preparedness plans; (iv) develop watershed/catchment management action plans 
including land and water resources development, common property resource regeneration  
to enhance adaptation to climate change; (v) introduction and improved management of 
livestock, including local poultry, through better health care and better production 
systems; (vi) introduction of flood-tolerant improved seeds (rice/pulses/oilseed/fodder 
plants); (vii) introduction of diversified crops (vegetables, flowers, oil seeds, fiber crops, 
fodder crops, spices, fruits), crop rotations, integrated natural resource management 
(related to inclusion of common property resources in the adaptation process) and 
integrated pest management; and (viii) development of integrated flood and drought early 
warning and information system.  
 
Policy mainstreaming is a cross cutting theme of the project supported by a number of 
capacity building, knowledge dissemination and outreach activities based on lesson 
derived from filed operations. Sustainable land and ecosystem management approaches 
and techniques will be mainstreamed into guidelines and policies of public and private 
institutions for which the SLEM CPP would provide the enabling environment at national 
level.  
 
The objectives of this component are to ensure that public and private organizations 
apply SLEM practices and policies to combat land degradation, increase utilization of 
indigenous biodiversity and adapt to climate variability and change.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The three blocks of activities have been selected by ICAR using the institutional review 
structure and approval processes under the ongoing parent project NAIP including 
safeguards screening in compliance of the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework. Geographical coverage of block activities varies and it largely coincides with 
the strategic geographic coverage of NAIP and focus on Indian states where degradation 
of natural assets and poverty are of major concerns.  
 
(A) Land degradation - Strategies for sustainable management of degraded coastal land 
and water for enhancing livelihood security of farming communities: The project will 
address the constraints to agricultural productively due to degraded soils and water of the 
coastal areas with primary concern for the landless, marginal and small farmers in ten 
selected locations representing two of the most disadvantaged coastal areas of the country 
viz. the coastal Sundarbans, the delta region of the river Ganga in the state of West 
Bengal and in North-mid & South of Andaman island.  
 
(B) Biodiversity - Harmonizing biodiversity conservation and agricultural 
intensification through integration of plant animal and fish genetic resources for 
livelihood security in fragile ecosystems: The project will operate in three districts, 
namely, Chamba in Himachal Pradesh (Hill and Mountain agro-ecosystem with 
temperate climate), Udaipur in Rajasthan (Irrigated and rainfed agro-ecosystem in 
Arawali hills with semi-arid climate) and Adilabad in Andhra Pradesh (Deccan Plateau 
and Sahyadri Hills with tropical climate). These districts represent distinct agro-
ecosystems with specific bio-resource components of plants, animals and fish.  
 
(C) Adaptation to climate change - Enhancing adaptive capacity to climate change and 
variability in drought and flood prone areas: The project will be implemented in three to 
four villages in eight districts of Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Orissa, and Maharashtra. The 
districts and villages have been selected in cooperation with local development agencies 
and local government institutions in order to target communities where the introduction 
of innovative technologies can make an important contribution to improving the 
livelihoods of poor families now adversely impacted by droughts and floods.  
 
The proposed safeguar
ds category of the project is “B” which is consistent withthe 
parent project NAIP’s category.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDI) 
Ms Yuka Makino (SASDI) 
Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The issues covered here are possible issues that may arise during the implementation of 
the additional financing which cover the three GEF financed sub-projects.  
 
The sub-projects aim at harnessing scientific advances in the sustainable management of 
degraded coastal land and water; harmonizing biodiversity conservation and agricultural 
intensification; and enhancing the adaptive capacity to climate change and variability in 
drought and flood prone areas. The interventions are aimed at sustainable livelihoods 
while enhancing the surrounding ecosystems. Therefore, the impacts of the projects are 
expected to be mostly positive.  
 
However, localized small-scale temporary impacts may arise inadvertently, in the 
unlikely event that the selection, planning, and implementation of the sub-project 
interventions and demonstration sites are not done properly.  Detailed impact assessments 
will be done during the preparation of site specific micro plans, particularly,  in the light 
of the following safeguard policies of the Bank; (i) OP 4.01 --Environmental ; (ii) OP 
4.09 - Pest Management; (iii) OP 4.04: Natural Habitats; (iv) OP 4.36: Forestry; and 
(v)OP 4.10: Indigenous/ Tribal People. Other aspects receiving attention will include: 
livelihoods, in general, and that of the poor and vulnerable, in particular, drudgery for 
women, land alienation & marginalization, unemployment & migration; nutrition, 
customary rights & accesses, drinking water and sanitation etc.  
 
Some of the potential issues and the associated anticipated impacts that could include 
are presented below:  
 
.
•
Water resources: Potential contamination of water resources due to intensified 
agriculture, aquaculture and animal husbandry.  
 
•
Strain on fragile ecosystems: The acquisition of fodder for the livestock/poultry 
may put a strain on the surrounding ecosystems or lead to the introduction of new species 
Page  7
into the ecosystem. The compounded affect of the various livelihood activities may 
increase reliance or infringement on the already fragile ecosystems.  
 
•
Project’s Interface with the Communities : This is probably be the first timethat 
the scientific community will be required to ‘interface’ on such a large scale with the 
local communities and other partners (NGOs as well as private sector entities). This 
demands that each sub-project develops and adopts an appropriate institutional 
mechanism and implementation arrangements thereof to ensure an effective ‘outreach’.  
 
All these anticipated negative impacts could be prevented, mitigated, and/or contained 
by applying simple measures. The borrowers have undertaken an environmental 
assessment that identified all relevant potential impacts for all types of probable 
interventions and the necessary mitigation measures that have been presented in the 
ESMF of the parent project NAIP. The ESMF also includes a monitoring system to 
ensure implementation of the proposed mitigation measures. It also has provisions to 
review and advise the consortia partners on improving the implementation.  
 
These issues identified are manageable and the social and environmental assessments 
did not identify any potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects under GEF additional financing are likely to improve the natural 
resources management and no such issues that have long-term impact have been 
identified by the environmental assessment. However, to manage against unforeseen 
risks, the project has prepared few exclusion criteria for potential project activities, as 
part of the environmental and social management framework. During the approval 
process, the proposals are screened for exclusion using the criteria that have been 
identified in the ESMF of the parent project NAIP. It should be noted that though the 
activities planned under this project are small scale, if the Government of India plans to 
upscale the activities over larger areas, there is a likelihood of larger cumulative impacts 
and therefore, the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures would be critical.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has followed the environmental assessment and institutional measures 
described below under the parent project NAIP which are also applicable to the sub-
projects that are supported by additional financing under GEF. The sub-project specific 
measures will be determined during the implementation of the sub-projects during the 
first three months of grant effectiveness.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework for parent project: The ESMF of the 
parent project NAIP describes (i) the relevant legal and regulatory set up in India for 
Page  8
managing relevant issues, (ii) an exhaustive list of potential impacts along with a menu of 
required mitigation measures; and (iii) the institutional arrangements for implementation 
and mainstreaming the required environmental and social management measures, 
including monitoring and evaluation requirements. In addition to the ESMF, ICAR has 
also developed a comprehensive Integrated Pest and Nutrient Management (IPNM) 
which provides guidance on the safe use of pesticides and other agro-chemicals, and the 
use of other pest management techniques.  
 
Thus the proposed measures in ESMF are to ensure that the project conforms to the 
applicable GOI environmental and social safeguards, such as the rules and regulations 
related to conservation of forests, conservation of wildlife, coastal regulation zone, 
groundwater resources; guidelines related to aquaculture, biotechnology and transgenic 
research, hazardous micro organisms; environmental protection norms related to air 
quality, surface water quality, bio medical and hazardous wastes, hazardous chemicals, 
pesticides and insecticide; and the applicable discharge and emission standards. The 
project will also conform to the policies such as resettlement, agricultural and tribal 
policies; tribal laws and other relevant legislation for indigenous people; laws governing 
social issues such as protecting rights of women, child labor, equal remuneration, 
laborer’s rights; local self government regulations; and the right to information.  
 
The ESMF also contains a clear, unambiguous and comprehensive list of subproject 
types that will not be financed by the Project which will be taken into account of while 
preparing site specific plans.  
 
Exclusion Criteria: To ensure that the project meets its overall objectives and that the 
national legal as well as Bank’s safeguards requirements are met, the following will 
constitute criteria for the exclusion in the project’s ambit if the proposed interventions:  
 
•
require involuntary land acquisition;  
 
•
cause damage to wildlife, forests and other natural habitat  
 
•
that would exclude or impact adversely the local people in general, and , 
vulnerable sections such as tribals, landless, marginal/ small farmers and other BPL 
families  
 
•
which could cause flooding and land slides  
 
•
that promote use, storage, manufacture and distribution of banned/ hazardous 
agro-chemicals; resulting in eliminating/ replacing indigenous varieties of species; and  
 
•
which impact religious places and cultural sites.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Management Note for sub-projects: Given that the 
sub-projects (and the interventions) are identified over time and as and when they are 
approved (and become effective), NAIP has planned for a pro-active safeguard measure 
which includes:  (i) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the 
sub-projects; and (ii) Checklist of Impacts likely to occur. These will guide in ensuring 
that each sub-project proposal complies with safeguard requirements.  Further, safeguards 
issues are not viewed in isolation, but integrated with the overall project implementation 
Page  9
which also paves way for offering substantial opportunities to further environmental and 
social development objectives.  
 
ESMF and checklists provides guidance to the prospective consortium applicants as 
how to prepare an Environmental and Social Safeguard Management note, similar to the 
Bank’s ISDS, as a part of the overall proposal. The selection of all sub-projects will be 
subject to satisfactory safeguard compliance.  During the NAIP implementation, the 
PMU and Bank have had extensive deliberations and steps were taken to simplify the 
instrument into a simple Safeguards Management Note. The same forms an integral part 
of the sub-project proposal.  
 
In addition to the ESMF provisions, the consortia partners will undertake the following 
during the first three months of the implementation of their projects:  
 
1. 
The consortia partners will participate in a workshop that will provide guidance 
on the preparation of detailed Safeguard notes;   
 
2.
Prepare a Safeguard Note and shall seek approval from the Bank within 3 months 
of effectiveness; and  
 
3.
The NAIP will disclose the duly completed safeguards notes on their website.  
 
Institutional/ Implementation Arrangements: Safeguards management forms a part of 
the dedicated institutional arrangement put in place for implementing the project by the 
ICAR. The key elements of this arrangement are: [a] the National Steering Committee – 
which will have an apex role in ensuring that the projects selected do not have adverse 
environment and social impacts; [b] Research Program Committee (RPC), which will 
ensure that environment and social impacts have been adequately identified and 
addressed in the proposals while approving the proposals and workplans from the 
consortia; [c] Technical Advisory Group (TAG) will provide technical and quality 
guidance to the consortia to strengthen the sub-project concept note as well as the full 
proposal, including evaluation of identification of environmental and social risks and 
adequacy of the mitigation measures and management plans suggested in the sub-project 
proposals. TAG will undertake field observations, verification of key environmental and 
social baseline parameters, and stakeholder consultations; [d] National Coordinators, who 
will be primarily responsible for coordination between the consortia and the PIU, and will 
ensure that consortia are meeting their objectives and targets, with due technical and 
quality control during implementation. One of the 4 National Coordinators will be 
responsible for implementing the ESMF in the project and the sub-projects; [e] the 
Consortia Advisory Committee (CAC) that will guide the consortia on the impact 
identification process and in preparation of management plans. [f] Help Desk, which will 
respond to any queries/issues raised by consortia, including on the management of 
environmental and social issues.  
 
Monitoring on environmental and social issues will be a part of the overall sub-project 
progress monitoring. The ESMF has outlined environmental and social monitoring 
parameters and arrangements. In addition, independent and external evaluation of the 
implementation of the ESMF and social/environmental outcomes will be conducted two 
Page  10
times during the two interim reviews (at 18 and 36 months of implementation).  Results 
of these evaluations will be used for midcourse corrections (if need be).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholder participation had been integral to the preparation of the parent project NAIP.  
During project preparation, ICAR had established a working group (WG), headed by an 
eminent agricultural scientist, and comprising of 15 members representing scientists, 
academia, NGOs and private sector. The WG, in turn, created as many as 11 Sub-WGs 
(2-5 members), each of whom deliberated on a particular theme. This way, project 
preparation has been enriched by contributions from a large number of subject matter 
specialists. Findings of the sub-groups were discussed iteratively in 4 workshops, all of 
which, cumulatively contributed towards the design of the project including the 
elaboration of the implementation arrangements. For preparing the ESMF, the ICAR 
identified some 10 experts from different spheres, who each developed a special technical 
note. These were shared with a range of stakeholders, discussed and finalized in 2 
meetings. Simultaneously, making use of the results emanating from the above 
deliberations, ICAR conducted 5 stakeholder consultation meetings in 5 regions of the 
country.  
 
Stakeholder consultations will continue during the implementation as well. Extensive 
discussions will be held with the local communities and interest groups, proposals shared, 
views sought and incorporated into drawing Micro Plans. Due endorsements will be 
sought before embarking on implementation. Plans drawn, in addition to providing a 
framework for inclusion and participation, will reflect fully mechanisms to ensure 
accountability. Continuous dissemination and disclosures too will be planned for.  The 
following three outputs are expected within 3 months of effectiveness:  
 
1. 
A transparent and inclusive strategy followed in selecting beneficiary farmers;  
 
2.
Results of an assessment of stakeholder analysis to ensure that institutional 
accountability and benefit sharing mechanism is in place; and  
 
3.
Duly filled in and disclosed safeguards note.  
 
Disclosures: The ESMF of NAIP has been disclosed to the Bank’s Infoshop. The 
disclosure conducted for the on-going NAIP also applies to all the activities that will be 
conducted under the additional financing under GEF. During implementation of the sub-
projects under additional financing, the environmental and social safeguards management 
notes prepared as a part of each sub-project proposal will be disclosed through the ICAR 
website, and will be disseminated locally in public places for the benefit of stakeholders 
and local communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  11
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  12
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
04/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Yuka Makino 
04/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
03/31/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Anupam Joshi 
03/31/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/14/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. Please see safeguards clearance memo dated 04/14/2009 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
04/22/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
