Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: 42047 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
December 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: INDIA 
Project ID: P105184 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: Gujarat Solid Waste and Composting Project 
Task Team Leader: Raghu Kesavan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2008 
Estimated Board Date: Not Applicable 
Managing Unit: SASDU / SASDN 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset 
Sector: Infrastructure 
Theme: Solid Waste Management 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.):   
GEF Amount (US$m.):  
CDCF Amount (US$m.): 10.0 
 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Environmental Category:
 
B
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [X] 
B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
 
The project objective is to manage and mitigate the uncontrolled dumping of solid waste throughout the 
municipalities and cities in Gujarat through the construction and operation of composting facilities. 
Various strategies and technologies (vermi composting and microbial composting) will be supported to 
ensure that the functions of collecting, treating and processing waste are carried out in an environmentally 
sound manner. Alternative institutional mechanisms, i.e., different forms of public-private partnerships, 
are also envisaged in the project to enhance sustainability.  This carbon finance operation supports the 
intent of Government of Gujarat (GoG) to access carbon finance to enhance operational viability of the 
project, given the inherent difficulties of developing a compost market and challenges in viable Operation 
&
Maintenance (O&M) of composting operations across the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the state.   
 
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:
 
The project will be developed in two phases: 
 
Phase 1:
This includes composting units for 130 existing Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) for which Gujarat 
Urban Development Company (GUDC) has been designated as a nodal agency to implement Municipal 
Solid Waste Management (MSWM). The estimated waste quantity is approximately 1500 tonnes per day 
(tpd), based on a 2001 Census forecast. The first batch of compost plants in this phase are expected to 
become operational by early 2008. 
 
Page  2
Phase 2:
This will include 31 recently-formed ULBs with smaller populations and possibly the 7 larger 
municipal corporations.  The seven larger municipal corporations generate about 3900 tpd. Total waste 
generation, including both phases, is about 5500tpd. The compost plants under this phase are expected to 
commence operation in 2009.   
 
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 
known):   
 
The project will be implemented in 161 Municipalities in the state of Gujarat. The environmental, social 
and economic characteristics of these towns are highly variable. They range from large, dense urban 
settlements with sizeable poor/slum populations to smaller centers which include some rural and forested 
areas. Several coastal towns are included, and some towns have ecologically fragile zones such as 
marshes and lakes. 
 
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
The Department of Urban Development has mandated the Gujarat Urban Development Company to 
prepare and implement a Solid Waste Management program to cater to the 161 Municipalities. The 
State’s Master Plan envisages composting and other alternative energy recovery options for treatment of 
organics and land-filling the inert as well as residual compost, in conformity with the Municipal Solid 
Waste Management 2000 Rules.  The GUDC is designated to administer and manage the MSWM 
program which includes waste collection, transport, treatment and disposal on behalf of ULBs. 
 
All composting facilities covered by the project are being developed per the current regulatory 
framework, the 2000 MSW rules, the Gujarat Solid Waste Master Plan, and the revised legislation 
concerning Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA).  Furthermore, 
s
ite clearances for all composting 
facilities have been received from the Pollution Control Board. In conformity with GUDC policy, a 
generic Environmental Management Plan has also been prepared which covers health and safety 
provisions. A training and sensitization program (with an initial budget of Rs. 5 crores) has been initiated 
through the Institute of Solid Waste Management, including consultations for communities in the area 
through IEC activities. 
 
Each ULB will have its own composting unit. The waste will be segregated into a wet fraction and a dry 
fraction with the wet biodegradable wastes being composted in vermi- or microbial composting.  In 
accordance with the MSW Rules, the compost will be recovered for reuse and inert wastes from the 
compost process as well as segregated inert waste will be disposed of in a sanitary/engineered landfill. In 
order to reduce costs and impact on the environment, GUDC intends to eventually cluster the 130 ULBs 
into (approximately) 13 clusters for the purpose of land-filling MSW in engineered/sanitary landfills 
according to the environmental and social selection criteria specified in the MSW 2000 Rules.  
 
GUDC is familiar with the compliance criteria for door-to-door collection, segregation at source, 
transportation, processing and final disposal. The goals are to establish effective MSWM services to 
protect public health and natural resources, and to reduce waste generation, separate recyclable materials, 
and recover compost and energy.  These would be monitored by recording the proportion of compostable 
waste to the total waste being brought to the plant. However, the rules also recognize composting as an 
alternative technology for processing the organic wastes. To date, India’s states are catching up on 
compliance with the 2000 MSW rules, in particular with those related to the prohibition of land-filling of 
organic wastes.  The main reasons for lack of implementation of the MSW 2000 rules are: the viability 
gap for land-filling and processing options (including composting), financial constraints of ULBs, and 
their limited capacity. GUDC is also familiar with the MSW 2000 rules specifying that land-filling of 
wastes would be done in fully-engineered landfills and prohibiting the land-filling of organic wastes. 
Page  3
GUDC is currently exploring such facilities actively and is in dialog to obtain the regulatory clearance of 
the proposed sites to comply with the notification requirements i.e. clearance of an EIA by the state level 
EIA Authority. The project will confirm that this clearance is obtained in a time-bound manner with due 
regard to the environmental aspects and the EMP will be designed to capture the status of progress of 
implementation of such facilities over time.  
 
As regard social safeguards, 
GUDC is familiar with the Bank’s Indigenous Peoples’ and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policies and has the capacity to engage the consultants to do a quick review of the waste 
disposal/landfill sites and other items mentioned in III C below.  It is also capable of engaging any 
additional capacity that may be necessary to follow-up on the findings of the social assessment during 
project preparation and implementation. 
 
The stakeholders in the project are the GUDC, ULB managers, citizens of the ULBs, and anyone affected 
by the waste collection/transport/processing/disposal/etc. activities.  GUDC offers: (i) technical support to 
ULBs to structure MSW projects; (ii) land as equity to operate landfills and composting plants; (iii) 
capital investments; (iv) consensus building with various stakeholders; and (v) structuring a carbon 
finance project.  It is expected that the other stake-holders would be consulted and their views taken into 
account in the final design and implementation of the project.  
 
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Gaurav Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Meera Chatterjee, Senior Social Development Specialist 
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The EA Policy is triggered to ensure compliance with the Bank’s environmental policies and procedures, 
to which all carbon finance projects are required to conform.  In this case it would ensure appropriate and 
efficient collection, transport and disposal of solid waste in the urban environment and help strengthen 
conformance with the Government of India’s MSWM 2000 Rules.  Potential impacts such as those due 
handling mixed (without segregation) waste; odour from storage and processing of waste, contamination 
due to uncontrolled discharge of leachate, etc. and their appropriate management will be addressed by 
EA. An Environmental and Social Management Framework is being developed for composting aspects 
covers the process and identifies impacts at various stages of the process. It also identifies and provides 
guidance on mitigation measures required. An Environmental Management Plan will be developed and 
appended to the ESMF. Both these documents will be widely circulated and training will be imparted on 
their implementation as part of the ongoing capacity building of the ULBs being undertaken by GUDC. 
The EMP will also indicate the costs incurred for its implementation and (a part of) this may be offset by 
Carbon Finance revenues.
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
 
X 
The project would involve construction of compost plants and ancillary facilities and would excavation 
for foundation and other facilities. There could be existing cultural properties close to or on the sites 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
identified or there may be ‘chance-finds’ that need to be handled in line with this policy and local 
regulation/customs.  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
 
X 
The project is not expected to have any negative impacts on Indigenous Peoples, their lands or their 
culture since it largely collects and transports solid waste from urban areas.  However, as disposal of the 
waste and landfill sites are also involved this would be confirmed by an assessment of such sites.  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
 
X 
The project is not expected to involve any Involuntary Resettlement as land for the waste disposal/landfill 
sites is already in the possession of the GOG for this purpose and no additional land is expected to be 
acquired or otherwise obtained. This would be confirmed by an assessment of the sites. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50)  
 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared:  No QER is likely to be held. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
Before Appraisal. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed:   
 
(The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.) 
The social assessment would be carried would between June and September 2007.  It would cover 
mainly (1) the ownership and use status of all proposed composting sites, and (2) whether any 
indigenous peoples are affected in any way by the proposed use of these sites for waste disposal; (3) 
livelihood dimensions of the proposed project, particularly whether any loss of livelihood is likely to 
result from project activities and how livelihoods could be enhanced by it; and (4) health and safety 
situation of people involved in solid waste collection/transport/ processing/disposal/etc. activities 
under the project (which will be linked to measures in the Environment Management Plan). The SA 
will identify rag-picker communities that may be affected by the project, if any; and ways to ensure 
that their livelihoods are not affected will be discussed with the Borrower.  In the case of child 
laborers among these groups, the discussion would focus on ensuring education, health and safety.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Raghu Kesavan 
Date: Dec. 11, 2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
Date: Dec. 20, 2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Guang Zhe Chen / Songsu Choi 
Date: Dec 1, 2007 
Comments:   
