Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3765 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102331 
Project Name: Madhya Pradesh - District Poverty Initiatives Project II (MP-DPIP II) 
Task Team Leader: Nathan M. Belete 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (30%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective for the proposed project would be to empower the rural poor by 
improving their capacities and opportunities for a sustainable livelihood.  The key outcome 
indicators to assess achievement of the PDO will be:  
 
a) enhanced participation by the rural poor in economic activities;  
 
b)
skill enhancement for taking-up higher value employment, and  
 
c) increased income among project target households through assets and market linkages.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Approach  
 
The proposed project will continue with the same proven methodology, while keeping in mind 
the specific context and needs of Madhya Pradesh (MP) and the lessons of the first MP-DPIP and 
other livelihood projects around India.  To ensure effective and efficient design and project 
implementation arrangements, the proposed project will be prepared based on the following key 
principles:  
Page  2
a) replicate the key design features of the MP-DPIP;  
 
b)
identify the rural poor and mobilize them into community groups (i.e. SHGs);  
 
c) provide initial capital to community groups to leverage asset financing from the commercial 
banks, government, and the private sector; and  
 
d)
provide critical linkages to the poor to establish partnerships with the private sector.  
 
Scale: The first phase of the MP-DPIP was implemented in 14 out of the 48 districts in the 
State, however, only 20% of the villages were covered.  Under the proposed project, it is 
recommended to adopt a saturation approach to village coverage (i.e. 100% of villages in the 
existing 14 districts and funds permitting, additional districts).  The implementation of the 
scaling-up of project activities will be undertaken in a phased manner and based on the 
availability of sufficient financial and human resources. Moreover, given the limited Bank 
resources that will likely be made available and the need for strong and manageable 
implementation support, triggers will be incorporated into the project design.  These triggers may 
include, among others, human resource selection, institutional development processes (at the 
state, district and community levels), and implementation results. Specific details of the scale and 
phased approach will be further defined after close consultation and collaboration with the 
Government during project preparation.  
 
Targeting: The project proposes to target beneficiaries based on the MP-
DPIP’s wealth-ranking 
methodology for further inclusion in the official Below Poverty Line (BPL) classification of the 
GoMP. The identification of the project beneficiaries would be based on the MP-DPIP’s 
participatory wealth ranking methodology and the number of districts targeted for intervention. 
This will ensure a uniform, transparent and consistent approach to beneficiary identification.  
 
Project Components  
 
Based on the experiences of the MP-DPIP, and the discussions held with all concerned 
stakeholders during the identification mission, the proposed project would have the following 
four components:  
 
Component 1: Social Empowerment and Institution Building.  The objective of this component 
would be to help the poor mobilize themselves into livelihood-oriented groups and business-
organizations, and gradually develop their own capacity to initiate and expand sustainable 
livelihoods activities. The project support would focus on facilitating the process of community 
mobilization and capacity building of the poor and providing necessary technical expertise and 
financial resources.  The component consists of the following sub-components:  
 
a) Establishment of Process Facilitation Teams (PFT): entities that support project 
implementation at the village level;  
 
b)
Community Mobilization: to help the poor organize themselves into self help groups (SHGs) 
and take up livelihoods activities of their choice;  
 
c) Training of Para-workers and Village Resource Persons: to enable them to provide SHGs 
with additional technical support to supplement inputs provided by PFTs; and  
 
d)
Support for Establishment of Federations: to support SHGs in forming federations to gain 
from value addition and economies of scale to access wider markets.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Livelihoods Investment Support.  The objective of this component would be to 
support asset creation of SHGs and their federations and identify and support innovative 
approaches to improve the livelihoods of the rural poor. The component consists of the following 
sub-components:  
 
a) Rural Productivity Development: provide start-up seed capital funds to SHGs (i.e. possibly 
5000 as opposed to the 20,000 given in the first phase) for the acquisition of necessary assets to 
initiate income generation.  This will enable the SHGs to leverage additional resources from 
financial institutions, private sector and other government sources;  
 
b)
Value Chain Development: enable federations to acquire facilities, equipments and other 
assets required to operate their business; and  
 
c) Innovation Support Fund: support for innovative pilot activities that have potential for scale-
up and replication such as improved seed varieties, agro-processing, agricultural insurance, 
among others.  
 
Component 3: Employment Promotion Support.  The objective of this component would be to 
support opportunistic migration through the establishment of a structured mechanism in 
accordance with GoMP’s Employability Enhancement and Training Policy (2007) by which 
employment opportunities can be pursued by interested parties. It will consist of the following 
sub-components:  
 
a) Employment Facilitation Centers: support the establishment and operations of Employment 
Facilitation Centers (EFCs), or ‘Ajeevika Kendra,’ which builds linkages between job seekers in 
project villages and potential employers;  
 
b)
Training and Placement: provide vocational training opportunities to the unemployed 
populations in project area; and  
 
c) Strengthening of District Employment Exchange Offices: strengthen existing District 
Employment Exchange (DEE) Offices’ capacities to serve the needs of the unemployed rural 
poor.  
 
Component 4: Project Implementation Support.  The component will facilitate various 
implementation, coordination, learning and quality enhancement efforts. It comprises the 
following four sub-components:  
 
a) Governance Management  and Accountability: develop a governance and accountability 
framework by which to ensure that adequate and appropriate mechanisms are in place to monitor 
and support project implementation (i.e. social accountability, grievance mechanisms, 
information dissemination, etc);  
 
b)
Project Management: establish an efficient, effective and responsive entity for successful 
project implementation;  
 
c) Monitoring and Evaluation: develop a system that will support and inform project 
implementation;  
 
d)
Public-Private Partnership Development: support activities and services that will improve the 
quality of service provision by private, public sector, and civil society organizations; and  
 
e) Technical Assistance (TA) to Integrated Livelihood Forum: provide specific technical 
assistance (TA) to the GoMP to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation 
of their program.  
 
Implementation Arrangements  
Page  4
The primary agency responsible for the overall oversight of the project at the State-level will be 
the Madhya Pradesh State Livelihood Forum (MP-SLF), an institution established by the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh to focus on livelihood promotion.  A State Project Management 
Unit (SPMU) will be established under this Forum and will have specific responsibility for the 
management and implementation of the proposed project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project proposes to cover 14 districts of the state of Madhya Pradesh. The salient features of 
the state relevant to the safeguard analysis:  
 
•
the State of Madhya Pradesh has 8 national parks and 25 wildlife sanctuaries.15 of its 48 
districts (31% of the districts) have a forest cover of over 33%;  
 
•
23 districts (47% of the districts) in the state have agricultural productivity that is less than the 
state average (1091 kg/ha);  
 
•
16 districts (33% of the districts) have less than 917 mm of annual normal rainfall (which is 
the state average) . Also, high rainfall in the range of 1100 mm to 2200 mm occurs in 7 districts 
while low rainfall below 600 mm occurs in 5 districts;  
 
•
47 blocks in 21 districts are classified as having grey, over exploited or dark status of ground 
water exploitation ; and  
 
•
over 23% of the state's population is tribal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The State-level Madhya Pradesh State Livelihood Forum Society (MPSLF) will be the apex 
body for coordinating and implementing all the rural development programs implemented by the 
Department of Rural Development, GoMP. The Project Administrator of the MPSLF would be 
in charge of implementing the MP-DPIP II and will be supported by a team of State-level 
specialists and managers for different functions (for example, agriculture, livestock, 
environmental monitoring and sustainability, prioritizing gender, etc.). At the district level there 
will be a District Livelihood Facilitation Team headed by a District Program Manager and 
supported by District coordinators (for functions including agriculture, non-farm livelihoods, 
environment, M&E, etc.).  
 
At the sub-district level there will be a Project Facilitation Team (PFT) in each block covering 
30 to 40 villages. Each PFT will have a coordinator and 5-10 team members with specialized 
functions. In addition, Community Resource Persons (CRPs) selected from the area by the PFTs 
will be service providers to the various groups. Focused attention to careful selection of human 
resources for the project and provision of training/exposure and capacity building support along 
with required incentives for good performance has been one of the key strengths of the MP-DPIP 
project in achieving its development outcomes. Human Resource Development would need 
priority attention at the highest levels of Government as well as the project agency for MP-DPIP 
II to also benefit from this important learning.  
 
The institutional arrangements to be built by the MP-DPIP II at the community and village level 
are designed to enable the poor to form their membership organizations as follows: sub-village 
(SHGs); village (cluster); and subsequently to federate at higher levels (federations and/or 
producer organizations). The SHGs are organized to work on a single, livelihood activity and on 
an average will be about 3-10 per village. A cluster of SHGs would form the village level with a 
Page  5
focus on providing micro-finance services to members through linkages with banks. A federation 
of cluster-level SHGs, consisting of 20 to 100 SHGs, would be formed to undertake value chain 
investments and develop links to markets.  
 
The implementation of the MP-DPIP has enabled the state government to establish mechanisms 
at the state and district level for the implementation of the Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF). However, this existing capacity is not optimal (the Limited Environmental 
Audit (LEA) of the MP-DPIP reported that about 66% of the sub-projects were in compliance 
with the EMF). There is a need to strengthen institutional capacity especially in the new districts 
that are to be part of the new project. There is also a need to build ownership in the community 
institutions with respect to the safeguards. A detailed component on institutional building needs 
to be part of the Environmental Management Framework / Plan (EMF/P) to ensure that the MP-
DPIP II is better positioned to integrate the Safeguard Policies.  
 
The implementation of the Tribal Development Plan/Strategy in a manner that it achieves the 
intended outcomes would require sensitization and capacity building of staff particularly at the 
community-level, Project Facilitation Team (PFT) and the district-level teams. Incorporating 
sensitization, capacity building and overall Human Resource Development interventions as part 
of integral project design would be critical towards addressing the outcomes desired from the 
Tribal Development Plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASDI) 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI) 
Ms Kalyani Kandula (SASDI) 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The types of community-based investments in MP-DPIP II would be the same as those in 
MP-DPIP. However, the projects differ in two ways: First, the scale of the MP-DPIP II is larger 
within the same 14 districts. Second, the types of sub-projects that will be implemented through 
it range from SHG level activities to activities at larger levels of operation (federations of SHGs 
that will take up value chain investments). An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) 
for the MP-DPIP II would be based on the EMF established and applied in MP-DPIP. Thus, 
development of the EA/EMF for MP-DPIP II would be confined to incremental work to 
strengthen the existing environmental toolkit by taking into account: (i) the specific objectives 
and orientation of MP-DPIP II including institutional mechanism (ii) available information as 
part of the existing EA and EMF; and (iii) findings and recommendations of the recently 
concluded environmental audit of MP-DPIP.  
 
The resulting EMF will include a screening tool determine an appropriate level of 
environmental assessment. Screening includes verification against an environmental 
requirements (negative) list designed to ensure compliance with all safeguard policies and a 
determination of the extent of EA required. Following screening and assessment, measures to 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
control environmental risks and enhance benefits are built to the subproject design. The EMF 
also provides for training and capacity building in its application to various stakeholders and for 
an environmental agency contracted under the project to supervise the implementation and its 
continuing refinement.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The state of Madhya Pradesh has 34 protected areas (including 9 national parks and 25 
wildlife sanctuaries). However, activities within these critical natural habitats (wildlife 
sanctuaries and national parks) will not be supported under the MP-DPIP II . Trading in non-
timber forest produce, manufacture of bamboo artifacts, eco-tourism, etc., are some of the CIG 
activities supported in the MP-DPIP. Such activities involving extraction of resources from 
natural habitats may feature in the MP-DPIP II as well. However, all activities will be 
undertaken by local community institutions (SHGs) and are not expected to lead to significant 
conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. Mitigation measures will be appropriately 
included into the EA/EMF emphasizing adherence to country systems (national and state forest 
legislation) that are known to be comprehensive and capacity building of local community 
institutions for sustainable management of the resource.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
15 out of 48 districts in Madhya Pradesh have over 33% forest cover and 23% of the 
population is tribal. Trading in non-timber forest produce, manufacture of bamboo artifacts, eco-
tourism, etc., are some of the CIG activities supported in the MP-DPIP. Such activities involving 
extraction of resources from forests by local community may feature in the MP-DPIP II districts 
as well. However, the activities will be undertaken by local community institutions (SHGs) and 
do not involve significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or critical natural 
habitats. Mitigation measures will be appropriately included into the EA/EMF emphasizing 
adherence to country systems (national and state forest legislation) that are known to be 
comprehensive and capacity building of local community institutions for sustainable 
management of the resource.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The MP-DPIP II will focus strongly on producer organizations that would have a role in 
collective procurement and distribution of chemical pesticides. It is thus important that the EMP 
address this safeguard and therefore the policy has been triggered. The EA/EMP would be 
strengthened to include Technical Environmental Guidelines to cover those aspects that are 
incremental to what the project supports at the lower-level organizations.  For instance, to the 
extent that the existing EA/EMP already covered the application of pesticides by CIGs, the 
additional EA/EMP related work that would be required would be associated with the activities 
that a higher level organization could be engaged in (i.e. procurement of pesticides). Mechanisms 
for Integrated Pest Management would also be built into the EA/EMP.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project is not likely to involve any disturbance to physical cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
):  Over 23 percent of the population of Madhya Pradesh is tribal. Tribals averaged 13 
percent of the entire population in the MP-DPIP project districts. A Tribal Development Strategy 
and Plan (TDSP) was developed by the MP-DPIP in view of the special importance that tribal 
communities require as a result of their deprivation and exclusion from development processes. 
In view of the likely expansion of the MP
-
DPIP
-
II to a few more districts and in view of the 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
nature of its interventions and institutional mechanism, it is necessary to review the TDSP and 
strengthen it as needed.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not involve involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not involve construction, repair, etc., of large dams. However, structures 
classified as small dams (less than 15 meters in height) such as for example, farm ponds, local 
silt retention dams, check dams, and low embankment tanks may be part of the MP-DPIP II. The 
EMP will need to include generic dam safety measures designed by qualified engineers.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project location does not involve international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project location does not involve disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/08/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft Social and Environmental Assessment reports will be submitted by end-August 
2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nathan M. Belete 
07/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
07/08/2008 
Comments:  Norman Piccioni cleared the ISDS as acting sector manager. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
