Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC4022
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P102767 
Project Name:  SME Financing and Development Project: Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Niraj Verma 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 19, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the additional financing project is to scale up the development impact 
and outreach of the parent project by improving SME access to finance (including term 
finance) and thereby fostering SME growth, competitiveness and employment creation. 
The project will achieve this objective through helping financial institutions gain better 
access to longer term financing for lending to SMEs. The additional financing project 
would build on the TA activities of the parent project which mitigate banks’ risks related 
to SME lending and help reduce transactions costs of such lending while, at the same 
time, ensuring that banks enhance the quality of their SME loan portfolios, and 
strengthen business development services and market linkage programs for SMEs thereby 
helping them to improve profitability and competitiveness, and become more 
creditworthy.  
 
The project’s Key Performance Indicators are (i) increased lending (including term 
lending) to SMEs by all participating banks on market-based terms; (ii) controlled NPL 
ratio on the SME loan portfolios of participating banks; (iii) improved profitability of 
SME business in all participating banks; and (iv) scale up of beneficiary SMEs’ 
operations.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will have the same, two Bank funded components as the parent 
project, namely, (i) Component A: the credit facility (CF); and (ii) Component B: the 
Risk Sharing Facility (RSF). The project will scale up these components through an 
increased focus on the following areas:  
 
With regard to Component A, the CF:  
 
i)  Channeling of long term loans for SMEs in geographical areas beyond those that 
were covered in the parent project, including in lagging states, thereby facilitating not just 
expansion of credit but also channeling such expansion to new geographical areas which 
have high potential SME clusters.  
 
ii) Increased focus on developing new SME loan products that will be financed through 
the CF to channel loans to smaller SMEs - on average - than were covered in the parent 
project, using techniques that are appropriate for such smaller scale lending including 
lessons from similar Bank or other donor supported 'downscaling' projects in other parts 
of the world. Financing for smaller SME loans could be undertaken in those participating 
financial institutions (PFIs) that have the interest and/or are being provided capacity 
building under the TA component of the parent project for developing their 'downscaling' 
techniques which would involve TA interventions targeted at helping PFIs to develop 
new and appropriate financial products for smaller SMEs, new lending and delivery 
techniques, including the (re) design of lending procedures, product promotion tools and 
training of staff in marketing, client servicing, etc.  
 
iii) Channeling a greater volume of loans through eligible participating financing 
institutions, possibly those that have now been covered through the parent project's TA 
component. This would help enhance the synergies between the TA and CF components 
and also facilitate the expansion of the coverage of the CF beyond SIDBI, thereby 
increasing the demonstration effect of the project.  
 
iv) The project would also explore the possibility of providing energy efficiency loans, 
subject to adequate demand at SIDBI for such funding and from SMEs and in this regard, 
would seek to coordinate with the parallel GEF technical assistance project that is being 
prepared.  
 
With regard to Component B, the RSF:  
 
v)
Expanding the coverage of the recently introduced RSF product to a larger number of 
banks and SMEs. Based on the lessons from scaling up of the RSF, the implementing 
entity for this component, CGTMSE, could shift emphasis from its current main product 
to the improved RSF product launched under the parent project   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Through out India   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI) 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
There are no outstanding safeguards issues. No Social Safeguard Policies have been 
triggered. The environmental issues associated with the sub-loans are expected to be 
varied in nature with complexities of such issues largely depending upon the specific 
sector. It is expected that there will be no issues related to cultural property, involuntary 
resettlement, indigenous peoples, forests, safety of dams, projects in disputed areas, and 
project in international waterways.  
 
A
detailed Environmental and Social (E&S) safeguards framework was developed for 
the SME Financing and Development Project 
–
the parent project and which has been 
adhered to by SIDBI in the course of project implementation. The use of this framework 
will be continued to be used to address the environmental and social risks. The 
framework captures all encompassing E&S issues in such a manner so as to provide 
indicative guidelines for action that will take into account the environmental concerns 
related to the project/sector and also factor in the project size and what type of safeguard 
actions are practical to take. Thus, the existing ESMF is valid for the additional activities 
proposed under the additional financing including smaller SMEs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The agreed Safeguards Framework as part of SME Financing and Development Project is 
relevant and can be effectively used for the proposed SME Additional Financing Project. 
The framework and the existing institutional arrangements within SIDBI's Project 
Management Department (PMD) have been reviewed and validated in the context of the 
additional financing project. The current institutional arrangements includes: (a) 
screening of sub-projects by the loan officer at branch level; (b) Review of safeguards 
framework compliance at Central Loan Processing Cell; (c) Internal audit review 
mechanism, including at various stages of loan disbursement; (d) MIS system to track 
loan performance, including any specific flags on safeguards. The current framework is 
has been streamlined and is integrated in the credit appraisal process of SIDBI for the 
project. This has resulted in three key benefits: (a) minimization of environmental risks in 
project portfolio; (b) general awareness in SIDBI branches on importance of 
environmental due diligence as part of credit appraisal; and (c) business case for SME 
lending, especially in case of energy efficiency improvements. The relevant examples are 
shared by SIDBI on their web site for public information. It was agreed that SIDBI will 
further document the examples of benefits (direct as well as incidental) and lessons 
learned in integrating environmental due diligence as part of credit appraisal.  
 
While SIDBI follows the necessary provisions of ESMF, to further strengthen 
monitoring of compliance with safeguards framework the PMD will strengthen the 
current MIS system to reflect periodic monitoring and annual audit reports for all the sub-
projects under the project. Currently, branch level regular monitoring, supervision and 
compliance audits are carried out and this activity is supported by audits and supervision 
by PMD in select clusters. To further strengthen the supervision and audit role of PMD, it 
was agreed that PMD will conduct periodic supervision and annual audit of at least 50% 
of E-I category SMEs and a sample of E-II category SMEs. While the periodicity of 
supervision will be determined by the nature of project and its impacts, supervision and 
audit for the sample of E-I sub-projects will be conducted by PMD at least once annually. 
The PMD would proactively engage itself in monitoring and assessing social impact of 
sub-projects through periodic supervisions and commissioning of studies and impact 
assessments on case-to-case basis. The PMD would make efforts to generate additional 
resources and technical support to innovative and good practices of the sub-projects in 
areas of social development. The PMD would also sensitize and train its staff on 
empowerment, social development and Right to Information Act.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholders of the project mainly include SIDBI, the participating financial 
institutions (PFIs) and the SMEs. As part of implementation of the additional financing 
project, the safeguards framework compliance for on-lending will be applicable for 
SIDBI’s direct financing and for PFIs other than SIDBI. The Bank’sproject team will 
meet PFIs and also with the Government on issues related to safeguards and corporate 
social responsibility and help develop the capacity and awareness of the implementing 
agency through training programs, knowledge and awareness workshops.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/30/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/30/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Niraj Verma 
10/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli 
10/28/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh 
10/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/30/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
10/28/2008 
Comments:   
