Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4158 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P115566 
Project Name: Fifth Power System Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Julia M. Fraser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 2, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
1,000.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
430.00
430.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives are to strengthen the transmission system in order to increase 
reliable power exchanges between regions and states of India.  In order to achieve this objective, 
the project would: (i) strengthen the transmission system in the power deficit regions and 
increasing inter-regional transmission capacity, and (ii) develop the institutional capacity of 
POWERGRID.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following priority schemes have been proposed for Bank financing by POWERGRID:  
 
1. Transmission System for South-West Interconnection, $280 million of which Bank financing 
$195 million  
 
2.
System strengthening in Northern Region for Sasan and Mundra UMPP, $335 million of 
which Bank financing $235 million  
 
3.
Strengthening scheme in Northern Region, $245 million of which Bank financing $170 
million  
Page  2
4. System strengthening in Western Region for Sasan and Mundra UMPP, $570 million of 
which Bank financing $400 million   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is to be spread over various parts of the northern, western and south-west regions of 
the country. The project is primarily aimed at building a strong national transmission network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
POWERGRID has developed a corporate level Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures 
(ESPP) in 1998 and subsequently revised in 2005. ESPP broadly conforms to the Bank’s 
requirements on environmental and social safeguards policies. Thus, POWEGRID is familiar 
with the Bank’s policies on social and environmental aspects, as it has been continuously 
engaged with the Bank since it developed its ESPP. This corporate ESPP is being applied to all 
POWERGRID projects, irrespective of the source of funding and implementation has been so far 
satisfactory.  
 
The World Bank team is finalizing its review of POWERGRID’s ESPP to establish its 
equivalence and acceptability for use as a Corporate System with reference to each safeguard 
policy of the World Bank that are relevant for this project. POWERGRID has agreed to the key 
findings and recommendations of the Bank’s review of ESPP. Once approved by the World 
Bank, the revised ESPP would be accepted as a country system under OP4.00.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDI) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The geographical extent and coverage of the project scope is expected to extend to several 
hundred kilometers and therefore, each investment would require an assessment of both adverse 
and positive impacts on the surrounding environment. Environmental issues during the 
construction phase of power transmission line projects may include impacts on terrestrial and 
aquatic habitat and, impacts on humans due to electric and magnetic fields and hazardous 
materials. Although construction of transmission lines by POWERGRID in the past has led to 
very limited and manageable environmental impacts, the ESPP is expected to guide the 
Environment and Social Management Divisions (ESMD) in undertaking Environmental 
Assessment (EA) and Social Assessment (SA) and developing specific Environment 
Management Plans (EMPs) to offset potential environmental and social risks during the 
construction stage and operational stages. ESMD at POWERGRID would undertake an EA and 
SA of each investment project using the guidance provided under ESPP. EMP will include 
mitigation measures and the institutional arrangements for their effective implementation and 
monitoring.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Some of the transmission lines may go through ecologically sensitive habitats requiring 
specific interventions to mitigate any adverse environmental impacts.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Transmission Line projects of POWERGRID may not involve large scale diversion of forest 
areas but some of the POWERGRID transmission lines may pass through environmentally 
sensitive areas like forests/national parks/game reserves, where alternative routes may not be 
feasible. If such a case, the EA will identify appropriate mitigation measures to ensure 
compliance.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The implementation experience from earlier POWERGRID projects indicate that it is 
unlikely that the construction of transmission lines towers or sub stations would impact physical 
cultural properties. However, in case of a chance find during construction, appropriate 
procedures would be followed in accordance with ESPP to mitigate adverse impacts and protect 
physical cultural resources discovered during project implementation and monitor progress.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some transmission lines may pass through areas that are inhabited by indigenous people. In 
such cases, POWERGRID will follow procedures defined in the ESPP, for each investment to 
ensure that POWERGRID projects fosters full respect for the dignity and cultural uniqueness of 
indigenous peoples, and ensure that they receive culturally compatible social and economic 
benefits and do not suffer adverse effects during the development process.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Construction of grid sub-stations may involve limited land acquisition. The ESPP provides  
 
guidance on procedures to be followed to minimize involuntary resettlement where feasible 
through exploring all viable alternative project designs; and assist displaced persons in 
improving their former living standards, income earning capacity, and production levels, or at 
least in restoring them; encourage community participation in planning and implementing 
resettlement; and provide assistance to affected people regardless of the legality of title of land.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/17/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NA   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Julia M. Fraser 
01/30/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/04/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. The revised ESPP and a revised SDR should  be send for safeguards review prior 
to appraisal. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
02/05/2009 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
