Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3158
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P100735 
Project Name:  Orissa Community Tank Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Deepak Ahluwalia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (70%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P);Other rural 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
56.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
56.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.60
15.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is: Tank based producers improve 
agricultural productivity and water user associations manage tank systems effectively.  
 
Key performance indicators proposed to measure achievement of the PDO include: 
increase in area irrigated; improved water availability for tail-end farmers; increase in 
agricultural (includes livestock and fisheries) production and incomes from tank systems; 
resources raised and O&M expenditures incurred by user groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components:  
 
Component A:  Institutional Strengthening (Base Cost US$ 8.8 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to enable community-based institutions assume 
greater responsibility for tank system management and for improvement of tank-based 
agricultural livelihoods.  Activities to be financed under this component include: (i) 
Page  2
formation and capacity building of community-based institutions; (ii) services of non-
government Support Organizations (SOs) to assist with community mobilization and 
capacity building; (iii) technical assistance for preparation, implementation and 
monitoring of Tank Improvement and Management Plans (TIMPs); and (iv) workshops, 
training and capacity building for SO staff, project staff and other relevant functionaries.  
 
The component will also support WUA training and capacity building in key areas such 
as: planning and implementation of tank system rehabilitation works; preparation and 
implementation of operations and maintenance (O&M) plans; collection of water 
charges; maintenance of records and accounts; improved water-sharing and utilization; 
and participatory monitoring, learning and evaluation. It will further assist in 
mobilization and training of various production and commodity marketing groups.  
 
Component B:  Tank Systems Improvements (Base Cost US$ 89.8 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to improve the physical and operational performance 
of selected tank systems, ensure safe operation of tank structures, and improve reliability 
of irrigation water supply.  The component would support the physical 
rehabilitation/modernization of tank systems with cultivable command area (CCA) of 
between 40 to 2000 hectares.  About 900 tanks with an estimated CCA of about 120,000 
hectares, spread across 29 districts of the state, are proposed to be rehabilitated under the 
project.  The rehabilitation work would be undertaken in three batches of approximately 
300 tanks each.  In general, the physical works are likely to include: (a) feeder channel 
improvement; (b) limited tank bed desiltation where deemed necessary; (c) 
repair/strengthening of bunds to secure tank safety and resume normal operation; (d) 
repair or replacement of sluices; (e) repair or expansion of surplus weirs; (f) essential 
construction/repair of distribution and drainage systems including installation/repair of 
appropriate outlets to farmers fields; and (g) installation of water measuring devices.  
 
The component will also support: (i) hydrological assessment of tanks to be selected 
under the project; (ii) procurement of survey and quality control equipment for scheme 
preparation and implementation; (iii) district level engineering-support consultants to 
ensure that the rehabilitation works are carried out to acceptable construction quality 
standards; (iv) contractual staff to bridge the gap, where necessary, between technical 
staff required and presently available in District Project Units (DPUs); (v) consultants for 
third party quality assurance; (vi) dam safety panel review for ensuring safety of 
dams/tank bunds which are critical in nature or more than 10 meters height; (vii) 
groundwater monitoring in command area of selected tanks; and (viii) development of a 
statewide geographically referenced minor irrigation database to enable the Minor 
Irrigation Directorate better plan future interventions.  
 
Component C:  Agricultural Livelihoods Support Services (Base Cost US$ 16.1 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to enhance tank-based livelihoods by increasing 
production, productivity and profitability of agriculture, horticulture, fisheries, livestock 
and other significant productive activities. This would be achieved through improvements 
in production technologies and management practices, better input and output market 
Page  3
linkages, more efficient and effective delivery of key support services, and augmentation 
of community-level productive capacities as well as infrastructure. The outputs are 
expected to be higher productivity in agriculture, livestock and fisheries; better alignment 
of farm-based productive activities with water availability; and diversification into more 
market-oriented agriculture and livestock production. The activities to be financed under 
this component fall into five groups:  
 
(i) Sub-Component C.1: Agriculture and Horticulture (US$ 7.5 million): The focus of 
this sub-component is on increasing production and productivity of field, horticultural 
and fodder crops/trees in tank command areas. Activities to be financed within this sub-
component include: (i) upgrading technology and production practices 
–
through field-
level demonstrations, and training of farmers and farmer groups; (ii) investments 
(involving beneficiary contribution) in group/community implements that enhance on- 
and off-farm incomes; (iii) homestead gardening focusing on women led activities; and 
(iv) training, capacity building and exposure visits for farmer groups and staff from 
implementing agencies.  
 
(ii) Sub-Component C.2: Livestock (US$ 3.6 million): The focus of this sub-component 
is on increasing the production and productivity of milk, meat and related animal 
products. The activities to be financed include: (i) upgradation of breed quality by 
strengthening the coverage and effectiveness of the artificial insemination program; (ii) 
improvements in animal nutrition and health management; (iii) ram-lamb rearing on a 
small-scale basis; (iv) backyard poultry for poor and tribal households; and (v) training 
and capacity building of livestock producers and line department staff.  
 
(iii) Sub-Component C.3: Fisheries (US$ 2.4 million): The focus of this sub-component 
is on improving production and productivity of tank fisheries. Activities to be financed 
include: (i) upgrading production practices through improved stocking; (ii) improved 
feeding, management and harvesting techniques; (iii) intensive fish cultivation in selected 
“demonstration tanks”; and (iv) training, capacity building and exposure visits of FCS 
and line department staff.  
 
(iv) Sub-Component C.4: Foreshore Area Treatment (US$ 0.5 million): The focus of 
this sub-component is on effective utilization of tank foreshore areas in selected 
locations. Activities to be financed include: (i) site preparation; (ii) nursery raising and 
plantation; and (iii) training for maintenance and cultural operations. These activities, 
apart from reducing silt inflow into the tank, are also expected to create an additional, 
sustainable income source for the tank community.  
 
(v) Sub-Component C5: Agricultural Marketing (US$ 2.1 million): The focus of this 
sub-component is to increase profitability by improving market access to farmers and 
producers in the project location.  This would be done by financing a set of activities that 
would promote greater market orientation of production systems, producers selling 
products higher up the value chain and accessing no-traditional markets.  Activities to be 
financed include: (i) strengthening producer linkages with input and output markets, 
including for non-farm products; (ii) post-harvest management of perishable produce and 
Page  4
cash crops; and (iii) training, capacity building and exposure visits for producers and 
relevant project staff.  
 
Component D:  Project Management (Base Cost US$ 6.4 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project 
activities, monitoring of project implementation progress and outputs/outcomes achieved, 
and learning from project experience.  Activities to be financed include: (i) setting up and 
supporting (through capacity building and equipment) project management units at the 
state and district levels; (ii) design and establishment of a project specific Management 
Information System; (iii) setting up and leading the project monitoring, evaluation and 
learning activities; (iv) contracting resource agencies including services of an external 
M&E agency to be engaged as consultants for the duration of the project; (v) providing 
support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; (vi) liaison and 
convergence with other agencies and government departments; and (vii) documentation 
of project experience and its dissemination in the wider development community.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would cover 237 blocks spread across 29 districts of the state.  The proposed 
project focuses mainly on restoring the existing tank irrigation systems through 
rehabilitation works with the aim of improving irrigation service delivery system, 
strengthening participatory irrigation management, and providing agricultural support 
services. As such there are no significant safeguard issues relating to planning of 
irrigation projects. A detailed analysis of safeguard issues and impacts associated with 
the project has been carried out as part of an Environmental Assessment and Social 
Assessment.  The assessments reveal no large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts due to the proposed project interventions.  Under the existing laws of the 
country, no environmental clearances are required and the project interventions neither 
envisage any major new land acquisition nor physical displacement of local population.  
However, encroachment of tank system land is an issue in some tanks for which a 
resettlement and rehabilitation entitlement framework has been prepared to provide 
support to those affected to restore their livelihood.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASDN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
detailed analysis of safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project has been 
carried out as part of an Environmental Assessment and Social Assessment.  The 
assessments reveal no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts due to the 
proposed project interventions.  
 
Environmental Safeguards.  The Environmental Assessment (EA) included an analysis 
of tank specific environmental issues, lessons learned from past and ongoing projects, 
and a focused case study of twenty-five sample tanks.  Following on the EA, the 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) focuses on six areas that are considered 
relevant under this project -- dam safety, integrated pest and nutrient management, silt 
disposal, water quality, water-logging, drainage, and aquatic weed.  The EMF, which has 
been prepared by GoO with the help of consultants, specifies measures to address and 
manage risks associated with these six environmental issues.  
 
Social Safeguards.  The Social Assessment highlighted two areas that require attention 
under the project 
–
resettlement and tribal development.  
 
With regard to resettlement, the repair and rehabilitation works envisaged under the 
project will not require any major acquisition of land as only existing tanks would be 
taken up and no new construction is envisaged.  There are also no plans to raise tank 
height to enhance water storage capacity.  Hence, there will be neither any physical 
displacement nor loss of structures.  However, in a few cases, it is likely that some tank 
bed area could have been encroached for raising crops. Similarly, in some cases the water 
distribution networks could have been encroached by nearby land owners or may require 
realignment and extension.  Such cases would warrant acquiring lands.  Thus, land 
related issues may arise due to: (i) encroachment of the tank bed and distribution system; 
and (ii) acquisition for repairing and/or constructing new distribution channels.  
 
Page  6
With regard to tribal development, Orissa has a significant tribal population 
–about 22% 
of the total population or about 8 million people are categorized as Scheduled Tribes 
(ST).  While the project interventions will not affect adversely the tribals, these groups do 
require special attention from the viewpoint of ensuring inclusion and equity.  Hence, to 
ensure their inclusion, specific targeting is essential.  Against this context, in accordance 
with the Bank’s OP 4.10, aTribal Development Plan (TDP) has been prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area.  
 
Only existing tanks would be rehabilitated under the project with no new tanks to be 
constructed.  The tanks are largely in remote rural areas with modest command areas.  
Hence, large scale agricultural intensification/diversification leading to substantial 
industrial development is not expected.  While some small scale agro-industry activities 
could emerge, it is not possible to define what those activities would be or what their 
environmental impact may be.  In any event, for the industrial activities Environment 
Impact Assessments are mandatory in accordance with the State Environmental Act and 
associated regulations and hence their impacts would be addressed through such studies 
in the future.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Due to the participatory nature of the tank rehabilitation design and implementation and 
the framework approach adopted for social and environment management, alternative 
options for tank rehabilitation would be considered during the design and planning phase 
of each tank.  Communities will be educated on the merits of each of the options and 
provision made for fully informed decision making.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
All environmental and social management measures are integrated with the overall 
project cycle and will be implemented at various stages of individual tank project 
preparation and execution through an integrated Project Implementation Plan.  Based on 
the findings of the Social and Environment Assessments and consultations held with 
project stakeholders, Social and Environmental Management Frameworks have been 
prepared which provide a good basis to respond to environmental and social issues in a 
programmatic manner.   Social aspects include an entitlement framework for resettlement 
of project affected people, strategy to address issues related to tribal groups, and 
strategies for consultation and communication.  On environmental aspects, specific 
measures have been prescribed to address issues related to pest management, dam safety, 
silt disposal, water logging, and drainage.  For ease in implementation, a Process Map has 
been prepared detailing the activities to be carried out in a sequence during different 
phases -- pre-planning, planning, implementation and post-implementation phases of the 
Page  7
tank rehabilitation cycle (provided in the Resettlement Policy Framework). Also are 
provided role and responsibilities of different actors against each activity.  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework. Since the project proposes to cover a large number of 
tanks (about 900) spread across the state and with actual selection taking place during the 
implementation period of five years, it is not possible to prepare a Resettlement Action 
Plan.  Hence, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed.  This has 
been prepared drawing on the provisions of the State’s R&R policy which is broadly 
consistent with the Bank’s OP 4.12.  The approach proposed is that whenever adverse 
effects resulting from the proposed project interventions appear inevitable, those affected 
will be supported not only through their R&R entitlements but by also helping them 
access project benefits.  The resettlement framework will form an integral part of project 
planning and will be adopted as and when a tank is selected.  The proposed framework 
comprises: (i) identification/definition of project affected households; (ii) compensation 
in lieu of lands; (iii) resettlement/rehabilitation assistance; and (iii) institutional and 
implementation arrangements.  Entitlements proposed for the affected families are 
provided in the Resettlement Policy Framework. The identification of the affected people 
and preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be done by the WUAs with 
technical assistance from non-government support organizations.  The identification of 
project affected persons (PAPs) will be vetted/reviewed by the local engineer as well as 
local revenue officials and finally approved by the District Collector.  The RAP will be 
integrated into the overall Tank Improvement Management Plan (TIMP) and approved by 
the Institutional Development Specialist in the District Project Unit.  This will also be 
monitored by the State Project Unit.  
 
Tribal Development Plan. The key elements underpinning the tribal development plan 
(TDP) relate to: (i) discriminatory targeting – to ensure inclusion and equity; (ii) 
governance – ensuring that the project’s implementation arrangements are in accordance 
with existing government stipulations, particularly the Panchayat Extension to Scheduled 
Areas Act which provides special functional powers and responsibilities to ensure 
effective participation of tribals; (iii) implementation arrangements – rules of 
engagement, including community contributions will be flexible to accommodate the 
tribals; (iv) livelihood improvements – tribal friendly interventions to improve/establish 
agricultural profitability and non-farm activities; (v) capacity support/building – to enable 
tribals to participate and derive full benefits; and (vi) convergence –with other 
government programs to provide not only additional mileage to TDP but also to ensure 
sustainability beyond the project.  
 
Institutional Arrangements.  The project will be implemented by the Orissa Community 
Tank Development and Management Society (OCTDMS), which is anchored in the 
Water Resources Department.  A State Project Unit (SPU) has been established which 
consists of a multi-disciplinary team that includes an Environment Specialist and a Social 
Development Specialist who will be responsible for coordinating social and 
environmental issues in all project tanks.  At the district level, the project will be 
implemented by District Project Units (DPUs) which too will have, among others, social 
and environmental coordinators.  Non-government support organizations recruited by the 
Page  8
project will facilitate in mobilizing communities as well as in addressing social and 
environmental issues.  The three existing Dam Safety Panels in the state will review and 
provide support for all tanks with height above 10 meters or those in distress.  The state 
has a Dam Safety Organization that is responsible for providing safeguard mechanisms 
and undertakes regular monitoring in line with International Commission on Large Dams 
(ICOLD) and CWC’s (Central Water Commission) dam safety norms.  The Environment 
Specialist in the SPU will ensure timely coordination with the Dam Safety Organization 
and panel members.  
 
Costs for implementing the RPF, TDP, promotion of integrated pest and nutrient 
management, and ensuring tank safety through oversight of Dam Safety Panels have been 
included as part of the overall project costing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During project preparation, efforts have been made to identify and consult with key 
stakeholders at different levels: (i) Apex/policy level comprising administrators, policy 
makers, political functionaries, scientific and extension community, and financial 
institutions who play a major role  in creating an enabling environment for marketing the 
project's key principles throughout the state; (ii) Strategic/Program comprising the 
Departments of Finance, Revenue, Water Resources, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, 
Fisheries, Forestry and other associated government departments and citizen bodies who 
promote and facilitate in campaigning as well as grounding the project; (iii) 
Intermediary/Operational, comprising the district administration, district rural 
development authorities, service providers and other support organizations like NGOs 
who are to provide technical assistance and monitoring support to grassroots level 
stakeholders; and (iv) Grassroots, encompassing farmers, farmer interest groups, WUAs, 
fishing cooperatives, livestock owners, women self help groups and other user groups.  
Systematic consultations with all the key stakeholders were conducted as a part of the 
environmental and social assessments and a framework for continuing consultations 
during implementation has also been proposed under the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2007 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  10
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Deepak Ahluwalia 
12/18/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray 
12/18/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
12/18/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/18/2007 
Comments:  ISDS cleared, formal appraisal clearance will be sent via e-mail. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
12/19/2007 
Comments:   
