Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/19/2009 
Report No.:  AC1595
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P071250 
Project Name:  ANDHRA PRADESH MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Songsu Choi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 22, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (50%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (30%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (50%);Municipal finance (25%);Municipal 
governance and institution building (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
87.30
87.30 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to help improve urban services in selected cities of Andhra 
Pradesh (AP), and the capacity of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to develop and manage 
urban services.  Urban services to be improved would be chosen and implemented by 
ULBs subject to several criteria.  The project would support improvements in the 
financial, technical and management capacities of all ULBs of AP through Technical 
Assistance (TA) and as a condition for infrastructure financing.  The project would also 
pursue improvement of the state-level framework that defines ULBs autonomy, 
accountability and incentives for performance, as well as the Government of APs (GoAP) 
capacity to monitor and provide policy and technical support for ULBs performance and 
development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of three TA and one investment components.  
 
A. State Level Policy and Institutional Development Support (cost US$9.2 million, 
Bank financing US$7.6 million) aims to improve the state#s policy and institutional 
Page  2
framework to support service delivery and capacity building by ULBs, and would 
include:  
 
#
Studies and TA to help evaluate and design options to improve AP#s systems of 
urban finance, including that of the fiscal transfer and borrowing, to enhance 
accountability and incentives for ULB#s performances, and the efficiency and equity of 
public expenditures in the state as a whole  
 
#
Studies and TA to help draft and implement streamlined town planning 
procedures  
 
#
Establishment of a Geographic Information System (GIS) to support monitoring 
and planning of urban development at the state level, and to support the establishment of 
similar systems at ULBs  
 
#
Establishment of an AP Urban Academy for monitoring and analysis of urban 
development, management and finance, and for training of state and ULB officers  
 
#
Preparation of a detailed program to implement the state#s Mission for 
Elimination of Poverty in Urban Areas (MEPMA).  
 
B. 
Capacity Enhancement (cost US$ 14 million, Bank financing US$12.6 million) 
aims at enhancing the financial and technical capacity and operating systems of all ULBs 
(currently 126) and includes:  
 
#
Professionalization of ULB management: mainly through training of ULB staff 
(in finance, management, planning, procurement and engineering) as well as Councilors 
and executive officers, based on needs identified by ULBs  
 
#
Technical assistance for preparation and implementation of institutional, financial 
and operational improvements tailored to individual ULBs  
 
#
Preparation of GIS maps and General Town Plans for about 30 ULBs.  
 
C. Urban Infrastructure Investment (cost US$342 million, Bank financing US$259 
million) to finance sustainable, high-priority investments identified by ULBs to improve 
urban services or operational efficiency.  To be eligible, ULBs need adequate financial 
capacity to sustainably finance and operate the facilities and an adequate and feasible 
plan to improve their financial and management capacity.  At present, over 80 ULBs are 
judged to meet the financial eligibility criteria.  In practice, various ULB and subproject 
eligibility requirements may limit this component to around 50 ULBs.  The criteria and 
guidelines for selection, design, and implementation of subprojects are specified in the 
Operations Manual for the project.  
 
D.  Project Management Technical Assistance (cost US$22.1 million, Bank financing 
US$19.9 million) aims at ensuring the quality of subproject preparation, implementation 
and monitoring, and includes:  
 
#
Preparation and implementation of urban investment subprojects at ULBs through 
consultant pools managed by the Municipal Strengthening Unit (MSU) under the 
Commissioner and Director of Municipal Administration (CDMA) to assist ULBs, or 
Page  3
through consultants hired and managed directly by ULBs which can and want to do so.  
This would include assistance to prepare and manage public-private partnership schemes.  
 
#
To support the MSU and CDMA for subproject appraisal, monitoring and quality 
control, as well as monitoring and support for implementation of reform and the 
Governance and Accountability Action Plan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be located in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh, and its investment 
component would be implemented in a performance-based selection of urban (municipal) 
areas.  AP, with a population of 76 million (2001 Census), is the fifth most populous state 
of India.  Its urban population of around 21 million makes up about 27 percent of the 
state#s total.  The majority (70%) of urban dwellers lives in three metropolitan areas and 
41 Class I towns (urban areas with more than 100,000 population). There are 126 ULBs 
(including all sizes of towns) spread across the state.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDI) 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental  
 
In addition to OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) which is triggered by the project, 
some subprojects (depending on their nature and location) may trigger OP 4.36 (Forestry) 
as some cities in India have designated forested areas, OP 4.09 (Pest Management) due to 
the use of pesticides for control of vector borne diseases such as malaria, and OP 4.11 
(Cultural Property), which includes places of worship in the urban context.  The Social 
and Environmental Assessment (SEA) report and SEA Management Framework 
(SEAMF) were prepared in accordance with OP 4.01.  They also resulted in the 
Page  4
preparation of a Social and Environmental Capacity-building Action Plan (SECAP), and 
an Information and Consultation Strategy and Action Plan (ICS) to ensure full 
information to all stakeholders at all stages of the project, and to consult and obtain 
feedback from them on the reform measures and investment component of the project.  
 
The potential direct and indirect social and environmental impacts of urban reforms 
have been identified in the SEA report. These would be addressed through better town 
planning and land management, budgets for operation and maintenance of basic 
infrastructure, the ability of the urban poor to pay for services, adequate capacity of the 
municipal bodies and CBOs to prepare and implement subprojects, etc.  
 
A
significant risk stems from the likelihood of large-scale irreversible impacts from 
subprojects relating to disposal of municipal solid waste, particularly through land-filling 
or the closing or capping of existing landfill sites that are filled up. This component is 
also important because of pending legal obligations of ULBs under judicial orders as well 
as the regulatory requirements of the Government of India.  The SEAMF covers the 
relevant procedures for addressing safeguard issues in this regard.  
 
Social  
 
The project#s Urban Infrastructure Investment component would finance high-priority 
investments identified by ULBs to improve urban services, including city roads, 
sewerage, water supply, sanitation, solid waste management, street lighting, community 
centers, and efficiency improvement investments.  Some of these may call for the 
provisions of OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement, IR) to be implemented.  There is a 
possibility of people being displaced from their places of residence or work when land 
has either to be acquired for construction purposes (e.g., of roads, storm-water drains, 
etc.) or temporarily dug-up (e.g., to lay underground pipes, sewers, etc.).  Upgradation of 
infrastructure may also necessitate the removal of encroachments or squatters either 
temporarily or permanently, which also triggers the IR policy.  As the pipeline of 
subprojects would evolve throughout the project, the extent to which resettlement and 
rehabilitation would be necessitated is currently unknown. Hence, the SEAMF has been 
prepared and would be applied to subprojects as they are identified, designed, 
implemented and evaluated.  As the project aims to ensure demand-driven investments 
and citizen responsibility to ensure effective and efficient service delivery, local people 
and their elected representatives would be involved in decisions about the subprojects and 
their implementation.  The SEAMF is supported by an information and consultation 
strategy and action plan, the ICS.  
 
Although OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples, IP) does not apply to urban areas, there is a 
possibility of this project extending to some peri-urban areas (e.g., for water pipes, drains 
and sewers, solid waste dumps, etc.) which may touch on tribal lands, dwellings, 
livelihoods, or cultural properties (for example, in the tribal districts of the state).  To 
protect these tribal communities (if any), the IP Policy has been triggered, and 
appropriate assessment and management of impacts are included in the SEAMF, and 
prior and informed consultations ensured through the ICS.  
Page  5
No large scale or irreversible negative impacts related to the two social safeguards are 
expected from the project.  In fact, the project could have significant positive impacts for 
poor and vulnerable populations.  An important social issue that the project would 
address is the exclusion of poor and vulnerable urban people (e.g., slum-dwellers and 
women) from municipal services, as a result of inadequate services, lack of information 
about them, or other constraints. The financing arrangements for the project include the 
provision of larger state grants for subprojects that primarily benefit the poor (45-47.5% 
percent of the subproject costs) than to other subprojects (18-19% of the cost).  The 
project#s focus on improving municipal finance capacities could help to improve the 
security of asset ownership as registration of land and property is important for 
establishing and raising property taxes.  This would be an important poverty-reducing 
measure.  In addition, the GoAP has been increasing the transparency of costing and 
billing procedures through e-governance, and the accountability of municipal 
management as well as of citizens through citizens# charters.  These measures could help 
the poor obtain information (which is also supported by the ICS), access to services and 
fair treatment.  Improvements in municipal management in general are also expected to 
enhance equity.  The GoAP#s approach to municipal infrastructure planning, 
management and monitoring includes a systematic development and involvement of 
community organizations), in addition to the elected local self-government bodies (the 
ULBs).  These neighborhood groups have been important to building social capital in the 
towns, and would continue to do so under the project.  Even more directly, the project 
would assist poverty reduction by providing some community centers to be used by 
women#s economic groups (self-help groups) and for job training for the poor.  It would 
also provide TA for the detailed design of the state#s major urban poverty elimination 
program, MEPMA.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main long-term impact on displaced, tribal or other poor people would stem from 
rising land prices and population pressures that are likely to occur as a result of the 
project.  Improvements in urban infrastructure and upgradation of services in slum 
settlements are known to attract rural migrants to towns, putting pressure on land, 
services and the environment, and consequently on the living conditions of both new and 
old settlers.  The rise in land prices as a direct effect of urban improvements and/or 
indirect effect through population pressure could also work against the poor, forcing them 
out from inner city areas (being bought out by the rich) to peripheries, thereby 
(voluntarily) dislocating them again.  Repeated displacement makes people highly 
vulnerable to impoverishment especially, as might be the case with peri-urban tribal 
people, if they are directly dependent on land or location for their livelihoods or 
indirectly so due to networks or cultural affinities.  Prevention or solution of these 
problems lies in proper urban planning and land management that enables poor and low 
income groups to find residential space, and jobs that improve their incomes, and in 
legislation that protects their tenure to land and property.  Studies have been done during 
project preparation on these aspects and some of the actions envisaged in the project have 
been mentioned above.  Importantly, the ULBs would implement the SEAMF to mitigate 
Page  6
the potential adverse consequences on the poor and vulnerable during the life of the 
project and, as capacity and conviction grow, beyond its life.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The SEAMF builds the consideration of alternatives into the planning and design of 
subprojects.  The investment subprojects would be identified through a community-
driven approach before they are subject to social and environmental screening/ 
assessment. Communities would be informed and encouraged to consider possible direct 
and indirect impacts (positive and negative) of different investments and designs, and, 
where there are potential negative impacts, to avoid or minimize these.  
 
Subprojects with relatively higher environmental risks (category EA and EB 
subprojects; see section D.4 for details) would be subject to a detailed environmental 
assessment. This would require an analysis of alternatives as laid out clearly in the 
SEAMF. The analysis of alternatives would be particularly relevant to ensure proper site 
selection and the design/layout of subprojects. In addition, the economic analysis of 
subprojects would be carried out in close coordination with the social and environmental 
assessment, increasing the information base for consideration of alternatives.  The costs 
considered would include social and environmental costs, affordability and willingness to 
pay.  
 
A
detailed Social and Environmental Capacity-building Action Plan  (SECAP) has been 
prepared to strengthen capacity at different levels of urban government to integrate social 
and environmental concerns into subproject planning, screening, design and 
implementation.  The training would include information on possible alternatives in 
different types of subprojects and on methodology to make choices.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Social  
 
The GOAP developed the SEAMF which includes a social section that addresses OP 
4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples).  A Social Manual has 
also been prepared for use by Project Managers and ULBs, and is part of the Operations 
Manual which would be followed by the Project.  The subproject development would 
include collection of data on tribal people in the subproject area, and on potential 
subproject impacts, which would be addressed in the subproject planning.  Baseline data 
would also be collected in each subproject on other people potentially affected by losses 
of land, property, other assets or livelihoods, and any potential impacts including R&R 
needs would also be addressed during planning and implementation.  Consultations 
would be held and steps taken to ensure that all losses are adequately compensated.  The 
project#s Information and Consultation Strategy aims to provide up-front information to 
potential subproject participants (e.g., state- and town-wide information), including tribal 
people if they are affected in any way, while processes of in-depth consultation would be 
an integral part of the participatory preparation of the Municipal Action Plans for Poverty 
Page  7
Reduction (MAPPs) and the Detailed Project Reports.  Any potential displacement and 
negative effects on people would be identified, discussed and mitigated through 
appropriate plans.  
 
Institutional Capacity. Capacity to manage implementation of the social (and 
environmental) safeguards is limited, especially in the ULBs, and would be developed at 
the state level and in the towns participating in the project.  The SECAP that has been 
developed and included in the SEAMF addresses the capacity needs of the ULBs as well 
as the main project management agencies at the state level (the Municipal Strengthening 
Unit of the office of the Commissioner and Director of Municipal Administration, the 
CDMA#s Regional Offices, and the AP Urban Infrastructure Fund (APUIF)).  The MSU 
would have two safeguard specialists (one is currently in place) as well as engage 
consultants. As the state has had considerable experience of implementing the social 
safeguards in earlier Bank-assisted projects (e.g., in the Irrigation, Roads, Forestry and 
Rural Development sectors), the MSU and ULBs could draw on expertise available from 
these.  There are a few institutions in the state that could support implementation of the 
SEAMF initially, and help build ULB capacity.  Training programs for staff have been 
developed, and a core number of persons already trained for implementation.  As AP has 
already implemented the MAPP process in 32 Class I towns, there is some capacity in the 
state for participatory planning.  However, this capacity is weak, especially in the other 
towns, and would also be built during the project, along with capacities to implement 
other proposed actions.  
 
Environment  
 
All potential environmental impacts -- including induced, cumulative and long-term 
impacts -- related to the various project components have been identified and generic 
environmental management plans (EMPs) prepared and included in the SEA and the 
SEAMF. Implementation manuals have been developed to provide details of the process 
to be followed to translate the generic EMPs into site-specific EMPs for each subproject, 
and implement them.  
 
The generic EMPs outline the measures to be incorporated in the planning, design, 
construction and operation of the different subprojects in the investment program, to 
mitigate the potential adverse impacts, and bring-out the positive aspects.  They are 
complemented by a monitoring plan for key indicators of impacts on the 
environment/ecology and human health, such as air and water pollution, during the 
various stages of each subproject.  It would be ensured through the EMPs that the project 
complies with OP 4.36, OP 4.09 and OP 4.11, if these are triggered in any subproject.  
 
The generic EMPs include cross-references to contract clauses linking the mitigation 
measures to the contract documents.  They also provide guidelines for management of 
cultural heritage properties in case these are affected.  However, they need to be 
converted into site-specific EMPs for each subproject, depending on the severity of 
potential impact and hence the need for mitigation.  The SEAMF helps classify the 
subproject into three different categories EA, EB, and EC, in a similar manner as the 
Page  8
World Bank's classification of projects into A, B and C category as per Operational 
Policy 4.01.  As a result those subprojects classified as category EA would undergo a 
detailed environmental assessment, those classified as category EB would undergo a 
limited assessment, while category EC subprojects would not involve a separate EMP.  
The SEAMF provides guidance on the steps to be followed in the three categories of 
subprojects in order to develop site-specific EMPs.  
 
Institutional Framework.  As described in the Social section above, the need for 
strengthen capacity for environmental and social safeguard implementation has been 
recognized, and the SECAP has been developed for implementation during the project.  
The MSU/CDMA would take the lead in implementing the SEAMF and SECAP, and 
obtain the help of the Public Health Engineering Department.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are residents of all the municipalities that would be part of the 
project, elected officials of the ULBs, and municipal staff at all levels in AP.  The poor, 
tribals and potentially displaced people are important among these.  Groups of these 
stakeholders were formally consulted about the project and its environmental and social 
aspects during preparation of the SEA and SEAMF, and again when the draft SEA and 
SEAMF were ready.  In addition, a large household perception survey was carried out as 
part of the SEA, and consultations were held while documenting the status and adequacy 
of urban basic services in sample municipalities.  The consultants also tested the SEAMF 
on prototype subprojects that had been carried out in these sample municipalities, and 
interacted with residents, affected people, and tribal people during this process.  In Class 
I
towns, stakeholders have participated actively in the MAPP process under the precursor, 
DFID-funded AP Urban Services Project.  As described above, integrated consultative 
and participatory approaches would continue to be the basis for subproject development, 
giving relevant stakeholders the opportunity to participate throughout, and ensuring the 
free, prior and informed consultation of any tribal people who may be affected.  The SEA 
and SEAMF were disclosed on the CDMA website on November 10, 2004 (reconfirmed 
on October 30, 2008).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/11/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2004 
 
Page  9
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
Page  10
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Songsu Choi 
05/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli 
05/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meera Chatterjee 
05/20/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/27/2009 
Comments:  Cleared, Category "A". See clearance memo for details. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
06/08/2009 
Comments:   
