Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3407
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P101653 
Project Name:  POWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IV 
Task Team Leader:  Pedro E. Sanchez 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
600.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,514.00
1,514.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to further facilitate and strengthen India’s electricity 
transmission system in order to increase reliable power exchanges between regions and 
states   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of one component, namely Transmission System Strengthening 
Schemes.  The five investment schemes to be financed under this component have been 
identified following the eligibility criteria for Bank financing established in the PSDP-III 
PAD. These eligibility criteria include: (i) technical and operational justification; (ii) 
economic and financial justification; (iii) appropriate GoI clearances, including 
investment approvals and environmental clearances; (iv) adequate financing procurement 
and implementation plans; (v) compliance with environmental and social safeguards 
requirements; and (vi) proposed investments should be for strengthening of transmission 
system and inter-regional power exchange for the National Grid. The project 
implementation plans for each of the five investment schemes have been approved by the 
Bank.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project locations are spread across the country. The project is primarily aimed at 
building a strong national transmission network. The project will fund substations and 
transmission lines in Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, and West 
Bengal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDS) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Transmission schemes are generally environmentally clean and non-polluting in nature. 
Their impact on the environment is generally restricted to rights of way (ROW) and land 
acquisition for sub-stations. Environmental issues during the construction phase of power 
transmission line projects may include impacts on terrestrial and aquatic habitat and, 
impacts on humans due to electric and magnetic fields and hazardous materials. Given 
the large geographical spread of the transmission system (voltages above 400 kV and 
relatively large substations), and given the assumption that some of the project 
transmission lines may pass through forest areas, the project has been assigned 
environment cate
gory “A”.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not anticipated   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
POWERGRID has developed its ESPP formalizing its “commitment to the goal of 
sustainable development through conservation of natural resources and involvement of 
Page  3
stakeholders, continually improving its management system, accessing specialist 
knowledge for management of significant environmental and social issues and 
introducing new state of the art and internationally proven technologies while strictly 
following the basic principles of Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation.”As part of the 
EA, several alternative alignments are analyzed and choice is made on the basis of 
several criteria including environmental sensitivity of the routes.  
 
POWERGRID has put in place a corporate Environmental and Social Policies and 
Procedures (ESPP) since 1998 (revised in March 2005) to proactively respond to the 
environmental and social issues that may be encountered in all its operations. Some of the 
potential environment and social issues that would be mitigated using the ESPP 
framework, irrespective of source of funding for its schemes include the following:  
 
•
Mitigating Opening up of canopy in natural forests;   lopping of trees; habitatloss, 
vegetation damage and fragmentation;  
 
•
Avoid increased access to wild lands, Paths/Access roads;  
 
•
Avoid run off and sedimentation from grading of  access roads;  
 
•
Avoid chemical contamination from chemical maintenance techniques;  
 
•
Ensure that there is no PCBs in electrical equipment;  
 
•
Mitigate the impact as a result of change in land use and population relocation due 
to towers, substations and induced secondary development during construction;  
 
•
Minimizing avian hazards from transmission lines and towers, Air craft hazards 
from transmission lines and towers;  
 
•
Avoid impairment of cultural and aesthetic resources/,  health  and  safety, fire 
hazards and pollution;  
 
•
Prevent loss of agriculture/community land – by avoiding  physical displacement 
of population; and  
 
•
Avoid, if not minimize, displacement of population and ensure that the livelihood 
of those affected is improved or restored.  
 
It is important to note that ESPP applies to all of POWERGRID’s projects irrespective 
of funding source.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
At the corporate level, POWERGRID has established a strong Environment and Social 
Management Division (ESMD) headed by a General Manager, and supported by five 
environment and social specialists under the overall control of an Executive Director 
(Corporate Planning).  In each of the nine regions of POWERGRID, there is one separate 
unit headed by a Deputy General Manager /Chief Manager responsible for managing 
social and environmental activities and ensuring coordination with ESMD in the 
corporate office.  
 
The ESPP provides a framework for identification, assessment and management of 
environmental and social concerns at both organizational as well as project levels. In 
addition, POWERGRID has also appointed a committee of independent eminent experts 
to oversee environmental and social management policies and their implementation.  
Page  4
The environmental assessment process for transmission line schemes includes two 
stages, particularly where the lines go through forest reserves or may go through sensitive 
habitats.  During the first stage POWERGRID team prepares an initial environment 
assessment report (IEAR) based on the available GIS survey for fixing line routes and 
sensitive areas such as reserved forests, wild life sanctuary, national park,  protected areas 
supported by public consultation and ground survey, particularly with reference to 
sensitive areas and other sensitive receptors, if any. The IEAR capture all significant 
environmental issues 
and prepare an ‘Environmental Management Plan’, including 
budget provisions for implementation. The second stage produces a final environmental 
assessment report, submitted after completion of detailed survey of entire route. This 
report incorporates site specific minor changes before commencing actual scheme 
implementation and requirements for compliance with conditions of clearances, including 
forestry clearances accorded by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Initial 
Environmental Assessment reports for each scheme include a set of indicators and a 
mitigation plan to be supervised during the implementation stage.  
 
POWERGRID has adopted a third party certified comprehensive “Integrated 
Management System” (IMS) as per PAS 99:2006 integrating the requirement of ISO: 
9001 for Quality Management System, ISO: 14001 for Environment Management 
System and OHSAS: 18001 for Occupational Health & Safety Management System. 
POWERGRID has also been certified for SA 8000:2001 for Social Accountability 
standard by Social Accountability International. POWERGRID is progressively rolling 
out the IMS to regional offices of which 3 have already been completed. Implementation 
of these systems will enhance the effectiveness of implementation of ESPP in 
POWERGRID supported investment projects. In recognition of POWERGRID's efforts 
on social and environmental safeguards mainstreaming, they have been awarded the 
"Annual Green Award" for 2006 by the Environment Sector Board of the World Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESPP was prepared and has been revised (in 2005) based on regional level 
consultation with the stakeholders including affected community, NGOs, people’s 
representatives and others. A national level consultation workshop was also organized to 
discuss the draft ESPP. Power Grid has also disclosed the ESPP in public including their 
web site and locations of their regional offices. During EA process for individual sub-
projects, and preparation of RAP, consultations are held in settlements along the 
alignment as well as at Regional Offices of POWERGRID. EA documents are also 
hosted on the POWERGRID website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/01/2005 
 
Page  5
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/01/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/01/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/01/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Note:  Equivalence and Acceptability Report is under preparation.  Individual EA reports 
(IEARS) disclosed between Dec. 2006 and August 2007.  
 
The SDR is under preparation.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pedro E. Sanchez 
01/25/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi 
01/25/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
01/25/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/04/2008 
Comments:  Cleared, with understanding that the ESPP for this project, ESPP-4, is the same used 
and earlier disclosed for PSDP-3. Clearance memo to follow. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
