Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3775 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P112033 
Project Name: Uttar Pradesh Sodic Lands Reclamation III Project 
Task Team Leader: Animesh Shrivastava 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (75%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%);Other social services (4%);Agricultural extension and research (1%) 
Theme: Technology diffusion (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural 
development (P);Land administration and management (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
160.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity in the selected 
project areas in UP. The objective will be achieved through reversal of water-induced land 
degradation, enhancement of soil fertility and improved provision of agricultural support 
services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have the following five components:  
 
(i) 
Land Treatment and On-Farm Development:  This component will form the core of the 
project, accounting for more than half of the project costs. The objective of this component is to 
sustainably reverse water-induced land degradation (salinization, sodification and water-logging) 
in the targeted areas. Activities to be financed under this component would include (a) detailed 
mapping and classification of sodic lands to facilitate adoption of appropriate management 
techniques to develop sodic lands; (b) formation of water user groups (WUGs); (c) clarifying and 
Page  2
confirming land titles and tenure arrangements; (d) on-farm development through land-leveling, 
bunding and improved drainage network (linking field drains to link and main drains); (e) 
provision of shallow tubewells to help in reclamation operations and provide irrigation; and (f) 
application of chemical/organic amendments and plant nutrients to the soil.  
 
The intervention model to be followed under this component has been developed and validated 
in the earlier phases of Sodic Lands Reclamation Project. The expected results from this 
component, in the reclaimed areas, are: (i) improved soil quality; (ii) increased productivity; and 
(ii) higher cropping intensity.  
 
(ii) 
Improvement of Drainage Systems: The objective of this component is to improve and 
better maintain drainage networks in the project area which will help to remove leach effluents, 
excess rain and irrigation water from reclaimed and adjoining areas. The activities to be financed 
under this component include (a) re-modeling and rehabilitation of main drains; (b) maintenance 
of main drains; and (c) training and capacity building of Irrigation Department (ID) staff and 
WUGs for appropriate O&M of drainage works.  
 
The remodeling and rehabilitation of main drains will be undertaken by ID through 
participatory processes that involve stakeholder consultation in planning, design and execution of 
the physical works. The maintenance of rehabilitated main drains will be done by the ID and that 
of link and field drains by relevant WUGs. The expected results from this component are: (i) 
length of main drains rehabilitated and maintained; (ii) increased drainage capacity of main 
drains; (iii) land area relieved from water-logging; and (iv) increased productivity.  
 
(iii) 
Agricultural Support Services: The objective of this component is to enhance farm 
livelihoods by increasing productivity of agriculture and related activities through improved 
production technology and agronomic practices and more efficient and effective delivery of key 
support services. The activities to be financed under this component include: (a) training of 
farmers in effective land and water management practices, including efficient water use, 
drainage, and crop planning; (b) upgrading agricultural technology and production practices (for 
agriculture and  livestock) through field-level demonstrations; (c) exposure visits, rural fairs, 
animal health camps and other “means” for rural communication and outreach; and (c) training 
and capacity building of line department staff and other relevant providers of support services to 
farmers. The expected results from this component are: (i) increased productivity; (ii) greater 
cropping intensity; and (iii) crop diversification.  
 
(iv) 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Market-Oriented Production: The 
objective of this component is to improve the profitability of farm production by enhancing 
local-level capacities to align production with market demand, enable producers to access 
finance and other critical inputs, and provide post-production support for value-adding activities. 
Activities to be financed under this component include: (a) strengthening of WUGs, self-help 
groups (including possible support for groups formed under earlier projects) and other producer 
groups; (b) facilitating linkages that improve farmer access to finance and other critical inputs; 
(c) developing greater access to (non-traditional) markets; and (d) promoting post-harvest value-
addition, as appropriate. The expected results from this component will be (i) increase in share of 
Page  3
produce marketed; (ii) improved price terms for farmers; and (iii) access to non-traditional 
markets.  
 
(v) 
Project Management: The objective of this component is to ensure smooth 
implementation of project activities, monitoring of project implementation progress and 
outputs/outcomes achieved, and learning from project experience.  Activities to be financed 
include: (i) setting up and supporting project management units at the state and district levels; (ii) 
project M&E and learning activities, including assessment of environmental impacts, NGOs and 
sustainability of land reclamation; (iii) services of an external M&E agency to be engaged as 
consultants for the duration of the project (the ICR for Sodic II has explicitly endorsed the 
usefulness of having an independent M&E agency); (iv) providing support for emerging needs 
and innovations during implementation; (v) liaising with project partner organizations, support 
organizations, external professional agencies and the World Bank; and (vi) documentation of 
project experience and its dissemination to the wider development community.  
 
At the central level, the main implementing agencies are expected to be the UPBSN and the 
departments of agriculture and irrigation. At the local level, project planning/coordination 
committees will be established at village panchayat, block and district levels, with a convergence 
plan developed to help these committees interact better with existing public institutions as well 
as government development programs at these levels.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The state of Uttar Pradesh in country India.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower is familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements as it has already 
implemented previous Sodic I and II projects and also other Bank funded projects in water and 
other sectors in the past. The Bank team will work on strengthening the capacity of the project 
management team and other agencies concerned with the project implementation to deal with 
issues related to the social and environment aspects of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDI) 
Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While the project is likely to have an overall positive impact, some activities may have 
adverse environmental impacts and, therefore, this policy is triggered. These may include 
drainage improvement by rehabilitation of main drains for disposing drainage from sodic 
farmlands, leaching of gypsum into groundwater and increased application of fertilizers that 
could contribute to pollution of nearby surface waters or wetlands.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This is being triggered because of the presence of Sarus Cranes in the project areas. The 
project may drain wetlands and impact Sarus cranes.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
To address the possibility that improvements in sodic land may lead to increased cropping 
and hence increased use of pesticides, the ESMF will include a pest management plan.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project may involve appropriation of land for some of the proposed interventions. The 
adverse impacts as a result of the project interventions would be identified and assessed through 
a
social impact assessment which would be undertaken as a part of IESA for the project. The 
results of this assessment will provide input to develop ESMF including R&R entitlements for 
different categories of adverse impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/28/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As part of project preparation, an Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment (IESA) is 
planned. This will identify the project’s potential negative and positive environmental and 
social impacts and recommend measures to prevent, minimize, mitigate and compensate for 
adverse impacts and enhance the positive impacts. The assessment would include an ESMF 
for addressing the adverse impacts. The assessment report including the safeguards 
documents are expected to be ready before appraisal and is expected to lead to improved 
environmental and social performance of the project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Animesh Shrivastava 
07/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/24/2008 
Comments:  cleared. Please see clearance memo dt 7/24. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
07/31/2008 
Comments:  cleared 
