Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3851 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100530 
Project Name: INDIA - Programmatic Framework Project for Energy Efficiency: 
Financing Energy Efficiency at SMEs 
Task Team Leader: Jeremy Levin 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (60%);Micro- and SME finance 
(30%);General industry and trade sector (10%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Pollution 
management and environmental health (S);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
11.30 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Borrowing 
Agency 
7.50 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
50.00
57.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is “To improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions from Small and Medium Enterprises utilizing increased commercial 
financing.” The Project proposes to: (a) Create increased demand for energy efficiency (EE) 
investments by adopting a cluster approach to facilitate the development of customized EE 
products and financing solutions at the local level, and would build the capacity of stakeholder in 
small and medium enterprise (SME) sector to assist units in identifying additional EE projects in 
the future, aiding in widespread replication; (b) Raise the quality of EE investment proposals 
from a technical and commercial perspective, and will increasing capacity of both project 
developers and loan officers to help shrink the gap between project identification and successful 
delivery of finance; and (c) Expand use of existing resources and/or aid in the development of 
Page  2
new financial instruments for better risk management by the commercial banks as dictated by 
local conditions to catalyze significant additional commercial finance for energy efficiency.  
These products will be deployed as required to overcome barriers of perceived risk in 
implementing and financing EE projects.  
 
The Project, by focusing on overcoming market barriers to increase EE investments in SME 
sector, will help reduce the carbon intensity of production by Indian SMEs and reduce emissions 
of greenhouse gasses from this sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would be implemented as part of the larger SME EE program of the Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency (BEE).  The proposed project has the following three main components:  
 
Component 1: Technical Assistance for Capacity Building in SME clusters, focusing on 
increasing awareness of EE at the cluster and plant level on a large scale through the 
implementation of outreach efforts, dissemination of information on successful projects and 
packaging potential investment proposals in energy efficiency for financing by local banks or 
other sources.  This cluster sub-component would encompass ongoing EE cluster efforts by BEE.  
Efforts would also be made to increase the capacity of energy auditors, chartered accountants, 
vendors and service providers to improve project development capability, service delivery, and 
to improve the quality and acceptability of initial and investment grade audits and loan 
applications.  This Component would also include provision of major support for the five 
existing schemes for EE launched by Indian banks under the 3 Country EE Project, 
encouragement for participation by additional banks to launch new schemes for EE financing or 
to integrate EE lending into existing programs, national and local marketing support to increase 
awareness of schemes, detailed training support through Indian Bank Training Institutes to 
increase capacity at local branch offices in identifying and appraising EE projects, and 
widespread dissemination of success stories and impacts of EE implementation on improving 
asset quality  
 
Component 2: Investment and Risk Mitigation Instruments for investment by participating 
banks. This component would provide grant 
support to cover the ‘soft costs’ of an initial pipeline 
of ~500 projects and will provide funding for a limited number of demonstration projects for 
appropriate EE technologies in Indian conditions where required.  This component could also 
support the development of risk mitigation instruments to overcome perceived risk in lending for 
EE projects to SMEs.  These instruments shall be deployed as required by local market 
conditions, and shall be supplemented by high (estimated to exceed US$50 million for the initial 
pipeline alone) levels of commercial bank co-financing and SME equity contributions. The 
average investment envisaged in the individual SME units is in the range of INR 4 million 
(~US$100,000) with a simple payback period of less than 2 years.  Risk mitigation instruments 
which could be deployed include partial credit guarantees for the EE projects on an individual or 
a
portfolio basis either as a new instrument or by expanding outreach and uptake of existing tools 
such as the Credit Guarantee Trust for Small Scale Industries, or utilization of contingent grant 
mechanisms to encourage project development beyond the proposed TA support to energy 
auditors.  
 
Component 3: Program Knowledge Management and Sharing. This component relates to 
collation of best practices, dissemination, and policy development functions with the goal of 
ensuring effective implementation and replication of not just this individual PIF, but of BEE's 
entire effort implemented with GEF support. The knowledge management element will provide 
Page  3
key inputs to help better inform GOI policy making and shall also serve the function of 
informing the local state designated agencies of ongoing progress and best practices, leading to 
more effective implementation of the GOI EC policies/ programs at the local level.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The SME clusters proposed for implementation of the project components will be determined 
jointly with BEE, and will likely be in multiple states across the country. The identification of 
clusters will form part of the project preparation exercise.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency involving the industry 
associations in selected SME clusters. BEE has necessary understanding of safeguards as per 
requirements of the country systems. However, in the context of the proposed project, BEE’s 
capacity will be reviewed and, if necessary, capacity enhancement measures will be undertaken.  
In order to facilitate effective implementation, institutional mechanisms may be worked out to 
support sector level environmental audits. Individual SME associations and the individual SME 
units may have limited capacity due to lack of experience, particularly with respect to 
management of environmental safeguard issues, which would be further evaluated during the 
proposed Environmental Audit of pilot level EE improvement investments. Drawing from the 
lessons of Environmental Audits for the pilot investments, sector specific audit checklists and 
Environmental Management Plans will be generated. This would be useful in case of replication 
of investments in SME clusters.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
EA is required for Component 2 of the project relating to investments on pilot/demonstration 
level for Energy Efficiency measures. The energy efficiency measures in select SMEs are likely 
to bring environmental benefits and are unlikely to cause adverse environmental impact. 
However, environmental concerns could possibly arise from the current environmental 
management practices and past record of environmental noncompliance, if any, including 
potential environmental liability associated with water and air pollution; noise levels in the 
neighborhood; and disposal of solid and hazardous waste. Such environmental safeguards issues 
could be assessed through conduct of unit level Environmental Audits for all the 
pilot/demonstration level investments.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Project activities may affect cultural properties, though none are currently known as the SME 
clusters for pilot implementation of EE investments are identified.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The SME clusters proposed to be considered under the project do
not fall under IP areas. 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
However, this will be further determined once the identification of SME clusters is completed, 
prior to appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since identified safeguards issues primarily relate to the proposed pilot/demonstration 
investments, the team proposes to commission environmental audits to assess the baseline 
environmental performance of SME units selected for pilot implementation. The audits 
would cover all the pilot investments and will include reviews of environmental aspects and 
evaluation of implementation of mitigation measures based on assessment of production 
process to identify emission (air/water/solid) sources; evaluation of the level of compliance 
with the applicable national and state regulations; identify potential (both actual and 
perceived) environmental and social risks and liabilities and define relevant mitigation 
interventions. Further, based on the audits, standard sector specific checklists and 
environmental management measures would be prepared for pilot clusters. These would be in 
the form of implementable EHS protocols which address national and local environmental 
regulations.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jeremy Levin 
09/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/26/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
09/29/2008 
Comments:   
