Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC2514
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P100101 
Project Name:  Coal Fired Generation Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mikul Bhatia 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P100531 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 24, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
45.60 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
27.50
27.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to improve energy efficiency and environmental 
performance of selected coal-fired power generation units through renovation and 
modernization (R&M) and improved operations and maintenance (O&M).  
 
The global environmental objective of the project is the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions through energy efficient rehabilitation of coal-fired power plants.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have the following components:  (i) Energy Efficiency R&M Pilots 
(US$295.9 million) and (ii) Technical Assistance (US$7.5 million).  
 
Component 1: Energy Efficiency R&M Pilots (US$295.9 million).  This component 
would renovate and modernize about 640 MW (three to four generation units) of old 
coal-fired generation capacity to test and demonstrate energy efficient rehabilitation 
approaches. Energy efficient R&M of generation units would go beyond the typical 
Page  2
Indian practice - of restoring original generation capacity, life-extension, and improving 
availability - by also modifying (or replacing) some equipment and systems to enable the 
unit to operate with higher fuel efficiency.  
 
The Bank and GOI have agreed to focus on 110 MW and 210 MW units which are in 
urgent need for R&M in India and constitute about 68% of the 27,000 MW identified for 
R&M. The following generation units have been initially selected for participation in the 
pilot project:  
 
•
Unit-5, Bandel Thermal Power Plant, West Bengal (210 MW)  
 
•
Unit-6, Koradi Thermal Power Plant, Maharashtra (210 MW)  
 
•
Units-3 & 4, Panipat Thermal Power Plant, Haryana (110 MW each)  
 
Component 2:  Technical Assistance (US$7.5 million).  The technical assistance 
component of the project is aimed at facilitating replication of EE R&M approaches 
through support for successful implementation of pilot R&Ms, mitigation of barriers, 
support for additional design studies and dissemination of lessons learned from 
demonstration R&Ms. It would also facilitate strengthening of institutional capacity of 
the concerned generation utilities for improved operation and maintenance practices and 
better monitoring and evaluation of plant performance. This component would support 
preparation of EE R&M for an additional five or six old 110 MW / 210 MW units.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The generating plants considered under the project and the physical characteristics are as 
under:  
 
a)  Koradi Thermal Power Station (KTPS)--is located at 18 KM distance to Nagpur city 
in Maharashtra. The plant location can be characterized as semi-rural with agriculture as 
predominant land use.  
 
b)  Bandel Thermal Power Station (BTPS)--is located in the Hooghly district of West 
Bengal. The area can be classified as semi-rural with surrounding rural land use. The 
plant is in the proximity of Hoogly River.  
 
c)  Panipat Thermal Power Station (PTPS)--is located in Khukhrana Village, about 8 km 
west of Panipat City in Haryana. The plant is located in an area with mixed land use 
comprising agriculture and industrial activity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01:  No significant adverse environmental impacts 
are expected under the Project.  Indeed, the Project will result in significant positive 
environmental benefits, in terms of improved energy efficiency, reduced local and global 
air pollutants (reduced emission intensity in terms of CO2 released per kWh of electricity 
generated), which will be measured and quantified during the project. Hence the 
environmental safeguard category of the project is ‘B’.  The plant level environmental 
issues and the unit level environmental issues in case of BTPS and KTPS are assessed 
through an Environmental Audit and Due Diligence (EADD) which also brings out 
Environmental Management Action Plans (EMAP) for addressing the environmental 
issues related to the specific units under consideration for R&M as well as overall plant 
level environmental performance, including investment requirements to improve 
environmental performance. The EADD study has been completed for Bandel and Koradi 
power plants. Since R&M in Panipat is phased out by over a year compared to the other 
two plants, the EADD study for the plant would be completed by June 2009.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50):  Bandel power project is located 
adjacent to river Hooghly which is about 80 kms downstream of Farakka barrage. 
Farakka barrage bifurcates the river Ganges into two streams - one going to Bangladesh 
and the other flowing in India by the name Hooghly. BTPS uses water from river 
Hooghly which is an international waterway as described in Para 1 of OP 7.50.  Hence, 
OP 7.50 is triggered for this project.  
 
BTPS draws water from river Hoogly for cooling water requirements. Hooghly River is 
part of Ganga basin which extends to Bangladesh. River Ganga branches in to two 
streams at Farakka Barrage, 80km upstream of BTPS. One of the branches flows in to 
Bangladesh and the other flows in India as river Hooghly. Since BTPS uses water from 
river Hooghly which is an international waterways as described in Para 1 of OP 7.50, OP 
7.50 is triggered.  
 
Page  4
The Ganges River Basin extends to Nepal much upstream of Farakka barrage, and some 
of its tributaries originate in China. India has signed formal agreements with Nepal on 
international rights and obligations regarding two tributaries of Ganga/Ganges, located 
upstream of Farakka: (i) River Kosi (Kosi River Agreement on April 25, 1954, revised in 
1966), and (ii) River Gandaki (Gandaki River Agreement on December 4, 1959). These 
agreements relate to construction of barrage projects in Nepalese territory on respective 
rivers with specified rights and obligations of both parties on issues like provision of 
land, sharing of power, irrigation water, etc. The agreements do not impose any 
restrictions on consumptive use on water discharges in Indian side.  
 
There is no agreement between the littoral states of the Bay of Bengal (India, 
Bangladesh and Myanmar).  
 
It is noted, however, that paragraph 7 of OP 7.50 provides for an exception to external 
notification to other riparians “For any ongoing schemes, projects involving additions or 
alterations that require rehabilitation, construction, or other changes that in the judgment 
of the Bank (i) will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the 
other riparians; and (ii) will not be adversely affected by the other riparians’ possible 
water use.”  
 
Bank management has approved the applicability of the exception to external 
notification to other riparians for this project for the following reasons:  
 
(a)  The project would not adversely affect the quality or quantity of the water flows to 
other riparians, because:  
 
(i)  The quantity of water required by the project after rehabilitation is estimated to 
remain below the originally sanctioned quantity of 1.7 Mil m3/day for BTPS.  
 
(ii)  Most of the above water (>99%) is discharged back into the river after using for 
“once through” cooling purposes. The same pattern would be maintained after 
rehabilitation. Thus, from the above points (i) and (ii), the water flows to other riparians 
will not be affected.  
 
(iii)  The temperature difference between inlet and discharge water mixing with river 
Hooghly (the key water quality parameter relevant here) would continue to be maintained 
below 3 degrees Celsius, complying with World Bank Guideline as well as West Bengal 
Pollution Control Board Guidelines, both before and after rehabilitation of Unit-5.  
 
(b)  The proposed rehabilitation works are mainly aimed at improving the energy 
efficiency (coal consumption per kilo-watt-hour of power generation) of the selected unit, 
and restoring the performance of the plant (capacity, availability etc) to close to original 
design parameters through renovation and modernization efforts. There are no major 
alternations or change in the nature or scope of the plant envisaged  
 
Page  5
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12: The Project will not result in any loss of 
immovable assets and is anticipated to have very limited adverse social impacts.  The 
renovations will be carried out at the existing power plant locations and therefore there 
will be no land acquisition and displacement.  Hence, the OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered. 
However, there have been reports of adverse health impacts on the community and crop 
losses due to the power station’s operations in the 
 
past.  
 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10: Though the Rapid Social Assessment (RSA) has 
identified tribal households, none of them were found to have any distinct identities and 
cultures.  All the tribal households have assimilated themselves with the local non tribal 
community and hence OP 4.10 is not triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Though Rapid Social Assessment brought perceived negative impact on the health of the 
community and occasional crop damage, the proposed project intervention is expected to 
result in positive impacts at unit level as well as plant level in terms of improved energy 
efficiency, reduced local and global air pollutants and reduction in negative impact on the 
health. Negative direct and/or long term impacts are not anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the context of the proposed R&M project, the project alternatives are in respect of 
selection of plants and choice of units within the plant for R&M activities. These 
alternatives are assessed considering technical, environmental, and social aspects prior to 
selection of plants.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Currently all the three plants considered under the proposed project follows the GoI as 
well as respective state Pollution Control Board’s regulations and standards. All the 
plants have basic institutional functions defined to address Environment, Health, and 
Safety (EHS) aspects. However, there are many areas of possible improvements in EHS. 
Specific measures to address these issues have been identified and agreed with BTPS and 
KTPS in the form of: (a) measures that are included as a part of R&M activities; and (b) 
measures that need to be implemented by the respective plants in the form of a time 
bound action plan. To improve relations between the thermal power stations and the 
neighboring community, the entities are in the process of preparing the Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Policy which will also include the institutional mechanism for 
implementation. In case of PTPS, the EADD and CSR are likely to be completed by June, 
2009, as the R&M intervention in PTPS is phased out by about a year.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of EADD, consultations with the stakeholders at BTPS and KTPS have been 
completed. The consultations revealed that there were issues related to crop damages at 
KTPS due to fly ash slurry leakages and pipe bursts. However, the stakeholders 
confirmed timely action by KTPS management with relevant compensation and 
appropriate measure ensure to minimize such events. In case of BTPS, the raw sewage 
from the plant is currently being used by the nearby farmers. The farmers pointed out that 
the STP under construction shall be operationalized in way that the treated effluent shall 
be made available for cultivation. In case of PTPS, the nearby communities expressed 
that the air and water pollution is impacting health and agricultural activities. These 
issues are documented as part of Bank’sinternal environmental due diligence and social 
assessment. The scope of proposed EADD for PTPS includes consultations with the 
stakeholders to assess the type of issues and preparation of necessary mitigation 
measures. The EADDs for BTPS and KTPS are finalized and accepted by the respective 
managements. In country disclosure of EADD by KTPS, including disclosure at their 
head office and at the power plant has been completed. BTPS will be shortly disclose the 
EADD. The final EADDs will also be disclosed in Bank’s Infoshop shortly.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mikul Bhatia 
11/18/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli 
11/18/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh 
11/18/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari 
11/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/03/2008 
Comments:  Comments provided in appraisal clearance memo. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
12/03/2008 
Comments:  I agree with Eric's comments on the appraisal clearance memo. 
