Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.: 48615 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2009 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  INDIA 
Project ID:  ID: P105618 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  PUNJAB HIGH VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM CARBON OFFSET 
PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Jeremy Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2009 
Estimated ERPA Date: July 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Carbon Offset 
Sector:  Power 
Theme : Climate Change 
IBRD/IDA Amount (US$m.): 0 
PCF Amount (US$m.): $10 million (estimated) 
Other financing amounts by source:  
PSEB Equity: $53 million, 
REC: $477 Million 
 
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises 
and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
The proposed development objectives of the Carbon Offset Project are: 
·
Reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide  
·
Increase the efficiency, reliability, and quality of electricity supply in the local 
distribution system of Punjab State Electricity Board (PSEB) 
3. Project Description: 
 
The project will reduce technical losses from current levels of ~18 percent to 11 percent within a 
five year period in 46 separate distribution divisions in Punjab.  PSEB will decommission 
transformers of 50 to 200 kVA and install new 6.3-kVA, 10-kVA, 16-kVA, and 25-kVA 
transformers in 19 of the 20 distribution circles in Punjab while upgrading the voltage from a 3-
phase 400V system to an 11kV high voltage distribution system (HVDS).  The objective is to 
reduce energy losses in distribution lines by providing higher voltage power to individual 
agricultural pump (AP) consumers and to reduce non-technical losses.  
 
The loss reduction program implemented in all 46 divisions will have an aggregate annual 
energy savings of 490 GWh per year in peak years.  As a result of energy savings, the project 
Page  2
will generate emission reductions by reducing the existing and future load/demand, thus avoiding 
calculated levels of electricity generation in the region.  
 
Distribution system conversions will reduce lines current by 27.5 times and thus the technical 
energy losses by around 800 times. Additional benefits that will accrue include: 
·
Increased energy availability to serve future or unmet current demand, 
·
Improved voltage profiles for AP consumers. The voltage drop will be reduced, 
especially during peak time, which improves the voltage profile available to the pump 
sets leading to improvements in the life of AP motors and reducing consumer 
expenditures for frequent motor rewinds, 
o
Reduced transformer failure resulting from local overloading, and 
o
Reduced emissions of nitrogen oxide (NOx) and sulpher oxide (SOx) and other 
particulates, which contribute to local environmental problems. 
 
The present Clean Development Machanism (CDM) Program of Activity (POA) targets only 
technical loss reduction in the feeders and excludes the energy saving and emission reductions 
through reduction in other losses or end use improvements from replacement of inefficient Agri-
Pumps by efficient pumps.  The category
 of the chosen methodology “comprises technologies or 
measures to improve the energy efficiency of an electricity network by up to the equivalent of 60 
GWh
e
per year.”  
 
The implementation (initial tendering) for 6 projects consisting of about 81,000 agricultural 
consumers started in October 2007. The 40 remaining projects will be fully implemented within 
a
three-year period, and are to be completed by March 2010.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
Actions to be undertaken in each of the 46 divisions include: 
 
–
Dismantling existing transformers and unnecessary lines so that lines crossing is avoided; 
–
Changing the configuration of the distribution network using existing poles and 
conductors; 
–
Installing small capacity dedicated distribution transformers for each AP consumer.  
–
Strengthening poles and installing additional poles wherever necessary. 
 
As a result of energy savings on account of technical loss reductions in the distribution of power, 
the project leads to equivalent reduction in the power generation at the grid level. At the 
Northern grid level, wherein the power generation is a mix of hydro and fossil fuel, it leads to 
reduction of carbon dioxide (a Green House Gas) emissions.  By reducing the existing and future 
load/demand the amount of mainly coal-based electricity generation in the region, the emissions 
of nitrogen oxide (NOx) and sulpher oxide (SOx) and other particulates are also reduced, 
producing positive environmental and health benefits. 
 
The project will lead to avenues of direct and indirect employment during the implementation 
phase. The additional power made available in the state will help in improving the quality of life 
of the citizens and poverty alleviation, thus fostering social well being. 
Page  3
No other negative impacts are expected from the project.  An investigation was undertaken to 
identify potential environmental issues in the transformers, and there was no presence of Poly 
Chlorinated Biphenyls (PCB) in the transformer oil.  
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Pyush Dogra 
 
Environment Specialist 
 
R.R. Mohan 
 
Senior Social Development Specialist   
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 x 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
Changing over from low voltage to high voltage supply will be a major step in reducing technical 
losses from the electricity distribution network. Up-grading of the system will ensure that 
significant additional power previously lost in the distribution system will now be available for 
direct consumption.   
 
The improper handling of the dismantled transformers could lead to leakage of Poly Chlorinated 
Biphenyls in case these were used as dielectric medium and operational safety during 
implementation are two issues. These issues have been examined as part of the ESA and there 
are no PCBs present in the PSEB transformer oil.  Therefore, no significant and/or adverse 
environmental and social impacts are anticipated. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
No adverse indirect or long term environmental or social impacts are anticipated. It is noted that 
PSEB has established and maintained adequate internal systems and procedures for health and 
safety which are anticipated to be able to address potential future environmental and social 
concerns if they arise.    
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
N.A. 
 
4. 
Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described
:
PSEB as part of due diligence on environmental and social aspect has conducted an 
“Environmental and Social Review (ESR).” This report was prepared describing impacts of the 
project, mitigating arrangements, and the relevant systems in place within PSEB to address these 
and future potential issues.  
 
This Report describes that as a result of energy savings on account of technical loss reductions in 
the distribution of power, the project leads to equivalent reduction in the power generation at the 
grid level. At the Northern grid level, wherein the power generation is a mix of hydro and fossil 
fuel, it leads to reduction of carbon dioxide (a Green House Gas) emissions. No other negative 
impacts are expected from the project. Further, no PCBs are found in the transformer oil. This 
was verified by conducting relevant field tests which have been duly documented in the ESR. 
 
On Safety aspects PSEB has a separate Safety Code developed in house which highlights the 
various practices and guidelines for Engineering and technical staff safety. This safety code is 
part of ESR. The occupational Health and Safety issues are also proposed to be developed from 
contract to contract basis on each sub project under the project. The procedures in this regard for 
contractor in his staff are also referred to in the developed ESR by PSEB. 
 
PSEB is aware of the policy on Physical Cultural Resources. This policy will be triggered in case 
there is a requirement to construct / replace the supports (poles / concrete bases) for new 
transformers replacing the existing ones. It will essentially confirm that ‘chance find’ procedures 
are in place to guide the project authorities to handle such a situation. The Chance find 
procedures shall be adopted under relevant Acts, and is duly mentioned in the ESR. 
 
Institutionally these aspects are mainstreamed in the PSEB operations, and concerned officers 
shall be made aware of the health and safety aspects through specific trainings. Occupational 
health and safety aspects are also checked while awarding work to the contractors under work 
contracting agreements. 
 
PSEB has disclosed the Environmental and Social Review on their website and has also solicited 
stakeholder’s comments on the same through paper advertisement. Comments so received shall 
be discussed in a stakeholder’s workshop proposed along with disclosure of POA.   
 
A
copy of final ESR shall be kept in the office of every Executive engineer associated with the 
project in addition to head quarter of the PSEB. 
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
For the project under consideration there will not be any adversely affected stakeholders, 
identified as the rural end users served by the PSEB distribution system.  PSEB has solicited 
stakeholder’s comments on Environmental & Social Review (ESR) by displaying the copy of 
ESR on their website and simultaneously requesting through paper advertisement comments on 
ESR from stakeholders. PSEB is also organizing additional workshops to solicit additional 
stakeholder input which will be completed by June 2009. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
March 21,2009 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
May 14, 2009 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:  
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Not Applicable
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:  
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Not Applicable
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Pest Management Plan:  
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Not Applicable
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
 
The Chance find procedures shall be 
adopted under relevant Acts as 
mentioned in the ESR. 
 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Page  7
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [  X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes. 
PSEB has disclosed the 
Environmental & Social Review 
(ESR) on their website. 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Page  8
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project includes the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
ESR includes safety aspects and 
safety code which is incorporated in 
the systems of PSEB. 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Jeremy Levin 
Environmental Specialist: 
Pyush Dogra 
Social Development Specialist 
R.R.Mohan 
 
04/07/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
ERIC BRUSBERG/ SANJAY SRIVASTAVA
 
04/22/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
JULIE FRASIER (ACTING) 
 
05/12/09 
Comments:   
