Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC3824
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P112798 
Project Name:  Power System Development IV - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pedro E. Sanchez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,714.00
1,714.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to further facilitate and strengthen In
dia’s electricity 
transmission system in order to increase reliable power exchanges between regions and 
states.  The Growth in Power Exchange between Regions will be used as the key 
indicator to measure the performance in achieving the development objectives.  
 
Investments would be aimed at improving the outcomes-orientation and service delivery 
of POWERGRID, by: (i) facilitating more economic use of generation resources; (ii) 
providing greater grid stability; (iii) establishing the open access regime mandated in the 
new Electricity Act; and (iv) facilitating development of a power trading regime within 
the country and with India’s neighbors.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will provide funds to complete the financing of the following 
transmission strenghtening schemes nitiated with PSDP-III and continued with PSDP-IV: 
(i) East-West Transmission Corridor, (ii) Western Region System Strengthening Scheme-
II, and (iii) Eastern Region System Strengthening Scheme-I.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project locations are spread across the country. The project is primarily aimed at 
building a strong national transmission network. The project will fund substations and 
transmission lines in Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, and West 
Bengal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDI) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Transmission schemes are generally environmentally clean and non-polluting in nature. 
Their impact on the environment is generally restricted to rights of way (ROW) and land 
acquisition for sub-stations. Environmental issues during the construction phase of power 
transmission line projects may include impacts on terrestrial and aquatic habitat and, 
impacts on humans due to electric and magnetic fields and hazardous materials. Given 
the large geographical spread of the transmission system (transmission line voltages 
above 400 kV and relatively large substations), and given the assumption that some of the 
project transmission lines may pass through forest areas, the project has been assigned 
environment category “A”.  In order toaddress potential environment and social issues 
associated with POWERGRID projects, the corporate level Environmental and Social 
Policy and Procedures (ESPP)is applied to all its investements irrespective of the source 
of funding. The ESPP serves as an important tool to mainstream and upstream 
environmental and social aspects of operations and activities for POWERGRID, 
particularly to plan, design, implement, monitor and manage key environmental and 
social interventions for all its sub-projects.  Some of the potential environment and social 
issues that would be mitigated using the ESPP framework include the following include 
the following:  
 
Page  3
•
Mitigating Opening up of canopy in natural forests; lopping of trees; habitatloss, 
vegetation damage and fragmentation  
 
•
Avoid increased access to wild lands, Paths/Access roads;  
 
•
Avoid run off and sedimentation from grading of  access roads;  
 
•
Avoid chemical contamination from chemical maintenance techniques;  
 
•
Ensure that there is no PCBs in electrical equipment;  
 
•
Mitigate the impact as a result of change in land use and population relocation due 
to towers, substations and induced secondary development during construction;  
 
•
Minimizing avian hazards from transmission lines and towers, Air craft hazards 
from transmission lines and towers;  
 
•
Avoid impairment of cultural and aesthetic resources/,  health  and  safety, fire 
hazards and pollution  
 
•
Prevent loss of agriculture/community land – by avoiding  physical displacement 
of population  
 
•
Avoid, if not minimize, displacement of population and ensure that the livelihood 
of those affected is improved or restored  
 
It is important to note that ESPP applies to all of POWERGRID’s projects irrespective 
of funding source.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not anticipated   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
POWERGRID has developed its ESPP formalizing its “commitment to the goal of 
sustainable development through conservation of natural resources and involvement of 
stakeholders, continually improving its management system, accessing specialist 
knowledge for management of significant environmental and social issues and 
introducing new state of the art and internationally proven technologies while strictly 
following the basic principles of “Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation.” As part of 
the EA, several alternative alignments are analyzed and choice is made on the basis of 
several criteria including environmental sensitivity of the routes. In selection of the sites 
for substations all efforts are made to minimize land requirement and also avoid any 
major adverse impact to the local population.  
 
POWERGRID has put in place a corporate Environmental and Social Policies and 
Procedures (ESPP) since 1998 (revised in March 2005) to proactively respond to the 
environmental and social issues that may be encountered in all its operations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
At organization and project levels the ESPP provides a framework for identification, 
assessment and management of environmental and social concerns.  Also the company 
Page  4
has an independent panel of experts that oversee environmental and social management 
policies and their implementation.  
 
For transmission line schemes the environmental assessment process includes two 
stages, during the first stage POWERGRID team prepares an initial environment 
assessment report (IEAR) based on the available GIS survey for fixing line routes and 
sensitive areas such as reserved forests, wild life sanctuary, national park, protected areas 
supported by public consultation and ground survey, particularly with reference to 
sensitive areas and other sensitive receptors, if any. The IEAR capture all significant 
environmental issues and prepare an ‘EnvironmentalManagement Plan’, including budget 
provisions for implementation. Where it is not feasible to realign a line, innovative 
solutions such as double circuit towers and pole-type rather than lattice structures for 
towers are considered and consciously incorporated in the design documents, wherever 
required, to avoid taking additional precious land for RoW such as in protected areas. The 
second stage produces a final environmental assessment report, submitted after 
completion of detailed survey of entire route. This report incorporates site specific minor 
changes before commencing actual scheme implementation and requirements for 
compliance with conditions of clearances, including forestry clearances accorded by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Initial Environmental Assessment reports for 
each scheme include a set of indicators and a mitigation plan to be supervised during the 
implementation stage.  
 
Resettlement: POWERGRID strictly adheres to the basic principles of avoiding 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) in all its projects by siting substations on 
government land as far as possible.  In case R&R is inevitable, POWERGRID addresses 
R&R issues arising due to land acquisition through its R&R Entitlement Framework and 
provides for complete rehabilitation of all the project affected families. For this purpose, 
a
detailed social assessment is undertaken to identify the potential affected families and 
consult wit them for mitigation measures.  
 
The flexibility of route selection of transmission lines enables POWERGRID to avoid 
adverse social impacts through undertaking measures including (i) avoidance of the 
transmission route involving any human displacement; (ii) making certain that the route 
does not threat create any threat to the survival of any community with particular 
reference to tribal groups; and (iii) ensuring that the proposed route does not adversely 
affect public utility services.  
 
Tribal development:  POWERGRID will ensure that the transmission route does not 
threat the survival of any community with particular reference to tribal groups. If initial 
preliminary assessment concludes that tribal groups will be affected by the proposed 
interventions at the subproject level, a detailed social assessment will be undertaken to 
identify issues and concerns and prepare a Tribal Development Plan using the tribal 
development strategy included in ESPP. For each substation, POWERGRID plans and 
implement, in consultation with local people, community development activities to 
improve their civic amenities and other socio-economic measures.  
 
Page  5
Implementation arrangement:  At the corporate level, POWERGRID has established a 
strong Environment and Social Management Division (ESMD) headed by a General 
Manager, and supported by five environment and social specialists under the overall 
control of an Executive Director (Corporate Planning).  In each of the nine regions of 
POWERGRID, there is one separate unit headed by a Deputy General Manager /Chief 
Manager responsible for managing social and environmental activities and ensuring 
coordination with ESMD in the corporate office. POWERGRID is now in the process of 
augmenting the ESMD unit along with field staff strength for improved ESPP planning 
and implementation.  
 
POWERGRID has adopted a third party certified comprehensive “Integrated 
Management System” (IMS) as per PAS 99:2006 integrating the requirement of ISO: 
9001 for Quality Management System, ISO: 14001 for Environment Management 
System and OHSAS: 18001 for Occupational Health & Safety Management System. 
POWERGRID has also been certified for SA 8000:2001 for Social Accountability 
standard by Social Accountability International. POWERGRID is progressively rolling 
out the IMS to regional offices of which 3 have already been completed. Implementation 
of these systems will enhance the effectiveness of implementation of ESPP in 
POWERGRID supported investment projects. In recognition of POWERGRID's efforts 
on social and environmental safeguards mainstreaming, they have been awarded the 
"Annual Green Award" for 2006 by the Environment Sector Board of the World Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESPP was prepared and has been revised (in 2005) based on regional level 
consultation with the stakeholders including affected community, NGOs, people’s 
representatives and others. A national level consultation workshop was also organized to 
discuss the draft ESPP. Power Grid has also disclosed the ESPP in public including their 
web site and locations of their regional offices. During the EA and social assessment 
process for individual sub-projects, and preparation of RAP, consultations are held with 
affected people and in settlements along the alignment as well as at Regional Offices of 
POWERGRID. EA documents are also hosted on the POWERGRID website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pedro E. Sanchez 
08/18/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi 
08/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
08/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
08/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
08/19/2008 
Comments:   
