Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/10/2008 
Report No.:  AC3752
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P091031 
Project Name:  India - Capacity Buildng for Industrial Pollution Management 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (40%);Other industry (30%);Solid waste 
management (30%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
24.81 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
37.23 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.95 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
0.00
10.95 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will support the implementation of the new Government policies that 
emphasize enforcement, integration of pollution prevention efforts and social 
participation. The project is designed as a pilot in response to the abundance of 
contaminated sites across India and the limitations of the institutional base to tackle the 
problem. The scale of the project effort is also conducive with the limited project 
resources.  The implicit logic of the project approach is to expand the institutional 
capacity at state level, ease the regulatory gaps and demonstrate appropriate clean 
up/remediation techniques and thus to facilitate scaling up of the remediation effort in 
other states.  
 
The project targets the pollution associated with specific sites, impacts on land and 
water and human health hazards. With this in mind the project also places a great 
importance on investments in institutional development of environmental agencies to 
prevent secondary pollution from ongoing industrial operations in the area. The project 
Page  2
will provide a comprehensive framework for investments in remediation of legacy 
hazardous waste and old municipal dump sites which pose significant hazard to 
communities and meet the criteria of investments in “public good”.  
 
The development objective of the project is twofold: (i) to support the development of 
an institutional and methodological framework for rehabilitation of highly polluted sites 
resulting from rapid industrialization and implementation of pilots for clean 
up/rehabilitation; and (ii) to build tangible human and technical capacity in state agencies 
for undertaking projects for reducing the risks from contamination to population, 
livelihoods and ecosystems associated with past environmental damage. Specifically, the 
project will pilot public action for remediation of negative effects generated by the 
physical damages to environment on selected sites.  More broadly, the project will 
provide a ‘blueprint’ for handling the issues related to ‘legacy’ pollution in the context of 
environmental and social sustainability as stated in National Environmental Policy.  
 
The project will achieve its objective by (a) using a project-based learning approach and 
supporting effective knowledge dissemination; (b) putting together a methodological 
framework for inventorying of polluted sites, assessing social costs and benefits, public 
health and ecosystem risks, and implementation of plans for cleanup/remediation, or 
containment of pollution-- whichever is feasible; (c) undertaking of prototypical 
investments in remediation of hazardous waste and old dump sites suitable for scaling up; 
and (d) providing support for improved industrial compliance.  
 
The project will also promote an integrated ‘area-based’ approach to legacy pollution 
cleanup which is based on stakeholders’ inclusion in planning and implementation of 
project investments, partnerships between public and private entities for improved 
environmental conditions of community neighborhoods. The project will support 
measures for community awareness to prevent secondary contamination of the sites and 
will promote behavioral changes. The project will involve civil society and community 
organizations in the multi-stakeholder monitoring mechanism to prevent indiscriminate 
disposal of waste from local industrial units. In order to measure project impacts several 
outcome indicators would apply. These include improved environmental quality that 
would be measured at pilot sites, for instance, by indicators such as: abatement of heavy 
metals in ground- and surface- water and soil; proper disposal of improperly recycled 
hazardous wastes; cleaner and thus more fertile farmland; reduction of high values of 
particulate matter at sites; public preventive action that reduces the risk to public health. 
Depending on the pilot site, saving of health treatment costs as brought about by project 
remediation activities could be evaluated as direct impact of undertaking remediation 
activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is designed as a pilot in response to the abundance of contaminated sites 
across India and the limitations of the institutional base to tackle the problem. The scale 
of the project effort is also conducive with the limited project resources. The implicit 
logic of the project approach is to expand the institutional capacity at state level, ease the 
regulatory gaps and demonstrate appropriate clean up/remediation techniques and thus to 
Page  3
facilitate scaling up of the remediation effort in other states. The project targets legacy 
pollution associated with specific sites, impacts on land and water, and aims to prevent 
exposure to human health hazards. With this in mind the project also places a great 
importance on investments in technical skills and knowledge of the responsible 
institutions to effectively address the issues.  
 
The project will have the following components:  
 
Component 1- Strengthening of Environmental Institutions: building capacity for 
addressing pollution remediation at state level. This includes technical assistance for 
strengthening the planning, monitoring and enforcement capacity of State PCBs in 
several states, including those where demonstration investments will be carried out. At 
the state level the project will provide technical assistance for improved compliance to 
HW Rules. On a national level the project will support through the process and 
methodological framework for development of the National Plan for Rehabilitation of 
Polluted Sites (NPRPS). In this regard, high priority will be given to support the 
development and application of risk based assessment of legacy pollution and 
prioritization of sites, cleanup/remediation standards, and options and financing 
modalities for implementation of the NPRPS. Largely, this will ensure the sustainability 
of project outcomes through enabling the replication of ‘good practices’ demonstrated 
through the project. Technical assistance will be provided to facilitate the knowledge 
sharing and dissemination of best practices from site remediation pilots with the aim to 
build a wider expertise in pollution remediation. The project support for states’ 
institutional capacity building would be in a form of a specialized training, support for 
creating environmental compliance assistance centers and knowledge exchange. Project 
financing will be provided for training and technical assistance, procurement of 
consultants, studies, environmental audits, participatory planning, community outreach 
activities; basic infrastructure and equipment for the compliance assistance centers, 
operational and maintenance cost on a declining basis; environmental monitoring and 
data collection, and other technical inputs and materials for capacity building as 
necessary.  
 
Component 2 - Investments in Priority Remediation and Environmental Improvements 
in Rehabilitation of Legacy Hazardous Waste Sites. The objective of this component is to 
remediate or minimize to acceptable and safe levels the environment and health risks by 
containing the migration of the heavy metal and chemical bearing of contaminated soil 
and groundwater. Typically, in most polluted sites the generation and discharge of 
industrial waste; domestic discharge of sewer water, as well as discharge of toxic 
chemicals from abandoned industrial facilities and the municipal dump site have 
contributed directly or indirectly to the overall degradation of environmental quality of 
soil, surface and groundwater in the area, thus posing significant human health risks. 
Specifically, the high concentration levels of heavy metals, exceeding the maximum 
permissible concentration limits, create a major risk to the quality of the total surface and 
groundwater system, which is also used by both animals and humans as a source of 
drinking water. This component will develop a risk based  technical solutions to 
implement measures for intercepting, containing or treating as well as monitoring the 
Page  4
environment and health impacts in the project area and prevent further migration of 
unacceptable contamination levels to sensitive areas and groundwater users. This 
component will be implemented in two states Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal to 
develop and implement area-based remediation plans and undertake environmental 
improvements in the area. Specifically, the project will provide technical assistance for 
detailed engineering design of site remediation plans, additional sampling and validation 
of pollution impacts, remediation works, environmental audits, post-remediation 
monitoring and after-care plans for the project sites and project based training.  
 
The four sites for pilot investment sites are located in peri-urban areas which continue to 
grow.  As the scale and complexity of development challenges continue to increase, 
market pressures are starting to stimulate increased interest in “brown field” 
redevelopment in and around major urban centers. This issue is coming into play in the 
business and municipal local government decisions, triggered by the growing demand for 
land. The project will support redevelopment of four abandoned, underutilized and 
polluted industrial sites with higher potential and commercial value where the clean up 
combined with a redevelopment option could be a ‘win-win’ solution. The experience of 
remediation and reclamation of these sites will inform the existing environmental 
protection act (and regulations on hazardous waste management and handling) for 
integrating risk assessment approaches in decisions for mitigation and remediation of 
pollution from old dump sites.  
 
The choice of four contaminated sites in AP and West Bengal is based on information 
on the economic and technical feasibility of the sites identified during project 
preparation. The basic factors that influenced the choice of sites for demonstration 
investments include: severity of environmental impacts, number of population directly 
exposed to pollution hazards, including upstream-downstream impact of pollution, 
current and planned land use; applicable choice of technology and potential for meeting 
cleanup standards within the life of the project, community buy-in, support of local 
government, and sustainability of the investments. The four sites have baseline 
environmental and social information on the key parameters regarding level and type of 
contaminant, geographic location and acreage, and health impacts. The feasibility study 
has provided the background on the socio-economic, technical, financial and 
environmental impacts of the proposed site remediation. The EMP provides 
recommendations on using an integrated approach to address other environmental 
problems in the area.  
 
Component 3: Project Management. The project will finance the cost of operation and 
maintenance of the implementing agencies at national and state level during project 
implementation, essential equipment and office supplies; operational travel expenses; 
hiring implementation consultants; training of project implementation staff, 
communication cost, beneficiary surveys and audits, field supervision, samples and 
laboratory analysis for validation of results.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The two states -- Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal--have been selected for piloting 
remediation based on a set of selection criteria designed to ensure that integrated 
pollution management approaches covering both hazardous and solid waste management 
can generate significant demonstration effect in terms of environmental, social and 
economic benefits. The legacy sites already designated for the pilot program include:  
 
(a) Remediation of Noor Mohammad Kunta (Lake), Katedan Industrial Area (KIE) in 
Ranga Reddy District in AP;  
 
(b) Rehabilitation of old municipal solid waste dump site in the District of Kadapa, in 
AP;  
 
(c) Remediation of chemically contaminated sites along 15 km of Delhi road in Hoogly 
district of West Bengal.  
 
(d) Closure and rehabilitation of old municipal solid waste dump site at Dhapa in East 
Kolkata in West Bengal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jennifer Solotaroff (SASDI) 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is expected to produce significant environmental improvements and social 
benefits due to expected nature of project intervention to reduce environment and health 
risks. However, because of its complex nature and remediation works associated with 
project sites (legacy pollution), the overall project has been assigned Category ‘A’, in 
accordance with the Bank's Operational Policy Guidelines. The project interventions are 
not likely to cause any adverse, large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The 
draft ESA has been completed. The EMP defines the procedures related to specific 
impacts associated with handling and disposal of hazardous waste from contaminated 
Page  6
sites, which will be mitigated by using international best practices. The EMP 
requirements will be integrated in the technical specifications and bidding document for 
remediation works and monitored as part of the contractual requirements in the civil 
works. The adverse impacts identified in the EMPs are of temporary nature and 
construction-related and can be mitigated following good construction management 
practices.  The policy on natural habitats may be triggered specifically with regard to the 
closure and rehabilitation of Dhapa old municipal waste dump site which is in the vicinity 
of the East Kolkata Wetlands. The remediation measures at Dhapa are designed to 
mitigate impacts of toxic run offs from the site which poses risks to community and area 
ecology. The closure and reclaiming of the site is expected to result in decreased levels of 
pollution in the water and soil and thus will have significant positive impacts. Any 
temporary impacts as a result of the remediation works will be mitigated following the 
recommendations of the EMP. The policy on cultural property may be triggered in the 
proximity of the sites for remediation works where items of religious importance or sites 
for worship are founds. Such cases the site management plan will include measures to 
ensure that these sites are not adversely affected, access is not interrupted and that the 
relevant authorities are informed well in advance of any instance of potential disruption 
on the property. This will include also maintaining a sufficient physical distance between 
the cultural sites and any remediation activities.  The project also will provide a chance 
finds protocol to notify relevant authorities in the event of chance find occurrences and to 
act in compliance with India’s relevant policies.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  It is expected that the physical activities envisaged under the 
project are unlikely to have significantly adverse social safeguard impacts.  A majority of 
the sites are ‘orphan’ sites and on public land. The Environmental and Social Assessment 
(ESA) has confirmed the absence of any legal disputes for each of the four sites under the 
project.  No land acquisition is expected under the project; however, the project has 
triggered the policy on involuntary resettlement due to the likelihood that income streams 
will be interrupted by project activities and will need to be restored. Rag-pickers on the 
two dump sites will require income restoration as well as rehabilitation (including 
training in safer methods of rag-picking and training to acquire alternative livelihoods).  
The possibility of encroachers on public lands or vendors/traders who use the 
undeveloped spaces also cannot be ruled out, and such groups have been accounted for in 
the environment and social management framework (ESMP) developed by the ESA.  In 
these cases, people affected by project activities in terms of loss of income or loss of 
housing/shelter have already been identified (through the ESA)  in advance of project 
appraisal through extensive preliminary consultations with all stakeholders in project 
sites.  Consultations have been supplemented with data collection in the form of 
household surveys and appropriate qualitative methods of data collection to ensure that 
all potentially affected peoples are recognized, and all ways in which they may be 
affected are specified. For events in which people incur loss of income and/or 
housing/shelter due to project activities, the ESMF has been prepared to ensure equitable 
income restoration and restoration of housing or shelter for affected people. The 
framework for resettlement and income restoration will identify and address issues 
relevant to vulnerable people and households.  The appropriate entitlement matrix and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for each site are being developed and will be 
Page  7
completed well before Negotiations.  Given that physical interventions are planned only 
for urban and peri-urban locations, interventions are unlikely to affect indigenous peoples 
(IPs) dwelling in tribal/ancestral lands, for example, and thus are unlikely to affected 
indigenous peoples and would not require preparation of a separate IP Development Plan.  
Because the selected sites are likely to be host to poor and vulnerable populations, 
however, implementation of remedial actions would ensure that project interventions do 
not obstruct the livelihoods and access of these populations or incur other adverse 
impacts, but also make the appropriate provisions to ensure that people are not exposed to 
health hazards while site remediation works take place.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to produce significant environmental improvements, including 
improved quality of the ambient environment and improved quality of water used for 
irrigation and household use. The project interventions to remediate the identified areas 
through a combination of specific interventions will reduce the existing and future 
adverse environment and health impacts resulting from existing excessive contaminated 
land and ground water. The environmental improvements, in turn, are likely to bring 
economic improvements, such as increased value of land/real estate and enhanced 
opportunities for income generation in the local community.  To this effect, the specific 
environmental assessments for each site account for these economic differentials in the 
event that local inhabitants will need to be resettled or their income streams restored as 
the result of project activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project design has considered various alternatives to avoid and minimize the adverse 
environment and social impacts. These alternatives include: definition of area for 
remediation (including the greater community affected by the pollution being remediated, 
in addition to the area of the pollution hotspot itself); designs alternative for technical 
intervention in terms of remediation verses containment; alternatives in planning and 
implementation arrangement. Specific to the pilot sites the approach which applies is to 
give primacy to the principles of avoidance of potential involuntary resettlement aspects, 
as well as issues related to cultural sites or health impact on community and workers. 
Additionally, the project will strengthen and integrate the institutional framework, 
including regulatory policies, management practices, compliance incentives, and 
performance guidelines, for central and state governments in the remediation of polluted 
sites.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to ensure timely identification and effective management of environmental and 
social risks, the borrower (through an ESA) has developed an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), as well as an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
and Social Management Plan (SMP) for each site, to mitigate and adequately address 
environmental and social risks. The ESMF provides guidance for managing, monitoring 
Page  8
and evaluation of environment and social impacts for different types of sites in each state.  
The framework also defines the procedures for screening of sites for environment and 
social risks and detailed environment assessment for remediation sites consistent with 
requirements under the World Bank policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
and the GOI requirements for EA. The ESMF also includes procedures for 
comprehensive site-specific consultations with key stakeholders and formal public 
disclosure, as well as implementation arrangements that meet mitigation and monitoring 
requirements for the expected investment activities. The site-specific Environmental and 
Social Assessment (ESA) has considered any potentially adverse impact on low-income 
households, indigenous peoples, women and other vulnerable groups. The ESA's site-
specific EMPs and SMPs will mitigate the potential consequences of management of 
hazardous materials. Specifically, the management plans provide:  
 
•
An outline of the mitigation measures required to avoid or minimize the negative 
impacts;  
 
•
A
monitoring mechanism with monitoring indicators for assessing effectivenessof 
the mitigation measures;  
 
•
Definition of the roles and responsibilities of the implementing agency, for each 
state, in implementing the EMPs/SMPs, and areas where these roles and responsibilities 
can be shared with other parties involved in the execution and monitoring of the Project;  
 
•
Defines the requirements necessary for documenting compliance with the 
EMP/SMP and communicating it to all concerned regulatory agencies;  
 
•
Prescribes the mechanisms for ongoing consultation with stakeholders during 
project implementation.  
 
•
Characterizes the socio-economic make-up of the project-affected community and 
identify means of educating community members about local environmental issues, 
raising awareness about responsible and sustainable waste management  
 
•
Identifies potential employment opportunities for local community members that 
arise from remediation activities.  
 
•
Recommends measures for encouraging inclusion of community-based 
organizations and members with particular attention to females, low-income households 
and SCs/STs/OBCs)  
 
•
Defines the grievance mechanism, as well as how communities/civil society will 
be involved in the multi-stakeholder mechanism for monitoring and enforcing 
compliance with regulatory requirements.  
 
Adherence to specific impact mitigation measures in the EMPs and SMP will be part of 
the requirements in the bidding documents and contracts to ensure that implementation is 
built into the contractor costs and agents responsible for implementation of project 
activities. The contractor will be legally bound for the execution and implementation of 
the EMP and SMP. The state-level implementing agencies -- AP Pollution Control Board 
and West Bengal Pollution Control Board--will be the focal points for the pilot 
remediation program and will ensure that coordination with project stakeholders on 
environmental and social matters as required is maintained throughout the 
implementation period of the project.   
 
Page  9
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Central Pollution 
Control Board, Departments of Environment and the State Pollution Control Boards in 
AP and West Bengal, urban local bodies in Hyderabad and Kaddapa and Hoogly-Howrah 
and Kolkata. The ESMF and site-specific EMPs and SMPs prepared in consultation with 
the relevant stakeholders are being reviewed by the World Bank. Upon approval, and 
prior to appraisal these will be disclosed in-
country and at the Bank’s Public Information 
Center in Delhi, and in Washington, DC. The MoEF and the SPCBs will also disclose the 
safeguards management plan (plus EMPs/SMPs for all sites) on their website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/26/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/12/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/26/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  10
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
11/12/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruma Tavorath 
10/29/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Jennifer Solotaroff 
11/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/02/2008 
Comments:  Email with comments dated Dec 2 filed in IRIS. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
12/03/2008 
Comments:  Fin/loan agreements under prep.; will be finalized after appraisal,hence information in 
points 2-OP/BP4.11; 4-All Safeguard Policies N/A.ISDS resubmitted as per T. Ceesay's email of 
12/09/08. 
