Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/20/2009 
Report No.:  AC3206
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P099979 
Project Name:  Capacity Building for Urban Local Bodies - NURM Capacity Building 
Task Team Leader:  Richard L. Clifford 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 14, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal finance (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other 
urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project would be to assist selected ULBs to 
institutionalize key urban reforms mandated under the GOI?s JNNURM program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will have two components:  
 
(1) Capacity Building Component: Capacity building will focus on support for strategy 
formulation and implementation, developing policies, programs and procedures, 
improving systems and building skills. While the project will mainly support these 
activities in ULBs, states will also be able to  access funding for activities that are 
consistent with their role in implementing JNNURM.(e.g. review of relevant legislation). 
Participating entities would be able to self-select activities for funding from any of four 
focus areas on the basis of city-specific needs assessments. The focus areas correspond to 
the reforms supported under JNNURM, and are defined as (i) Financial and Financial 
Management Reform; (ii) Service Delivery; (iii) Framework for Planning; (iv) 
Framework for Governance.  
Page  2
Component (2) Project Management Component: This component will cover assistance 
for appointment of a national Program Unit (PMU) at MOUD for providing overall 
management support during implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All India in scope. Description of salient physical characteristics of locations is not 
applicable, given this is a Technical Assistance.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASDI) 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDI) 
Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is a demand driven TA project which does not trigger environment and social 
safeguard issues, and therefore, no activities in this respect have been proposed or 
visualized. However, if any ULB requests for support to build/enhance its capacity to 
address safeguards issues, such request can be considered within the broad scope of the 
TA.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed/visualized activities under the TA do not have safeguard implications 
under the above stated (Section 6) safeguard policies, since no physical activities are 
planned. However, one of the focus areas of the TA is "planning framework". Under this, 
certain ULBs may request for TA to develop improved planning techniques, or plans for 
restructuring the existing city plans in part or whole. In such cases, the need for 
addressing the environmental and social safeguards in the  plans may  be looked into.   
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The TA project, as explained in para II-A-1, does not trigger any adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The TA does not trigger safeguard issues as explained in para II-A-1, hence no measures 
to address safeguard issues is necessary. However, the ULBs, that stand to receive 
support under this project, have varying capacity to address safeguard issues, which to 
enhance assistance can be provided under this project if requested. This would have the 
potential to ameliorate issues associated with lack of integrated land use planning, and 
citizen awareness.  Additionally, given the TA's emphasis on revenue generation, 
building capacity of ULBs to access Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) revenue and 
other Grant Funds that have carbon finance potential, would increase funds avilable to 
improve service delivery and the living environment. Realistic assessment of any ULB's 
capacity to address safeguard issues will be done as a part of extending such support for 
enhancing ULBs' capacity to address safeguard issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key primary stakeholders include ULBs and states, and consultations have been held 
with them in the course of project preparation.. However, improving local governance is 
one of the four focus areas for technical assistance, including strengthening citizen 
forums such as ward committees, sub-ward structures such as neighborhood assemblies 
and the civil society. This technical assistance is described in para 11 of Annex-4.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard L. Clifford 
02/10/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu 
02/10/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satya N. Mishra 
02/10/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/10/2009 
Comments:  Cleared as Category "C", on the understanding that the project will not finance any 
physical investments. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
02/18/2009 
Comments:  Cleared 
