Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4079 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102549 
Project Name: Tech Engr Educ Quality Improvement II 
Task Team Leader: Andreas Blom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 13, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (90%);General industry and trade sector (5%);General public 
administration sector (5%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Technology diffusion (S);Export 
development and competitiveness (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
200.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Increased production of high quality engineers and engineering research and development in 
technical areas demanded by the private and public sectors; including in low-income regions of 
India.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The PDO would be pursued via a USD 500 million project, of which IDA would finance USD 
300 million in the form of a Specific Investment Loan over a four-year period.  
 
Component-1:  Improving Quality and Relevance of Engineering Education- US$ 470 million  
 
a) 
Faculty Development: This program would support faculty development through: (i) 
large-scale training of faculty in modern pedagogy; (ii) upgrading of qualifications of existing 
faculty; and (iii) professional development through both face-to-face and distance modes. The 
target group is faculty at large whether the institution receives support under the project or not. 
The delivery mechanism will be developed during project preparations.  
Page  2
b) 
Competitive Fund to Strengthen Technical/Engineering Institutions: This Fund would 
seek to improve the competencies of undergraduates in supported institutions through the 
implementation of a set of reforms and investments. The state level reforms would seek to 
increase the decision-making authority of the institutions regarding educational, financial and 
administrative matters, and establish a Board of Governors for each institution. The Project 
would support an institution-specific package and consist of measures to: (i) improve teaching 
facilities; (ii) develop and continually improve curricula to enhance their relevance to the labor 
market, in collaboration with industry; (iii) increase faculty development, (iv) implement 
institutional reforms aimed at promoting academic excellence, provide incentives for better 
teaching, and enhance the efficiency of project institutions, (v) build management capacity, and 
(vi) obtain accreditation. This window is a continuation of the Phase I fund, and would focus on 
support to institutions that were not part of Phase I which are located in states that performed 
well in Phase I or in new states.  
 
c) 
Competitive Fund to Scale-up Post-graduate Education and Research, Development and 
Innovation This Fund would seek to significantly increase enrolment in post-graduate education, 
and produce engineering research relevant to the Indian economy. It would support the 
establishment of centers of excellence in select institutions in interdisciplinary and problem-
focused areas. The financing would cover scholarships, research equipment, faculty 
development, and networking activities with national and international research partners. 
Preference would be given to proposals that involve a cluster of institutions, include a focus on 
innovation and entrepreneurial skills, and show potential for sustainability. This Fund would 
support more advanced institutions than the Fund described above in (b). For example, 
institutions would have to meet a more stringent set of eligibility criteria, such as full 
accreditation and academic autonomy. Furthermore, industry contribution would be a 
prerequisite.  
 
Combined, the two competitive funds would support an estimated 200 institutions using a 
transparent process of proposal submission and peer review selection, based on pre-established 
selection criteria. Each fund would have a set of eligibility criteria in terms of policy reforms. 
Both private and public institutions would be supported. The proposals would be prepared by the 
institutions themselves and continued funding would be contingent upon performance.  
 
An Equity Assurance Plan would be developed to ensure that students, faculty, and institutions 
from disadvantaged backgrounds can participate on an equal footing in sub-components (a) and 
(b). In addition, institutions could be supported to better prepare disadvantaged students to 
compete for admission to technical/engineering education institutions.  
 
Component-2: 
Supporting Systemic Improvements through Capacity Building, 
Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management
–
US$ 30 million  
 
a) 
Improving Management Capacity: This sub-component would focus on building the 
capacity of technical education policy planners and managers at the central, state, and 
institutional levels.  Capacity building would support the effective implementation of the reforms 
required in component 1. It would be achieved through: (i) specifically designed training 
Page  3
programs within India and abroad; (ii) development of policy studies; (iii) visits, conferences and 
publications to learn and share best practices on planning and management among participating 
states and institutions; and (iv) support to strengthen “public/systemic goods”. For example, this 
sub-component could support the strengthening of the accreditation model to focus more on 
educational outputs, rather than inputs.  
 
b) 
Monitoring and Evaluating the implementation and impact of the project: The Project 
would be monitored and evaluated at the institutional, state and national levels through various 
means. A comprehensive set of indicators would be collected through the establishment of a 
Management Information System, including options for third-party verification, and through 
tracer studies. Performance of States and institutions would be assessed twice yearly through 
independent performance audits, and through student and faculty surveys. In addition, a regular 
employer survey would be administered. Impact of the Project would also be evaluated through 
thematic studies. Lastly, an external review is proposed at the mid-term review.  
 
c) 
Project Management: This sub-component would support project management at the 
central and State levels, including training and studies in fiduciary areas, and a contract 
management system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
India, nationwide.  Specific locations would be identified through the competitive selection of 
states and institutions.  Around 20 states and 200 educational institutions are expected to 
participate.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower managed environmental and social safeguards during phase I, and will continue to 
have people designated to do so at national and state levels during phase II.  Ensuring adequate 
expertise will be part of project design and implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDI) 
Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will support only minor repairs and refurbishments of the existing infrastructure. 
No new construction is expected. Therefore, no adverse environmental impact is anticipated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Government of India reserves seats for SC/ST/OBCs as per the Constitution.  State and 
Central governments ensure the reservation policy.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Rapid Equity Assessment (REA) will be undertaken to identify the barriers faced by 
disadvantaged groups (including Scheduled Tribes) during technical/ engineering education, 
in completing it and in obtaining appropriate employment.  This assessment would be 
completed by Feb. 28, 2009.  Thereafter, depending on its findings, a larger study may be 
undertaken and completed in CY2009.  
 
A
simple environment management framework will be prepared by 03/31/2009, including a 
checklist and guidelines for minor repairs and refurbishments of the existing infrastructure.  
Both environment and social assessment will be disclosed before appraisal: (i) at the 
InfoShop, and (ii) in-country at publicly accessible locations.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Blom 
12/17/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/22/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. IP Policy is triggered; appropriate plans / provisions for IPs will be needed by 
QER / appraisal. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
12/18/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
