Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3365
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P102771 
Project Name:  Financing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in Infrastructure through 
Support to IIFCL 
Task Team Leader:  Priya Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 4, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 23, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (30%);General energy sector (25%);General 
transportation sector (25%);Capital markets (20%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
595.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5,400.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5,400.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s objective is to increase the availability of long-term financing for 
infrastructure PPP projects in India. This will be achieved through supporting IIFCL in its 
role to catalyze private financing for infrastructure PPPs and stimulate the development 
of a long-term local currency debt financing market for infrastructure in India.   
 
3. Project Description 
The lending instrument to be used for this project is a Financial Intermediary Loan, or 
“FIL” (as per the World Bank Operations Policy directive OP8.30), usingan IBRD/IDA 
line of credit of USD 600 million to finance IIFCL’s disbursements for infrastructure 
projects as per its mandate under the GoI Scheme and also to support capacity building. 
IIFCL will act as the implementing agency. The project meets the OP8.30 guidelines on 
the terms for on-lending, managing foreign exchange risks, market interest rates for final 
borrowers, etc. The project includes two components: (i) Component one will provide 
long-term finance to the infrastructure project development companies (the “sub-
Page  2
projects”) to be financed by IIFCL.  The Bank will select PPP projects for financing 
(through IIFCL) from IIFCL’s pipeline (‘sub-projects’) based on agreed eligibility 
criteria.; and (ii) Component two involves capacity building, including building the 
capacity of IIFCL to fulfill its current mandate of long-term debt financing, through 
support for strengthening IIFCL’s organizational needs, staff skills, new product 
development, and strengthening IIFCL’s corporate ESSF; and Supporting IIFCL to 
implement and monitor the project, including in the areas of E&S safeguards and 
procurement, and overall results monitoring.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The sub-projects are likely to be located across India.  In the first  12 months, the  PPP 
sub-projects prepared under the proposed or on-going Bank assisted state highways 
projects in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa  will be considered for financing once the 
concessionaires or lead banks of these sub-projects approaches IIFCL for financing. In 
addition, the Bank may also consider other projects in IIFCL’s portfolio on case by case 
basis which meet the Bank’s standards with regards to Environment and Social 
safeguards    Subsequent to the establishment of an effective corporate environmental and 
social management system, other sub-projects prepared using IIFCL’s corporate 
Environment and Social Framework may be considered for Bank financing.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDI) 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI) 
Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDI) 
Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project could potentially trigger multiple safeguard policies depending upon the 
nature of a given sub-project investment. At this stage OP4.01 OP 4.10, and OP 4.12 
Page  3
have been triggered.  Further, OP 4.04, OP 4.36 and OP 4.11 are likely to be triggered 
considering the nature of sub-projects on a case-by-case basis. Bank funds will be used 
by IIFCL to on-
lend to projects (henceforth referred to as the ‘sub-projects’) across six 
major infrastructure sectors, including surface and air transport, power, urban, gas 
pipelines, infrastructure for SEZs and tourism developments.  Implementation of the sub-
projects in these sectors is expected to result in environmental and social impacts, 
including land acquisition.  
 
IIFCL will finance infrastructure sub-projects for which the environmental and social 
assessments may reveal triggering of additional Bank policies. These include 
Resettlement, Indigenous People, Natural Habitats, Cultural Properties, Forests, Pest 
Management, and Dam Safety. Up-stream environmental and social assessments and the 
development of appropriate management plans addressing all relevant environmental and 
social issues will be prepared, reviewed, and cleared by the Bank as compliant with its 
safeguard policies in advance of the decision to apply Bank funds to any given sub-
project investment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects are likely to be spread across India and play an important role in 
improving the country’s physical infrastructure, with important benefits for 
manufacturing competitiveness, job creation, growth and poverty reduction. 
Environmental and social impacts will be sub-project specific. These impacts will be 
examined in detail as part of sub-project level environmental and social assessments for 
which Bank-compliant management or remediation plans will be put in place using the 
applicable Bank Safeguard policies. 
 
In the initial 12 months, the  PPP sub-projects prepared under the proposed or on-going 
Bank assisted state highways projects in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa will be considered 
for financing once the concessionaires or lead banks of these sub-projects approaches 
IIFCL for financing. These sub-projects are likely to impact Natural Habitats and Forests 
and therefore the applicability of OP 4.04, OP 4.11 and OP 4.36, and the sub-projects will 
be appraised in accordance with these policies.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable as the project alternatives relate to individual sub-projects. Such analysis 
would be carried out as part of the sub-project level EAs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During the initial 12- month period, during which IIFCL will develop and implement a 
corporate environmental and social safeguards framework, preparation of sub-projects 
will follow standard World Bank procedures and policies. During this period, the pipeline 
of sub-projects is expected to include a set of state roads projects in Andhra Pradesh, and 
Orissa that are being prepared with assistance from the Bank and in accordance with the 
Page  4
Bank’s environment and social policies and standards. IIFCL has a draft Environment 
and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF), which is disclosed on its website. This ESSF 
is being further improved and revised by IIFCL through consultations with various 
stakeholders. The project plans to have the corporate ESSF finalized and adopted by 
IIFCL. These revisions will be informed by the experience and lessons learned during the 
initial phase of implementation and will also take into account stakeholder feedback, the 
Bank’s advice, and the requirements of relevant Indian policies. Once this revised 
Corporate ESSF is in place, the preparation of safeguards action plans for sub-projects 
will be guided by the ESSF with subsequent review and clearance by the Bank.  
 
The Bank has agreed with IIFCL an accelerated safeguards action plan to mange the 
risks which includes:(i) by February, 2009, establishing Environmental and Social 
Management Unit (ESMU), headed by E&S domain knowledge expert and supported by 
two professionals (one environment and one social); (ii) conducting a consultative 
process for finalizing Corporate ESSF and adopting as its corporate Policy framework, 
including mainstreaming of E&S due diligence procedures in to IIFCL’s Operations 
Manual, by July, 2009; (iii) establishing MIS tracking system by October, 2009 for 
effective management of environmental and Social Safeguards; and (iv) conducting 
training and awareness programs for the stakeholders.  
 
IIFCL capacity to manage safeguards: As per the Eligibility Criteria for FIs, Para 9(c), 
OP 8.30 – Financial Intermediary Lending, the proposed loan requires IIFCL to ensure 
appropriate capacity for undertaking the appraisal and supervision of sub-projects, 
including of environmental and social safeguards. At this stage, IIFCL does not have 
adequate capacity to screen and supervise sub-projects’ environmental and social policy 
compliance. They also do not have mandate for appraisal and supervision and depend on 
the Lead Banks for such appraisal and supervision. The corporate ESSF, which will be 
adopted by IIFCL, before July, 2009 will define the institutional arrangements for 
managing the safeguard-related issues in all of IIFCL’s sub-projects; IIFCL will 
accordingly refine and strengthenits policy framework, and allocate adequate resources to 
ensure effective screening and supervision.  
 
At the time of appraisal, the final selection of sub-projects for the first year Bank 
financing was ongoing. All sub-projects to be financed by the Bank under this project are 
likely to be category "A" operations: all the sub-project level Environment and Social 
Management Plans will be reviewed, cleared, and supervised by the Bank.  
 
Safeguard Measures in the current pipeline of sub-projects: The Bank has undertaken a 
review of potential sub-projects in the IIFCL pipeline to assess the quality of due 
diligence on environmental and social aspects. The review concluded that most sub-
projects in IIFCL’s pipeline would not comply with Bank requirements; they were 
prepared before the ESSF was developed, and hence, used the Concessioning 
Authorities’ policy provisions. In theory, remedial measures could be applied to these 
sub-projects to ensure compliance with the ESSF; in practice, however, such retrofitting 
will not be possible for projects that have already reached financial closure. In  future, 
however, it is expected that, once IIFCL adopts the ESSF as its corporate policy, and this 
is made known to all potential concessioning authorities, lead banks, and private 
Page  5
companies, new sub-
projects will be prepared in accordance with the ESSF’s provisions. 
In the initial 12 months, a “ring-fenced” approach will be adopted, under which, Bank-
financing will flow to sub-projects that have been carefully reviewed for compliance with 
the Bank’senvironmental and social policies. Candidates for Bank financing during this 
initial 12-month period include a set of state roads PPP projects prepared as part the   
Bank-assisted state highways projects in Andhra Pradesh, and Orissa. The sub-project 
specific draft management plans for Andhra Pradesh and Orissa are currently under 
preparation. These sub-projects  are being  prepared using the project specific policy 
frameworks which are consistent with the  Bank’s safeguard policies. The 
implementation mechanism for these sub-projects will be finalized when the concession 
agreement is executed between the Concessioning Agency and the Concessionaire. All 
the sub-project level environment and social management plans will be reviewed and 
cleared by the Regional Safeguards Adviser prior to acceptance of the sub-project for 
Bank financing through IIFCL.   
 
Risk Assessment and Mitigation measures. The rapid risk assessment reveals that there 
are substantial risks associated with environmental and social impacts  and these are not 
easy to mitigate. This is because IIFCL  has no mandate or  capacity at present to carry 
out sub-project environment and social  appraisal  and supervision of  sub-project 
implementation as laid down under World Bank’s  Operational Policy 8.30 Financial 
Intermediary Lending. A number of mitigation measures proposed to minimize the risks 
which include: development of corporate environment and social framework, setting up 
of Environment and Social Management Unit, establishment of MIS tracking system, 
annual audit, secondary appraisal by IIFCL and organizing series of workshops and 
meeting with all stakeholders involving in the process of managing the risks to 
familiarize the ESSF principles, and processes.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the sub-project concessioners and concessionaires, lending 
consortium, local NGOs, the people to be directly affected by subprojects and the 
population in general who are expected to benefit from the sub-projects that are expected 
to be implemented as part of the project.  
 
A
preliminary draft ESSF was posted on IIFCL’s website and the Bank’s Info shopon 
February 25, 2008. As per the provisions of ESSF, sub-project level documents will be 
disclosed at all project offices, including summaries in local languages. The ESSF 
provides mechanism for consultations at sub-project level while preparing EA/EMP, 
Resettlement Action Plans, and Tribal Development plans in order to enable stakeholders 
to express their concerns and priorities.  All the sub-project-specific safeguard documents 
will be publicly disclosed once they are submitted to IIFCL. The ESSF will undergo 
stakeholder consultations during the course of its finalization to IIFCL’s Corporate ESSF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  6
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/25/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/25/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/25/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
*
The Bank provided consolidated comments from Task Team, QACU, RSA and Legal 
on the preliminary draft ESSF during the last week of February, 2008 and IIFCL will 
revise the ESSF with the help of consultants and adopt it as its Corporate Policy before 
July, 2009. During the course of finalization, IIFCL will also hold stakeholders workshop 
to take into account of the views and suggestions of the concerned stakeholders as inputs 
to the final version.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
Yes 
Page  7
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Priya Basu 
09/01/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli 
09/01/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
09/01/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Satya N. Mishra 
Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari 
09/01/2008 
09/01/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
 
Comments:   
