Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4270 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P105990 
Project Name: West Bengal Improved Service Delivery by PRIs (ISDP) 
Task Team Leader: Roland White 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (40%);Municipal governance and institution building 
(20%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Access to urban services and housing 
(20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to help support the development of stronger, better 
capacitated and performing Gram Panchayats (GPs) delivering enhanced local services and 
infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will finance the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Block grant to GPs. A block (untied) grant flow from the state government 
directly to a significant fraction of GPs (around 800-1000, which is roughly a quarter of all GPS 
in the state) to support local development and service delivery activities. While GPs would have 
significant discretion over the use of this funding, the focus would be on the production and 
delivery of public goods and services.  The universe of targeted GPs will be selected on the basis 
of criteria related to need, risk management, and the importance of leveraging off the foundations 
established by other programs.  The grant flow will be structured in such a manner as to provide 
Page  2
a
performance-oriented incentive for the strengthening of the institutional capacities and 
capabilities of the targeted GPs, and the deepening of bottom-up accountability;  
 
Component 2: Capacity-building for PRIs.  The GoWB (PRDD) has initiated a PRI capacity-
building program using funds from its own and donor sources.  The project will supplement this 
program in areas where additional resources are necessary and with a focus on linkages to the 
block grant component.  While there will be a focus on linkages to the block grant component, 
this component will not be limited to local governments benefiting from Component 1;  
 
Component 3: State government oversight and monitoring of
 PRIs.  The GoWB’s systems of 
performance monitoring of PRIs within the state are inadequate and do not provide sufficient 
information for proper oversight and management of the PRI system overall.  The project will 
support the development of a comprehensive performance monitoring system, focused on the 
institutional performance of PRIs, for the PRDD;  
 
Component 4: Program Management and Implementation.  This component will support the 
management and implementation of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in approximately 800-1000 GPs in the West Bengal State.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency (PRI and Rural Development Department) has in place a well-
capacitated Society, the West Bengal State Rural Development Agency, to execute the project.  
Additional support will be provided to this Agency through the project, including capacity to 
ensure effective oversight of the environmental and social safeguard frameworks by beneficiary 
local authorities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDI) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Management Plan will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
If and when Indigenous Peoples are found in the project areas an Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/01/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roland White 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/07/2009 
Comments:  Cleared at PCN stage. Specific policies to be triggered to be determined. IP policy likely to 
be triggered. ESMF will be required. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
07/07/2009 
Comments:  The team should focus on supporting and strengthening the country systems and the 
ability of PRIs to implement the country systems rather than take a project-specific approach. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
