Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3002 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/22/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P101722 
Project Name: Indonesia: Education System Improvement through Sector Wide 
Approaches (SISWA) 
Task Team Leader: Dandan Chen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (60%);Secondary education (40%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,000.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 75.00
1,075.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to basic education particularly at 
junior secondary education level and improve basic education quality.  These objectives will be 
achieved through targeted scholarships directly to poor students to improve school enrollment 
and attendance, and to narrow the learning gap; and enhanced incentives and technical assistance 
to district Education Offices to support better service delivery particularly to the poor.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Government SISWA program: SISWA is the first Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) in Indonesia 
under a coherent framework for basic education improvement.  A new program at the end of the 
current education medium term strategy (RENSTRA) period, SISWA aims at taking the 
momentum of the successful implementation experience and move further towards reaching the 
RENSTRA target of increasing the number of children completing nine years of basic education; 
improving the quality; and strengthen sector governance and service delivery.  Under the three 
RENSTRA pillars, a few existing investment items are selected for increased financial support. 
These items have proved successful in implementation and effective in producing intended 
Page  2
results.  School Operations Assistance grant (BOS), scholarships for the poor, and community-
managed junior secondary school construction are three successful programs among these.  
 
SISWA also aims at laying a solid ground for the new RENSTRA, by introducing innovative 
approaches and new expenditure items that have great potential in improving service delivery 
and sector outcome.  District performance grant scheme has been identified as crucial to 
facilitate district’s roles in supporting schoolsfor better education outcome.  The grant scheme 
will be piloted in selected districts  
 
Bank’s support will focus on two components: scholarships and district performance grant.  
 
Scholarships (project support US$200 million). In anticipation of the impact of financial crisis, 
the government intends to scale up the ongoing scholarship programs providing grants to 
students in need.  The program design follows the previous scholarship program aiming at 
mitigating the impact of the Asian financial crisis a decade ago.  In the case of MoNE, the 
scholarship coverage has already reached 6 percent of students in 2008.  MoRA intended to 
cover 20 percent of its students in 2008.  However, due to budget constraint, disbursement did 
not take place in 2008 for MoRA students.  The average scholarship amount is approximately 
US$ 60.  SISWA will reimburse a portion of the Government’s scholarship grants made to public 
and private primary and junior secondary schools under the auspices of MoNE and MoRA 
schools for school years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12.  
 
District Performance Grants (project support US$ 50 million). In 2007, a new government 
regulation (PP No.38/2007) clarified the roles and responsibilities of central, provincial and 
district government in education sector, mandating district government’s key roles in setting 
local policy, planning, financing, managing infrastructure and teachers, and assuring education 
quality. In the meantime, mainly due to its low technical capacity in education, and generally still 
inadequate fiduciary system, local government’s roles have not been fully played out in terms of 
managing public resources (especially non-salary routine budget) supporting education service 
delivery at school level.  The objective of the District Performance Grants (DPG) is therefore to 
improve the local government’s capacity in managing public funds to help schools improve the 
quality of teaching and learning.  
 
50 districts will be selected to pilot the DPG program.  Total grant amount is US$ 300,000 per 
year per district, and up to a total amount of US$ 900,000 million for three disbursements per 
district during the project cycle.  To use this grant, districts will first select 50 low-performing 
schools and help schools diagnose teaching and learning gaps and prepare a school improvement 
plan based on the diagnosis.  Following the plan, a first disbursement of US$ 5,000 from the 
DPG will be disbursed by the district to the school to implement the improvement plan.  The 
district team will continue to support and monitor the plan implementation, identify 
implementation issues, help schools take remedial measures, evaluate outcomes, and finally help 
school roll forward the improvement plan with additional financing. Each participating school is 
also able to receive three disbursements if implementation is satisfactory.  Therefore, for one 
DPG disbursement, US$250,000 will be used at school level, and the rest US$50,000 will be 
used at district level to cover the operational costs by districts in playing their supporting roles 
for school improvement.  Including the technical assistance cost of about US$ 5 million at 
Page  3
central level, the total cost of Bank support to the district performance grant will be US$50 
million.  
 
The key design feature of the “school improvement plan”, distinctively different from the 
general school budget plan (i.e. supported by BOS funds) is its emphasis on student learning 
outcome.  Value-added of student learning is one of the main criteria for selecting “low 
performance” schools.  More importantly, it is also the single most important indicator 
measuring the success of the implementation of the “school improvement plan”, as well as that 
of DPG at district level. 
 
The DPG program provides district with a learning-by-doing opportunity, and substantial 
technical assistance is needed.  Key areas for technical assistance include: designing and 
administering instrument to gauge learning outcome; diagnosing school performance issues; 
helping school design remedial measures, monitoring outcome and solving implementation 
issues.  A DPG management team at central level will provide assistance to identify needed 
technical assistance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The scholarship program has a nationwide coverage.  The district performance grant will cover 
about 50 districts. It will include both poor and well-off districts to be chosen through a selection 
process and criteria to be agreed with GOI during project preparation   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Indonesian government has successfully implemented many community-based projects, of which 
safeguard policies and their implementation are an integrated part   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sulistiowati Ms. (EASTE) 
Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Bank team will carry out a screening to determine whether indigenous peoples (as defined in 
OP4.10) will be affected by the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/16/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
If the screening concludes that Indigenous People will be affected by the project, a social 
assessment will be undertaken before decision meeting.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Dandan Chen 
01/29/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
02/22/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
