Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/08/2009 
Report No.:  AC4367
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P113341 
Project Name:  Health Professional Education Quality Project 
Task Team Leader:  Puti Marzoeki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 27, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);Tertiary education (50%) 
Theme:  Other human development (67%);Health system performance (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
74.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The specific Project Development Objective would be to   strengthen  quality assurance 
policies governing the  education of  health professionals in Indonesia through 1) 
rationalizing and assuring competency focused accreditation of public and private health 
professional training institutions, 2) developing national competency standards and 
testing procedures for certification and licensing of health professionals, and 3) building 
institutional capacity to employ results based grants for encouraging use of accreditation 
and certification standards in the development of medical school quality.   
 
3. Project Description 
The lending instrument for the project is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). The project 
would have 4 components:  
 
Component 1 - Strengthening policies and procedures for school accreditation  
 
The component will focus on improving the accreditation system of medical, dental, 
nursing, and midwifery schools to make it comparable to internationally recognized 
systems. The goal is to have an independent body for the accreditation of medical, dental, 
nursing, and midwifery schools. More specifically, the project will assist in building 
consensus on and develop accreditation policies, standards, processes and outcomes, and 
in piloting the new system prior to legalizing the system for nation wide implementation. 
Page  2
This includes developing an accreditation strategic framework, accreditation instruments, 
assessor recruitment system and training, and a policy mandating publication of 
accreditation results for easy access by the general public. The project will revitalize the 
function of the National Medical Education Research Center initiated under the World 
Bank financed HWS Project and support the DGHE in synchronizing data collection and 
analysis for accreditation and EPSBED,(Evaluation of Study Programs Based on Self-
Evaluation), a tool designed by DGHE to monitor HEI statistics. This will help the self 
evaluation prior to the accreditation process and will inform decision making and 
planning processes in the institutions. Project resources would be used for the costs of 
workshops and training, benchmarking, international and local technical assistance, legal 
assistance studies and surveys, office equipment, IT and audio visual equipment and 
furniture.  
 
Component 2 - Certification of graduates using national competency-based examination  
 
The purpose of certification is to assure the standard of education quality. The project 
will support the establishment of an independent National Evaluation Center responsible 
for developing, validating and implementing strategies, methodologies, and tools to 
evaluate the competence of medical, dental, nursing and midwifery students prior to 
graduation from the respective education institutions. The challenge is to develop an 
evaluation mechanism measuring not only knowledge but also clinical skills, attitude, 
ethics, and communication skills; and to develop policies introducing discipline in 
determining passing scores and transparent remedial examination for failing students. In 
this regard, the project will assist the National Evaluation Center in establishing 
Computer Based Testing (CBT) and Objective Structured Clinical Evaluation (OSCE) 
facilities in 12 medical education institutions that will function as regional centers. To 
improve the validity and reliability of the examination, the project would assist the 
establishment of an item bank networking system. The system would also allow Health 
HEIs to evaluate their teaching methods. Expenditures include IT and audiovisual 
equipment, computer software, skills laboratory equipment, office equipment, furniture, 
international and local technical assistance, international benchmarking, workshop and 
training.  
 
Component 3 - Results based financial assistance package (FAP)  
 
Building on the agreements on accreditation and certification, the project would allocate 
financial assistance packages (FAP) for selected medical education institutions (MEIs) to 
meet the accreditation standards. The project would adopt 3 key principles in allocating 
the FAPs: (i)   results based allocation of resources, (ii) fair competition among MEIs 
according to their capacity, and (iii) partnership between leading and less strong NEIs to 
build the capacity of the less strong schools according to their specific needs. The project 
would have 3 FAP schemes:  
 
-
Scheme A: FAP for leading medical education institutions to build their international 
reputation and to strengthen Indonesia’s global competitiveness.  
 
-
Scheme B: FAP to support weak capacity and new medical education institutions in 
achieving medical education standards mandated by the Indonesia Medical Council 
(IMC) through partnership with a leading medical education institution,  
Page  3
-
Scheme C: FAP to support moderate capacity medical education institutions in 
achieving medical education standards mandated by the IMC  
 
The Board of Higher Education (BHE) is responsible for establishing the guidelines for 
the FAP recipient selection and proposal approval process and for overseeing the FAP 
implementation. A FAP manual would be prepared by the BHE to guide the 
implementation of the FAP. The BHE established the criteria for grouping existing MEIs 
into 4 categories: leading, moderate, weak, and new MEIs. Applying the criteria, the 69 
existing MEIs are grouped into 10 leading, 18 moderate, 14 weak and 27 new MEIs (see 
Annex xx for details). There would only be one selection process during the life time of 
the project to be conducted immediately after project effectiveness. Each FAP recipient 
would implement the program in 4 years.  
 
Component 4 
–
Project Management  
 
A
Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) would be established at the DGHE. 
Project resources would finance the cost of staff honoraria, project management 
consultant, office equipment, furniture and project monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1, 2, and 4 will be implemented in Jakarta. Component 3 will be 
implemented in medical schools in Indonesia selected to get the Financial Assistance 
Package.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not affect communities of indigenous peoples and thus the IP Policies 
are not triggered.  The project will provide Financial Assistance Package (FAP) to 
Page  4
selected medical schools, and an eligible spending under the FAP is providing access of 
the poor to medical education through a scholarship program. The medical schools will 
not actively seek scholarship candidates from the poor community. This is consistent 
with the Government policy of promoting access of underprivileged students to higher 
education  
 
Limited civil work is an eligible expenditure under Scheme B1, B2 and C of the FAP, 
but any civil work undertaken through the FAP program in the project is limited to the 
rehabilitation of existing lecture rooms and laboratories. The FAP manual states this 
provision and the manual would be used as reference not only by the medical schools in 
preparing the proposal but also by the reviewer of the FAP proposals.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Puti Marzoeki 
06/01/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja 
05/19/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
05/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan Pablo Uribe 
06/05/2009 
Comments:   
