Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4407 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/13/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P092218 
Project Name: Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility 
Task Team Leader: Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASFP 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project has two overall objectives: (i) strengthen and further develop the 
institutional framework of financial sector to facilitate financing of commercially viable 
infrastructure projects and (ii) increase the provision of infrastructure in Indonesia.  The net 
effect is expected to be a more inviting investment climate, sustained growth, and poverty 
reduction in the long term.  Concretely, the project aims to support the establishment of IIFF that 
mobilizes capital from domestic and international sources and makes it available to 
commercially viable infrastructure projects. IIFF will provide direct financing and credit 
enhancements to mobilize private participation. The project also aims to improve the institutional 
and legal/regulatory framework within which private infrastructure financing can occur on a 
sustainable basis, in part through the incentive mechanism created by the availability of debt for 
well designed projects and also through IIFF#s advisory function, by providing access to IIFF 
experts in infrastructure financing with good knowledge of the Indonesian context.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Infrastructure is seen as a critical constraint on economic growth in Indonesia but a series of 
attempts to lure back the private investors, many of them foreign, which had driven private 
infrastructure investment in the early 1990s, has failed.  The Government of Indonesia (#GoI#) 
Page  2
has now launched a broad range of measures to attract private, particularly domestic, investment 
to infrastructure.An important element of this effort is the development of domestic capacity to 
finance commercially viable infrastructure projects by complementing existing domestic 
financial institutions.  This project, the Indonesian Infrastructure Financing Facility (#IIFF#) is a 
key element of this effort. GoI has decided to establish a new, specialized lending institution 
offering long term, mainly local currency, financing for infrastructure, IIFF.  
 
IIFF is being established as a commercial financial institution, to mobilize domestic currency 
financing of appropriate tenor, terms and price for creditworthy infrastructure projects by: (i) 
using its good credit rating to borrow from domestic institutional investors and banks looking for 
long-term placements with margins higher than sovereign and large corporate offerings, and by 
(ii) providing financial products which meet the needs of infrastructure PPP and wholly private 
projects.  IIFF will be a non-bank financial intermediary with the capacity to assess infrastructure 
projects and with the long-term liabilities to match a portfolio of long-term assets.  It is expected 
to focus on long-term senior and subordinated debt and minority equity positions, but its range of 
products is likely to broaden to credit enhancements, securitizations, advisory services and other 
mechanisms to promote infrastructure investment.  
 
IIFF will operate as a commercial entity, with market-based rates and fees.  It will respond to 
market demand, and adhere to international best practices on corporate governance, operating 
policies and risk management; providing Indonesia with much needed infrastructure financing 
expertise.  GoI has embedded this concept in its policy statements on IIFF and it will be reflected 
in the structure and governance of the institution.  
 
The project will have one component # an investment loan to the Borrower that will be made 
available to IIFF as subordinated debt by the Borrower. The Bank # along with other 
development partners involved in the project # will approve an operations manual (OM) that will 
form the basis for IIFF#s decision making regarding specific projects it chooses to support and 
the instruments that it selects to provide such support. The Bank will not be involved in 
approving individual sub-projects that IIFF chooses to support, provided that the Environmental 
and Social Safeguard unit in the IIFF have the full capacity in ensuring that the IIFF#s safeguard 
policies will be met. However, the Bank may want to review the implementation of sub-projects 
to ensure that the safeguard policies are properly followed.  
 
In its initial operation, the IIFF will focus on the following infrastructure sectors: (i) energy, 
including power generation, transmission and distribution; (ii) water and sanitation; (iii) 
transportation, including roads, rail, ports and airports; and (iv) industrial and commercial 
infrastructure. Taking into account that Indonesia#s private infrastructure program is still in its 
infancy, and the fact that IIFF is itself expected to play a significant role in development of the 
pipeline going forward, the Bank team has deliberately assumed a slow growth of the balance 
sheet of IIFF. The Bank#s loan is expected to be fully disbursed over a four-year period (2009-
2012).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts of the sub-projects financed by 
IIFF will be determined during the screening and appraisal of the proposals submitted by the 
private sector. IIFF may finance commercially viable projects owned by sub-sovereign 
governments and SOEs, up to an aggregate cap of 20% of its assets for such investments. It is 
anticipated that the IIFF could potentially finance cost-recovery large-scale infrastructure sub-
projects, that are most likely will have significant potential environmental and social impacts. It 
Page  3
is expected that infrastructure sub-projects financed by the IIFF will be geographically 
distributed across the country, therefore they might affect indigenous peoples (IP).   
 
E.  Bo
rrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Directorate General of State Assets (DG-SA) of the Ministry of Finance will be the 
Executing Agency (EA) of the loan on behalf of the Borrower (Ministry of Finance). The IIFF 
will be the implementing agency for the on-lent loan from the EA through the SMI (a Central 
Government/Ministry of Finance State-owned Enterprise, as a vehicle through which the 
Government#s investments in loans to IIFF are to be channeled). The SMI has been established 
by the MoF, while the establishment of the IIFF is in progress. This includes : development of  
detailed institutional design, Operation Manual (OM), legal and regulatory work, hiring of 
management team, and identification of necessary consulting work that would be needed by the 
IIFF. The OM will consist of the operationalization of the Bank safeguard policies, the IFC#s PS 
incorporating the Government of Indonesia#s (GOI) regulations in two levels : ESMF and the 
operationalization of the ESMF which detail its procedures and approaches in each of the sub-
project cycle. The IIFF will have an ESMF and the operationalization of the ESMF in the OM to 
be followed by all subprojects regardless of its investors.  
 
The IIFF organizational structure will have a unit consisting of experts in environmental and 
social management, who will ensure that sub-projects implement the OM. This unit will be part 
of the Risk Management Division directly under the President Director/CEO of the IIFF.  
 
Ultimately, the DG-SA of MoF (on behalf of the Borrower) will have to ensure that IIFF will 
consistently implement the OM. Any request for the on-lent funds from IIFF made to the DG-SA 
through SMI will have to be accompanied by a report and proven documents that the IIFF has 
implemented the OM consistently. The SMI will have to check and review the IIFF reports prior 
to submitting them to the DG-SA.  
 
The institutional arrangement of the Project is very new to the country. The MoF, particularly 
the DG-SA, has no experience in executing projects that involve environmental and social 
safeguard policies. The SMI is a newly-established institution and this Project will be the first of 
its mandates. The IIFF is being established. Given this, all of the institutions involved in this 
Project have no experience in implementing environmental and social safeguards policies. A 
workshop on the OM comprising of ESMF and its operationalization will be carried out for DG-
SA of MoF prior to Board approval, to create an understanding of environmental and social 
safeguard polices and their implementation and monitoring requirements and measures.  
Similarly, capacity building on environmental and social safeguards for SMI and IIFF will be 
carried out prior to loan effectiveness and continuously during their operations, as needed. There 
will be a capacity building assessment from time to time done for the IIFF to define the level of 
its capacity in implementing the OM and to assess the training needs. At the earlier stage of IIFF 
operation, the Bank would be require to carry out a prior review for proposed sub-projects 
together with the E&S unit, until this unit has sufficient capacity to implement the OM by itself.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
IIFF will finance infrastructure projects in several sectors such as energy, including power 
generation, transmission and distribution; water and sanitation; transportation, including roads, 
rail, ports and airports; industrial and commercial infrastructure; telecommunication, etc. It is 
most likely that all sub-projects of these sectors would have moderate to significant 
environmental and social impacts. In other words, IIFF would finance both Category A and B 
sub-projects. However, the scale and location of impacts can only be identified during the 
screening stage, which will be confirmed at the appraisal of sub-project proposals. Impact 
minimization and mitigation measures will have to be prepared by the sub-borrowers and 
approved by the IIFF prior to the approval of the sub-projects for funding and be incorporated in 
the sub-project technical design and planning.  
 
The environmental and social safeguard measures will be operationalized in the IIFF#s 
Operational Manual (OM), which will provide detailed approaches and procedures to implement 
the framework.  The OM will consist of two main parts : an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Management Frameworks (ESMF) and  the operationalization of the ESMF.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Some of the infrastructure subprojects may affect natural habitats   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Project activities may take place in close proximity to or within critical forest areas or related 
critical natural habitats   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not procure any pesticides nor will an increased use of pesticides result from 
the project.  No agricultural development or irrigation construction is expected to be included in 
the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Some of the sub-projects included under IIFF may affect cultural property and trigger OP 
4.11. The environmental screening procedure to be included under the project will ensure the 
project will not adversely affect sites having archeological, paleontological, historical, religious 
or unique natural values. Any contracts let under the project will include a provision covering 
procedures to be followed in the event of #chance finds#.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some of the sub-projects to be included under IIFF might affect indigenous people (isolated 
vulnerable people) and trigger OD 4.10. The project will include a screening procedure to 
identify such sub-projects. Indigenous Peoples are likely to be present in some of the project 
provinces as the subprojects may be geographically distributed all over the country.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Most of the sub-projects to be included under IIFF will require land acquisition and thus 
would require land acquisition and resettlement action plans.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project may finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams, and may rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined under 
the policy   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy   
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/08/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
May 18, 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas 
05/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tunc Tahsin Uyanik 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
