Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/05/2009 
Report No.:  AC4103
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P108757 
Project Name:  ID PNPM Rural II 
Task Team Leader:  John Victor Bottini 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (25%);Water supply (20%);Irrigation 
and drainage (20%);Roads and highways (20%);Primary education (15%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Social safety nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
PNPM’s overall objective is to reduce poverty and improve local-level governance in 
rural areas of Indonesia through the provision of investment resources to support 
productive proposals developed by communities, using a participatory planning process. 
PNPM-Rural’s project development objective is for villagers in these locations to benefit 
from improved socio-economic and local governance conditions.  The project, using a 
community-based approach, will help fill Indonesia’slarge tertiary infrastructure gap 
efficiently. Objectives are being achieved through: (a) communities participating in an 
open planning process; (b) provision of grants to communities directly and transparently 
to finance an open menu of poverty alleviation activities; and (c) enhancing the capacity 
of central government and local governments to partner with community organizations in 
service provision.   
 
3. Project Description 
With this new loan, the Government of Indonesia (GOI) is requesting additional 
financing of US$300 million to the original project to allow further scale-up of activities 
Page  2
in 2009.   The need for additional financing was already raised as a likely possibility in 
the original loan.  The original amount of the Project is US$231 million and became 
effective on July 16, 2008.  The initial project was to be implemented from 2008-2009 
with a closing date of June 30, 2011.  With additional financing, project implementation 
will be extended to December 31, 2011. There will be no change to the overall objectives 
or basic design of the project as outlined in the original loan.  The additional financing 
will support expansion of PNPM-Rural from its current geographical coverage of 2,835 
rural subdistricts (kecamatan) to a total 4,371 rural subdistricts in 2009.  This additional 
financing will expand significantly the coverage of community block grants, and thus 
scale up the project’s developmental impacts.  
 
Components of this additional financing loan will be similar to that of the ongoing 
project. It will include:  
 
ï‚§ 
Kecamatan Block Grants for approximately 4,371 subdistricts across the country 
to support planning and investment in social and economic infrastructure  
 
ï‚§ 
Facilitation and Training to provide technical advisory services and other material 
support and training at the kecamatan level.  
 
ï‚§ 
Goods, Consultants’ Services, Training and Workshops.  This component will 
provide implementation support and technical assistance at the national, provincial and 
district levels to manage the program and strengthen the capacity of local governments. 
This component includes the monitoring and evaluation activities for the project.  
 
In addition to the core subdistrict planning and block grant scheme, PNPM-Rural 
includes six major operational pilots funded through loans and trust funds from several 
bilateral donors (Dutch, UK, CIDA, Australia,and Danida).  All of the pilots build upon 
the main PNPM platform and principles of community participatory engagement. These 
include: (i) the PNPM community conditional transfer (CCT) pilot in 178 subdistricts in 
five provinces across the country to achieve education and health outcomes;  (ii) Green 
KDP to support natural resource management and micro-hydro initiatives; (iii) support 
for agricultural development initiatives (SADI) to provide technical assistance and 
financial resources for poor farmers; (iv) Papua RESPEK which supports Papua and West 
Papua’s customized approach to adapting PNPM to the distinct conditions of those two 
provinces; (v) Aceh Multi-Donor Trust Fund activities for post-Tsunami recovery and 
PNPM specific adaptations for Aceh; and (vi) Creative Communities pilot in 30 
subdistricts aimed at cultivating a cultural approach to poverty reduction.  
 
The Coordinating Ministry of People’s Welfare chairs the  PNPM Program 
SteeringCommittee (an inter-ministerial coordination committee), which consists of 
representatives from the Ministries of Public Works, Finance, Home Affairs, 
People’sWelfare, Cooperation and Small Medium Enterprises, and Industry and Trade, 
etc. The Coordinating Ministry of People’s Welfare also chairs the Government’s 
National Poverty Reduction Coordination Committee. Overall project oversight is the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA), while the day-to-day 
coordination is undertaken by a Project Management Unit (PMU), assisted by 
administrative units (Satker) at central, provincial, and local government levels.   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a national project that will cover 50% of Indonesia's 70,000+ villages.  For 
safeguards purposes, it covers both environmentally sensitive (forest, coastal, marine) 
and socially sensitive areas, particularly in Papua and some of the islands near Sumatra.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS) 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASIS) 
Mr Sentot Surya Satria (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No significant, potential large scale and irreversible environmental impacts are 
anticipated. PNPM-
Rural’s investments are very small, and under the Indonesia 
Environmental Assessment rules, they all fall below the minimum size required for a 
formal environmental assessment. PNPM-Rural's negative list consists primarily of 
activities excluded by Bank environmental policies, and these have been uniformly 
respected in the completed subprojects. PNPM-Rural site selection also in principle rules 
out villages within demarcated protected areas (in practice poor data and unclear 
boundaries often lead to errors). PNPM-Rural’s negative listhas been expanded to 
encompass lessons from experience and from other community development operations.  
 
Experience under KDP (previous PNPM projects) and PNPM-Rural showed two kinds 
of environmental risk that can affect community projects. First, communities living in or 
near protected habitats will use natural resources from these areas regardless of formal 
regulations unless suitable sanctions are imposed. Thus, some communities in South 
Sulawesi mined coral for their roadbeds. In other areas, also in Sulawesi, communities 
have built roads that verge into protected forests. Both cases reflect poor oversight by the 
Page  4
provincial regulatory team. The NGOs implementing “green KDP” in Sulawesi will be 
trained to monitor and report any environmental problems that they witness in PNPM 
locations.  
 
The second environmental risk is poor placement of water supply sources, which can 
lead to contaminated water supplies. The number of cases where this has occurred is 
small, but review of their cases shows that they happen when there are systemic failures 
in the project's system of engineering oversight, reporting, and follow-up.  
 
In both types of environmental malfeasance, the proposed mitigation and prevention 
methods are proper training and monitoring of the supervising field engineers. In the 
cases noted above, the supervising engineers were either disciplined or dismissed. 
PNPM-rural supervision missions confirmed that improvements are now reflected in 
training and monitoring plans.  
 
PNPM-Rural has a project land acquisition and resettlement policy embedded in its 
operational manuals that has been accepted by the Bank. Application of the policy 
framework, measured through field reviews of KDP, reports generally good results from 
implementation of the policy. A review of 216 randomly selected, representative sites 
found no cases of involuntary displacement. PNPM-Rural does not involve state powers 
of eminent domain at any stage, and land transactions can only take place on a willing-
buyer/willing-seller basis. Land acquisition assessments are part of the proposal review 
process and must be approved by the district level oversight engineer. Land and 
resettlement are also recorded in the village records and reviewed during field 
supervision.  
 
No significant adverse impacts from land acquisition or involuntary resettlement have 
ever been reported from a KDP subproject. However, there are occasional cases where: 
(i) engineers do not follow the safeguard review rules; or (ii) villagers have felt pressured 
to contribute land without receiving “fair” compensation in return. PNPM’s training and 
oversight manuals have been revised to addressthe first problem. For the second, review 
of several such cases during supervision missions found no loss of income, living 
standards or livelihood.  
 
Papua presents a special challenge to the OP's directive to provide culturally compatible 
development benefits, particularly given the porous governance environment that prevails 
in many areas of the island. Inputs from a broad range of Papuan stakeholders introduced 
many modifications to the global design in order to reflect Papua’s unique physical and 
cultural conditions. These include adjustments to the geographical units, logistical 
support for facilitators so they can reach deeply isolated communities, extra training by 
dedicated engineers, and the formation of a Papuan government-NGO advisory group.  
As a result, in 2006 the Governors of Papua and West Papua decided to scale-up KDP 
under the new name of “RESPEK”.  
 
RESPEK will provide each of the 4,478 villages of Papua with a block grant of Rp. 100 
million (approx. $11,000). Funding will be provided through the government’s regional 
Page  5
autonomy budget, but PNPM-Rural will continue to cover the costs oftraining and 
managing the facilitators. A linked $1.0 million grant from AusAid will finance a 
“barefoot engineers’ training program for young Papuan technicalfacilitators, which will 
later be added on a permanent basis to the government allocations for Respek. PNPM co-
financing from IFAD scheduled for 2009 also includes livelihoods improvement 
programs developed especially for Papua.  
 
In summary, PNPM-Rural Additional Financing fully complies with Bank policies on 
safeguards. Also, based on the assessment mentioned above, the proposed additional 
financing will not pose a substantial change in the overall project risks or environmental 
categorization. The proposed project will remain as a Category B project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no significant long term potential impacts triggered by this project. The 
primary environmental impact would be caused by increases in commercial activity 
caused by improved farm to market linkages. However, all such roads are small in size 
(average 3 Kms).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only significant alternative considered would be to exclude communities living in 
environmentally sensitive areas from participating. However, these are very high poverty 
groups. Excluding them without a macro zoning policy would pose major ethical and 
reputational problems.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The primary means to mitigate environmental impacts is through better oversight of 
technical staff. This is easily within the capability of the EA, though it needs to be 
monitored. Social impact monitoring is driven by the project design itself. Again, 
supervision is important but risks are low.  
 
Success in the field depends upon the discipline of project actors. A review of the 
effectiveness of these measures will be included in the first-year evaluation and measures 
for correction will be agreed with the Bank prior to the approval of the second year 
program.  
 
Supported by nearly $30 million in grants from Denmark and Canada, PNPM-Rural is 
also piloting new approaches for community based environment work in the fragile 
upland areas of Sumatra and Sulawesi. These “green” programs cover watershed 
management, renewable resource energy, and environmental education. Detailed design 
documents are in the project files. They include the direct involvement of experienced 
green NGOs in promoting environmental awareness and community based resource 
management.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The consistency for PNPM-Rural is people in communities. Disclosure is mandatory, and 
project conditionality includes village-level disclosure of operational rules, including 
safeguards rules. PNPM-Rural does not involve any state expropriation; all decisions, 
including safeguard-implying decisions are by village level consensus.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
N/A 
Page  7
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Victor Bottini 
12/05/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Vivianti Rambe 
11/21/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Isono Sadoko 
12/05/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel 
12/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/16/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
12/09/2008 
Comments:   
