Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3947 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/20/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P100763 
Project Name: Life Skills Education for Employment and Entrepreneurship (LSE3) 
Task Team Leader: Pawan G. Patil 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (50%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (50%) 
Theme: Other human development (P);Other social protection and risk management 
(P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
0.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) of LSE3 (formerly BEKERJA - Better 
Employment Knowledge and Entrepreneurship to Revitalize Job Access for Indonesian Youth) is 
to increase employment and earnings of unemployed youth through provision of demand-driven 
life skills education that incorporate partnerships between government, industry, and training 
providers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is comprised of three fully integrated components which in tandem aim to 
increase the quantity and quality of graduates from LSE training providers ensuring graduates 
emerge with the specific vocational skills and competencies demanded by the respective 
vocational areas into which they will be placed, and or the appropriate entrepreneurial or self-
employment skills. To achieve relevance and sustainability in the linking and matching of 
training courses to the needs of industry the project in parallel focuses on developing a quality 
assurance system. When fully operational the quality assurance system will feature certification 
of LSE training graduates by certified instructors and assessors from accredited training 
Page  2
institutions with excellent training materials and best practice training methods and management 
practices reflecting good governance principles.  
 
1. 
  Component 1: Life Skills Education (Estimated US$37.6 million equivalent) will 
provide unemployed youth with increased access to quality LSE specifically tailored to the 
demands of the job market and in so doing lead to employment in the domestic or foreign, formal 
or informal sectors. Sub-component 1.1 will provide financial incentives for private LSE training 
providers to expand the number of LSE opportunities for targeted youth leading to formal 
employment either in the domestic or foreign employment sectors. Incentive payments will be 
based on the number of eligible participants whom the training provider places in employment in 
the fulfillment of job orders. Sub-component 1.2 will provide financial support for selected 
private training providers offering LSE geared towards entrepreneurship and self-employment. 
LSE3 will finance; training courses, including training provided through placement with 
employers for short-
term practical experience (as in a limited “apprenticeship” or “mentoring” 
model), seed or venture capital, and will foster initiatives which facilitate closer linkages 
between traditional credit providers and successful young entrepreneurs or the self-employed 
seeking to expand their business. Sub-component 1.3 will provide incentives for private LSE 
training providers to increase the quality of LSE opportunities for targeted youth leading to 
informal employment in the foreign employment sector, (domestic helper). Specifically LSE3 
will support the development, and introduction as an integral requirement of LSE training, 
modules which better inform domestic workers of their rights and responsibilities, including 
health, safety and social protection, and which enrich their understanding of the language and 
culture of their employment destination, and which provide them with the financial literacy to 
better manage their affairs and to maximize the benefits they derive from the employment 
contract.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening for Quality Assurance (Estimated US$9.9 million) 
will support the creation of a regulatory framework so that the training providers offering LSE 
have appropriate incentives to ensure that participants completing their courses do so with a level 
of competency commensurate with national standards. Sub-Component 2.1. will fund workshop, 
technical assistance and training to develop a set of competency standards and to implement 
those standards into the existing curriculum of LSE training providers and also to pilot their 
application in order to improve the quality of LSE training graduates. Specifically this sub-
component will support the following activities: (i) Develop a set of competency standards 
required to define a vocational skill set. Once standards are ratified by the Agency for National 
Education Standardization (Badan Standarisasi Nasional Pendidikan, BSNP), and the Minister 
has signed the standards into effect, LSE3 will assist the promulgation of national competency 
standards amongst LSE training providers, employer groups and profession associations as the 
entry level benchmark for the certification of workers in a given vocational area; (ii) Develop 
training modules for LSE. Training modules developed will be made available initially to 
selected training providers to trial the teaching materials developed and pilot innovative teaching 
methods to improve the quality of training and to ensure graduates attain the appropriate 
vocational competency standards.  After materials have been field trialed this sub-component 
will finance the printing and dissemination of modules.  One master hard-copy would be printed 
and disseminated to each training provider. Modules will also be posted on the LSE3 website in 
PDF format for free download by training providers. In short, this sub-component will support 
Page  3
the improvement of training curriculum, materials and instruction; (iii) Identify the specific 
needs of LSE instructors employed by private training providers require to efficiently use the 
teaching materials and teaching methods and to produce graduates with the vocational 
competency standards.  During the course of the project through this series of activities the set of 
skills, knowledge and experience required to become a certified instructor are expected to 
become industry standards.  In brief, this activity will support the improvement of instructors’ 
competence. Sub-component 2.2 will provide development/stimulant grants to selected 
Competence Certification Institutions (LSK) established by profession associations. This is to 
ensure LSK and its competency test place (TUK) with the responsibility for the certification of 
the competencies developed under sub-component 2.1 have the appropriate human and financial 
resources. Moreover, the grants will require LSKs to build partnership with the industry so that 
they will be able to assist training providers in channeling their graduates to employment in the 
labor market. Sub-component 2.3 will fund workshops, technical assistance and short course 
training to build the management capacity of LSE training providers. An integral part of 
strengthening management will be the institutional accreditation. This sub-component will work 
with Board of National Accreditation for Non Formal Education (BAN-PNF) to ensure that the 
initiatives supported in Component 2 can lay a sound foundation for the development of 
institutional accreditation.  
 
Component 3: Program Management, Integration and Sustainability (Estimated US$7.5 
million) will support activities to ensure the achievement of the Project development objectives 
in accordance to agreed procedure and mechanism and support the integration of the LSE3 into  
implementing unit, the Directorate of Course and Institution Development, DG PNFI.  It 
comprises four key elements. Sub-component 3.1 will cover the incremental operational costs 
associated with the implementation of the project in accordance with the Anti Corruption Action 
Plan (ACAP), at the central and regional level. Sub-component 3.2 will finance a Public 
Awareness and Media Campaign to ensure that stakeholders and beneficiaries are aware of their 
rights and responsibilities under the project. Sub-component 3.3 will fund Development Studies 
to guide strategic planning for expanding project initiatives to a national scale. This sub-
component will finance ad-hoc studies that provide policy makers with immediate feedback on 
project implementation. Sub-component 3.4 will finance routine Monitoring and Evaluation and 
comprise; technical assistance to design a management information system (MIS) for Non 
Formal Education Institutes that will monitor the progress of recruitment, skills training, 
certification and placement LSE graduates in employment, the design of instruments, supervision 
and internal reporting, and will include the establishment of a Central Independent Monitoring 
Unit (CIMU).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Agreement was reached during the preparation mission that LSE3 is by nature a central project 
closely aligned with the mandate of the central Government. Provision of Life Skills Education 
grants will be piloted in two phases in potential provinces which meet the agreed criteria 
(including high unemployment rate, availability of qualified Training Providers and commitment 
of the local government to participate in the program). The provinces meeting such criteria are: 
provinces located in Java (Banten, DKI Jakarta, West Java, Central Java, DI Yogyakarta, East 
Java) and Bali; and some provinces located outside Java and Bali Islandsâ
 ”West Nusa 
Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara, South Sulawesi, North Sumatra, South Sumatra and Lampung.  
Page  4
As agreed during preparation mission, the first Phase (2011- 2012) will be implemented in 
provinces in Java and Bali Islands. In the second Phase (2013-2014), the project will then expand 
to Provinces outside Java and Bali.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Executing Agency (DG Non Formal Education) is currently implementing another Bank-
financed operation.  They are familiar with Bank Safeguard Policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS) 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
C
-
Not Required  
 
The project solely includes skills trainings and development of education standards and 
regulatory frameworks. It will have no activities which potentially affect the environment; 
accordingly it is rated category C. An environment impact plan is not required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
OP/BP 4.10 is triggered because the project may deliver benefits to Indigenous Peoples (IPs) 
in some provinces.  Given the uncertainty about the impact of the project on IPs, the project will 
develop an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), which will include the elements 
described in Annex C of OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered because the project does not involve land acquisition or 
involuntary resettlement, and project activities will not result in loss of income sources or means 
or livelihood.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/20/2008 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An IP assessment will be undertaken prior to Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pawan G. Patil 
04/17/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
04/20/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
