Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2068 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P090990 
Project Name: Western Indonesia National Roads Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Imogene B. Jensen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 16, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASIS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Decentralization (40%);Other 
accountability/anti-corruption (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Project is to support regional economic and social development in Indonesia 
by improving the condition of the national road network.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3.1. 
Project Framework. Although the activities in east (EINRIP) will be financed by AusAID 
and the west (WINRIP) by the Bank, these are essentially two sources of funds contributing to an 
overall nation- wide project and will be executed in parallel with harmonized implementation 
procedures and from a technical and implementation point of view they will be consistent. Both 
sets of activities will have the same PDO, monitoring indicators, etc.  
 
3.2. 
Preparation. The Bank team has been working closely with the AusAID-EINRIP team to 
ensure that their project preparation can be used by the Bank supported project, thus a lot of the 
preparation work has already been done. AusAID is providing about US$3-5 million Bank 
administered Recipient executed trust fund for preparation of feasibility studies, designs and 
bidding documents to complement a US$1 million PHRD.  
Page  2
3.3. 
Project components. The Project will consist of the following components:  
 
Component 1: Betterment and Capacity Expansion of National Roads (US$360 million). 
Betterment typically involves strengthening the base course, minor widening, providing a new 
asphalt wearing course, and improving drainage. In most cases, the road will already have an 
asphalt pavement. Capacity improvements envisaged are the upgrading of roads to national 
standards including widening. The Project will focus on existing national roads in Western 
Indonesia.  
 
Component 2:  Implementation Support (US$36.0 million). This is for the design and 
supervision costs of the roads in Component 1 and some limited operating costs of the 
implementing agency.  
 
Component 3: Road Sector Institutional Development (US$4.0 million). The activities under 
this component will be determined during Project preparation and will include support as needed 
for example to the development of the procurement unit, the expansion of the e-procurement 
system, providing a system of capacity support advisory services.  
 
3.4. 
Alternatives considered. The Project is specifically targeted at national roads i.e. those 
legally under the responsibility of the national Ministry of Public Works with a focus on those 
roads recently re-classified as national roads. The alternative of including provincial and other 
sub-national/district roads into this particular Project is not workable due to the current 
institutional framework. The focus of this Project is also on existing roads with the development 
of new Freeways being explored under another project which is presently under discussion. The 
use of PPP is being explored under the PPITA support from the Bank however the PPP approach 
has had disappointing results to date. Agreement on institutional development in DGH has been 
pursued through the recently approved IDPL and is not included in this Project.  
 
3.5. 
Lending instrument. The Bank funded part of the Project is estimated to have a total cost 
of about US$400 million (including about $40 million in taxes). The IBRD Loan amount is 
preliminarily estimated at US$300 million. This will be a standard Sector Investment Loan. A 
programmatic SWAP-type project was considered however Government has indicated that while 
they are potentially interested in the approach they are not ready for it for this particular 
operation. Nevertheless projects in the sector are already implemented on a rolling program 
using for example standard agreed specifications, harmonized bidding documents, the DGH e-
procurement system etc. Donors are in discussions with DGH to move towards a harmonized 
sector wide approach to ease implementation.  
 
3.6. 
Sector program. The Project supports the Directorate General of Highways (DGH) 
national road program. Development of a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) will 
be piloted in the roads ministry.  
 
3.7. 
Environmental and Social Safeguards.  The Project is classified as Environment Category 
“A”. Most of the Project will focus on betterment of recently reclassified national roads within 
existing rights of way. The impact of these improvements on the environment is minimal and the 
Page  3
requirements for land acquisition and resettlement are expected to be minor. However, the 
capacity expansion and bridge components are likely to have significant impacts and would 
require land acquisition and resettlement. The safeguards triggered include Environmental 
Assessment, Physical Cultural Resources, Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement. A 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARF) has been prepared, based on the 
LARF adopted by DGH for the Strategic Roads Infrastructure Project (SRIP), updated to reflect 
latest government regulations. Land acquisition and resettlement is fully funded by Government. 
There have been no delays on implementation due to land acquisition on ongoing projects. Work 
is ongoing to establish standardized procedures for land acquisition plans, and other documents 
and procedures, and to review funding allocations and responsibilities including recent 
establishment of a Land Working Group. While the HIV/ AIDS rate in Indonesia is still 
relatively low there has been a significant increase. To mitigate the risks of HIV/AIDS 
transmission, the construction contracts include clauses requiring contractors to allow their 
workers to attend education sessions where materials such as awareness brochures and condoms 
will be distributed. This is a standard provision in the Standard Bidding Documents used for the 
works.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The roads and bridges to be financed under this project will be located in Western Indonesia, on 
the islands of Java and Sumatra. Its sister project the Eastern Indonesia National Roads 
Improvement Project (EINRIP), supported by AusAID, will finance similar type investments in 
Eastern Indonesia (e.g., Sulawesi, NTT, etc.)   
 
E.  Borr
ower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project will be implemented by the national Directorate General of Highways (DGH) of the 
Ministry of Public Works. Within the DGH, the Sub-directorate of Environmental Affairs will 
have overall responsibility for environmental and social management of this Project. This Sub-
directorate, which was set up with support from the World Bank in 2001, is fully staffed with 
well trained Indonesian professionals and has established itself well. Furthermore, it has a good 
track record working with the Bank. At present it is working closely with the Bank on preparing 
the safeguards requirements for this Project, and is satisfactorily managing the safeguards issues 
of the ongoing Bank supported EIRTP-2  and SRIP  projects under implementation. The Sub-
directorate is currently undertaking a technical assistance activity “Improving Management of 
Environment and Socio-Cultural Impacts of Road Development in Sensitive Areas, including 
Treatment of Isolated Vulnerable People (IMES)” to enhance their capacities (this is funded 
under the EIRTP-2 project). For this Project, the Sub-directorate will be assisted by a team of 
Core Team Consultants (CTC’s) and Design and Supervision Consultants (DSC’s), whose 
responsibilities, inter alia, will include environmental and social issues. Also, the task team will 
continue to work with and support the Sub-directorate throughout project preparation and during 
implementation.  
 
Therefore, based on the experiences of the task team and on the project’s implementation 
arrangements, the Borrower has the requisite institutional capacity in place to satisfactorily 
manage the environmental and social issues associated with this Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos (EAPCO) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 applies because the proposed Project will finance investments in national roads 
through the preservation and betterment of reclassified roads, replacement of bridges and 
capacity expansion of some congested roads. Construction activities and use of these roads may 
potentially have significant adverse environmental impacts on land and soil resources, surface 
water bodies and other natural ecosystems, and air quality. These impacts are expected to be 
prevalent in locations close to and along the road alignments, with the potential for some of these 
impacts to be more widespread. Construction related impacts will also occur at offsite locations 
such as at construction camps, spoil disposal and quarry sites.  
 
Therefore, due to the potential severity and intensity of these impacts, and in compliance 
with OP 4.01, the task team is proposing that the project be assigned an EA category “A”. To 
fully understand and address project risks, the Borrower will be preparing the required 
Environmental Assessments and Environmental Management Plans, as required under both the 
Indonesia EA system (AMDAL) and the Bank’s OP 4.01.  
 
To this end, the Borrower will prepare a framework type document, to be known as the 
Environmental and Social Assessment Management Plan (ESAMP), which will serve as the 
project’s umbrella Environmental (and Social) Assessment document, setting out the project’s 
strategic screening process and environmental managementrequirements for each type of sub 
project. The ESAMP document will be sent to the World Bank for review and clearance before it 
is disclosed locally and at the Bank’s Infoshop  
 
It is anticipated that some of the initial project investments will become known during the 
project preparation phase, so that a batch of sub-projects will be ready for implementation once 
the project is approved and effective, and other sub projects will become known during 
subsequent years in the implementation cycle.  
 
For this first batch of subprojects, in compliance with the requirements of ESAMP, the 
necessary level of sub project EA’s (AMDALs) and/or Environmental Management Plans will be 
prepared, reviewed, cleared and disclosed before project appraisal. For those sub-projects 
identified in subsequent years the ESAMP will provide the necessary guidance for their 
environmental management.   
 
The Bank team is working with AusAID and the DGH to harmonize environmental 
management systems for both this Project and the AusAID supported EINRIP and it is 
anticipated that the same ESAMP will apply to both projects.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Screening of each sub-project will be applied to determine if there are any cultural resources, 
such as cemeteries, archeological sites and others, and these will be addressed by following 
Government Regulations and OP 4.11. This is already the practice in ongoing roads projects.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Screening of each sub-project will be applied to determine if any Indigenous Peoples (IP) are 
affected in the sub-project location. A social impact assessment will be undertaken as needed. 
The presence of IPs is a possibility for sub-projects in Sumatra. For those sub-projects that have 
not yet been identified (especially under  WP-2 and WP-3), a screening process will be carried 
out as a part of the EA process to determine whether there are any IPs in the areas to be affected 
by the sub-projects.  However, it is not anticipated that sub-projects considered likely candidates 
for inclusion in the Project will have any impact on IPs.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Most of the sub-projects focus on betterment of recently reclassified national roads within 
existing right of way. The requirements for land acquisition and resettlement are expected to be 
minor. However, the capacity expansion component of the Project and the replacement of 
bridges are likely to have significant impacts and might require land acquisition and resettlement. 
The land acquisition and resettlement policy framework adopted by DGH for the SRIP project 
will be used with updates to reflect the latest government regulations (Perpres 26/2005 and 
65/2006 and BPN implementation guideline 3/2007).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
The feasibility studies, together with the environmental and social screening of the first year 
works will commence in January 2008. Based on the results of the screening the necessary 
environment and social safeguards instruments will be prepared.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sally L. Burningham 
12/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:  Reviewed by Jose Zevallos and James Monday 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
12/07/2007 
Comments:   
