Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4060 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P113341 
Project Name: Health Professional Education Quality Project 
Task Team Leader: Puti Marzoeki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 6, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);Tertiary education (50%) 
Theme: Other human development (P);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
95.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
35.00
35.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The specific Project Development Objective would be to improve and assure the quality of 
higher education in the health sector through (i) rationalizing and strengthening the accreditation 
of public and private institutions; (ii) implementing competency-based certification; and (iii) 
providing resources, on a results-based basis, to assure that training institutions can meet these 
standards.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. Strengthening policies and procedures for school accreditation  
 
Project preparation will focus on building consensus on accreditation policies, standards and 
processes through a series of decision meetings that include key stakeholders for each profession. 
Project implementation will support the execution of action plans to employ accreditation 
standards. Project resources would be used for the costs of technical assistance, workshops, 
training, limited equipment for implementation of accreditation processes.  
 
2. Assuring standard of education quality through certification of graduates using national 
competency-based examination  
Page  2
During preparation analogous processes to build and formulize consensus among stakeholders 
will lead to agreements on a program to develop and employ national competency-based 
examination at the school level. Project resources would be used for the costs of technical 
assistance, workshops, training, limited equipment for implementation of competency-based 
examination and certification purposes.  
 
3. Modernizing HR (doctors, midwives, and nurses) management  
 
Work on the first two components will reveal the need for policy development and analytical 
work to complement progress on accreditation and certification. For example, aligning 
certification processes with job descriptions and career paths. Project resources would be 
available for studies, analytical work, technical assistance and dissemination activities.  
 
4. Improving school quality through results based grants  
 
Building on the agreements on accreditation and certification that are the core tasks of project 
preparation the project will employ results-based grants for (i) school level efforts to meet 
accreditation standards; and (ii) support by leading schools to accelerate progress among less 
strong schools.  This component will employ implementation arrangements analogous to those 
successfully used in previous higher education projects including the Quality of Undergraduate 
Education Project (QUE).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Jakarta, medical schools throughout the country, and possibly government health polytechnics 
throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/25/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Puti Marzoeki 
11/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John C. Langenbrunner 
12/14/2008 
Comments:  The QER date may be ambitious, but I leave this assessment to the team.  They will need 
to closely monitor as the preparation progresses. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
