Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/28/2009 
Report No.:  AC4432
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P092218 
Project Name:  Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility 
Task Team Leader:  Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (50%);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project has two overall objectives: (i) strengthen and further develop the 
institutional framework of the financial sector to facilitate financing of commercially 
viable infrastructure projects; thereby resulting in (ii) increased provision of 
infrastructure in Indonesia.  IIFF is expected to achieve the first objective through 
building necessary capacity and skills, providing long-term financing, other innovative 
financial products, and advisory services. IIFF#s ultimate objective is to increase the 
provision of infrastructure in Indonesia to support a more inviting investment climate, 
sustained growth, and poverty reduction in the long term   
 
3. Project Description 
IIFF is being established as a commercial financial institution, to mobilize domestic 
currency financing of appropriate tenor, terms and price for creditworthy infrastructure 
projects by: (i) using its good credit rating to borrow from domestic institutional investors 
and banks looking for long-term placements with margins higher than sovereign and 
large corporate offerings, and by (ii) providing financial products which meet the needs 
of infrastructure PPP and wholly private projects.  IIFF will be a non-bank financial 
intermediary with the capacity to assess infrastructure projects and with the long-term 
Page  2
liabilities to match a portfolio of long-term assets.  It is expected to focus on long-term 
senior and subordinated debt and minority equity positions, but its range of products is 
likely to broaden to credit enhancements, securitizations, advisory services and other 
mechanisms to promote infrastructure investment.  
 
IIFF will operate as a commercial entity, with market-based rates and fees.  It will 
respond to market demand, and adhere to international best practices on corporate 
governance, operating policies and risk management; providing Indonesia with much 
needed infrastructure financing expertise.  GoI has embedded this concept in its policy 
statements on IIFF and it will be reflected in the structure and governance of the 
institution.  
 
The IIFF is a non-bank private financing institution that will borrow from the local debt 
market and lend to viable infrastructure projects. In its initial establishment, its fund 
sources will come from the ADB and IBRD loans, and from IFC, KfW, ADB and the GoI 
equities.  
 
The IIFF#s mandate will be flexible, to permit investments in infrastructure on a 
commercial basis. In the beginning, the fund likely will focus on sectors that put forward 
projects on a commercial basis to attract private sector investments. The sectors that IIFF 
will have under its investment mandate will include: energy (including power generation, 
transmission and distribution), water and sanitation, transportation (including roads, rail, 
ports and airports), industrial and commercial infrastructure sector, special economic 
zones (industrial parks, township developments and hotels), and telecommunications.  
 
A. 
Project Component and Financial Products  
 
The project will have one component: an investment loan to the Borrower that will be 
made available to IIFF as subordinated debt by the Borrower. The Bank # along with 
other development partners involved in the project # will approve an Operations Manual 
(OM) that will form the basis for IIFF#s selection process regarding specific projects to 
support and the financial instruments through which to provide such support. The Bank 
will not be involved in approving individual subprojects that IIFF chooses to support, 
provided that the Environmental and Social Unit in the IIFF has sufficient capacity to 
ensure that the IIFF#s environmental and social policies will be met. However, the Bank 
(and IFC) will review the implementation of subprojects to ensure that the safeguard 
policies are properly followed.  
 
In its initial operation, the IIFF will focus on the following sectors: (i) energy; (ii) water 
and sanitation; (iii) transportation; and (iv) industrial and commercial infrastructure. 
Taking into account that Indonesia#s private infrastructure program is still in its infancy, 
and the fact that IIFF is itself expected to play a significant role in development of the 
pipeline going forward, the Bank team has deliberately assumed a slow growth of the 
balance sheet of IIFF. The Bank#s loan is expected to be fully disbursed over a four-year 
period (2009-2012).  
 
IIFF will have three main financial product categories:  
 
#
Fee based products provide fee income to IIFF (for e.g.: for its advisory services) 
and do not involve any disbursement of IIFF funds.  
 
#
Fund based products (for e.g.: senior debt, subordinated debt, mezzanine funding, 
equity investment, bridge finance, refinancing, securitization) do involve actual 
Page  3
disbursement of Bank (through IIFF) funds. The first five categories - senior debt, 
subordinated debt, mezzanine funding, equity investment, bridge finance - all involve 
financing for new infrastructure. The final two categories (refinancing and securitization) 
involve raising financing on the basis of existing infrastructure (effectively as collateral), 
for the purpose of building new infrastructure.  
 
#
Non-fund based products - such as guarantees - involve contingent disbursement 
of Bank funds (through IIFF). If a sub-project to which IIFF has a provided a guarantee 
defaults on its loan obligations to another financial institution or other investors, only 
then is IIFF required to pay the loan instead of the sub-project. Therefore, this is a 
contingent disbursement of Bank funds. However, since there is the ex-post possibility 
that Bank funds may be disbursed, ex-ante, the same set of safeguard requirements as for 
fund-based products must apply.  
 
B. 
Types of Subprojects According to the Level of Preparedness  
 
IIFF will offer different financial products and will consider for subprojects with 
different levels of preparedness or readiness for implementation.  There will be four types 
of subprojects, which will require different types of review procedures:  
 
#
Type 1 # Subprojects in the early stages of preparation (with sites that have not 
been selected and design options that are still open):  The IIFF client will prepare and 
disclose all Environmental Assessment (EA) documents (EIA, EMP, SIA, RAP, IPP, 
etc.) prior to the approval of the sub-project by IIFF.  
 
#
Type 2 # Subprojects that have been fully prepared (where construction bids have 
been invited):  IIFF will review the EA documents that are available and will ask its 
clients to supplement them or develop new ones.  All required documents must be 
disclosed prior to subproject approval.  
 
#
Type 3 # Subprojects under construction or with facilities that have already been 
constructed: IIFF will carry out a due diligence to confirm that: (a) the subproject is in 
compliance with all applicable national environmental and social laws and regulations; 
(b) there are no reputational risks for the IIFF (and the World Bank Group); and (c) there 
are no legacy issues or no pending legal disputes or liabilities. Based on the findings of 
such an assessment, the IIF will ask its clients to implement remedial measures, if 
needed, or to mitigate potential reputational risks or to address legacy issues or liabilities.  
 
#
Type 4 # Fee-based advisory services: The ESSF must include procedures to 
ensure that all fee-based advisory services are provided in a manner that are consistent 
with the objectives of IIFF#s policies and that do not create reputational risks for the 
WBG.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
It is not possible to determine prior to project implementation the various activities for 
which loan funds will be requested. The financing is for medium and large size 
subprojects that meet certain eligibility criteria. It is very likely that many of the 
subprojects financed by the IIFF will have moderate to significant short-and/or long-term 
environmental and social impacts. However, the scale and location of impacts can only 
be identified at the time that IIFF screens subproject proposals. Impact minimization and 
mitigation measures will have to be prepared by clients of IIFF and approved and 
monitored by the IIFF based on an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework 
Page  4
(ESSF), which will be an integral part of the Operations Manual to the adopted by IIFF 
prior to disbursement of the Bank#s and IFC#s investments.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
preliminary assessment of the pipeline of potential sub-projects for IIFF indicates a 
total of 340, with a value of over USD 76 billion.  There is clear immediate demand for 
the IIFF in the form of i) small to medium Independent Power Producers (IPPs) that are 
financially viable but constrained by the lack of willing local currency lenders and ii) 
existing/operational IPPs and toll roads that could be refinanced (releasing extra financial 
capacity into the market). In the longer-term, more sectors are likely to demand IIFF 
funding.  
 
Infrastructure investment subprojects (Types 1, 2 and 3) under this project are likely to 
have moderate to significant environmental and social impacts; they will be Category A 
or B subprojects under World Bank OP 4.12 on Environmental Assessment and IFC#s 
Procedures for the Environmental and Social Review of Projects). Subprojects that 
involve fee-based advisory services (Type 4) will be assigned Category C.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This subprojects financed by the IIFF will have moderate to significant short-and/or long-
term environmental and social impacts. However, the scale and location of impacts can 
only be identified at the time that IIFF screens subproject proposals. Impact minimization 
and mitigation measures will have to be prepared by clients of IIFF and approved and 
monitored by the IIFF based on an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework 
(ESSF), which will be an integral part of the Operations Manual to the adopted by IIFF 
prior to disbursement of the Bank#s and IFC#s investments.   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower is currently preparing an Operations Manual which will include the ESSF 
and detailed procedures to be followed for each type of subprojects. The OM will contain 
procedures for screening subprojects and for ensuring that all project-associated adverse 
impacts are identified, effectively mitigated, and monitored.  
 
The Operations Manual (OM) is being developed taking into account:  
 
#
Indonesian laws and regulations;  
 
#
the eight Performance Standards (PS) of the IFC (PS 1: Social and Environmental 
Assessment and Management System; PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions; PS 3: 
Pollution Prevention and Abatement; PS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security; PS 
5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement; PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and 
Sustainable Natural Resource Management; PS 7: Indigenous Peoples; and PS 8: Cultural 
Heritage);  
 
#
the seven World Bank Safeguard Policies that could be triggered by IIFF#s 
subprojects (Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); 
Cultural Property (OP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Indigenous Peoples 
(OP 4.10); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37); and  
 
#
the guidance provided in the document #Environment and Social Policy and 
Procedural Guidelines for Projects Financed Jointly by Bank, IFC and/or MIGA#, dated 
January 21, 2009, to resolve any differences between IFC standards and Bank policy.  
 
The OM will contain all the necessary procedures to ensure that subprojects meet IFC#s 
PS and WB Safeguard Policies. The procedures will cover the following aspects:  
 
#
environmental screening and assignment of environmental category;  
 
#
identification of the social and environmental impacts and risks of subprojects;  
 
#
assessment and management of subproject impacts, including impacts on natural 
habitats, forests, and safety of dams, as applicable;  
 
#
consultation and disclosure requirements for each type of subproject, consistent 
with Indonesian regulations and WBG policies;  
 
#
land acquisition and resettlement, including procedures to compensate and 
rehabilitate affected persons;  
 
#
Indigenous Peoples, including procedures for free, prior and informed 
consultations; and  
 
#
review of EA documents and the capacity of IIFF#s clients to manage 
environmental and social issues.  
 
Assessment of Borrower#s capacity. 
The Directorate General of State Assets 
(DG-SA) of the Ministry of Finance will be the Executing Agency (EA) of the loan on 
behalf of the Borrower (Ministry of Finance). The IIFF will be the implementing agency 
for the on-lent loan from the EA through the SMI (a Central Government/Ministry of 
Finance State-owned Enterprise, as a vehicle through which the Government#s 
investments in loans to IIFF are to be channeled). The SMI has been established by the 
Page  6
MoF, while the establishment of the IIFF is being prepared. The IIFF organizational 
structure will have a unit consisting of experts in environmental and social management, 
who will ensure that sub-projects implement the OM. This unit will be part of the Risk 
Management Division directly under the President Director/CEO of the IIFF.  
 
Ultimately, the DG-SA of MoF (on behalf of the Borrower) will have to ensure that IIFF 
will consistently implement the OM. Any request for the on-lend funds from IIFF made 
to the DG-SA through SMI will have to be accompanied by a report and proven 
documents that the IIFF has implemented the OM consistently. The SMI will have to 
check and review the IIFF reports prior to submitting them to the DG-SA.  
 
The institutional arrangement of the Project is very new to the country. The MoF, 
particularly the DG-SA, has no experience in executing projects that involve 
environmental and social safeguard policies. The SMI is a newly-established institution 
and this Project will be the first of its mandates. The IIFF is being established. Given this, 
all of the institutions involved in this Project have no experience in implementing 
environmental and social safeguards policies. A workshop on the ESSF and OM will be 
carried out for DG-SA of MoF prior to Board approval, to create an understanding of 
environmental and social safeguard polices and their implementation and monitoring 
requirements and measures.  Similarly, capacity building on environmental and social 
safeguards for SMI and IIFF will be carried out prior to loan effectiveness and 
continuously during their operations, as needed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders.  At the Project (national) level, there will be at least three main 
stakeholders, i.e. the DG-SA of MoF, the SMI, and the IIFF, as well as ADB, IFC, and 
the World Bank. Ultimately onc ethe IIFF is established and in operation, the Project#s 
stakeholders involved will be private sectors and sub-national governments who 
borrowed from the IIFF. These entities have to consult the Project Affected Persons 
(PAPs) who are affected by their sub-projects, including non-government organizations 
who have concerns and interest in ensuring the protection of the PAPs and/or the 
environment from negative impacts.  
 
Consultation and disclosure. The current draft of the ESSF was developed on the basis 
of ADB-approved Safeguards Planning Document, which was subject to several rounds 
of consultations and disclosed locally and at the ADB#s Website in English language.  
This draft was discussed with the project stakeholders, including participating 
development partners.  
 
The current draft of ESSF will be updated and finalized prior to loan effectiveness, after 
consultations with key stakeholders, including civil society. The final version of ESSF 
will be disclosed locally and at Bank#s InfoShop.  
 
The environmental and social policies adopted in the ESSF have been discussed among 
the key project stakeholders, including IFC, the Bank, ADB, the Borrower (Directorate 
General of State Assets) and the Borrower#s shareholder (SMI).  It has been agreed that 
IIFF will have one common ESSF that complies with the environmental and social 
Page  7
safeguards policies of all of IIFF#s strategic investors. The ADB approved Safeguards 
Planning Document, which is consistent with the ESSF, has been disclosed on ADB#s 
and MoF#s websites. The MoF has also disclosed on its website its discussion with IFC 
that IIFF#s ESSF will conform to IFC#s PS (it has also disclosed the IFC PS). The ESSF 
prepared by the Bank has also been disclosed on MoF#s website. (A Bahasa Indonesia 
translation is under preparation and will be disclosed.)  The final version of the ESSF # 
acceptable to the Bank - will be the basis for the environmental and social sections of the 
Operations Manual (OM).  Since IIFF will be implementing the ESSF and the OM, it will 
be appropriate for IIFF, once established, to disclose the ESSF as the framework that it 
will follow.  It should also be noted that IIFF itself needs to hold, as required under WBG 
policies, ongoing consultations and disclosures regarding the subprojects that it finances.  
Disclosures will be made in the local language as required.  
 
The consultations and disclosure carried out to date are considered appropriate, given 
the fact that IIFF has not yet been established and, as a result, there is no management 
team in place yet that could adopt and disclose the ESSF as IIFF#s own framework. It is 
also important to note that the subprojects to be financed have not yet been identified and 
the OM has not yet been developed.  For these reasons, and the need to have IIFF#s 
management in place to discuss its role in implementing the ESSF, no consultations with 
civil society have yet been held. As the ESSF is an evolving document, additional 
consultations on the revised drafts of the ESSF will be carried out with a wider range of 
stakeholders, including civil society. The Borrower # and IIFF after it is established - will 
continue to carry out consultations and disclosure activities as the ESSF is updated.The 
environmental and social policies adopted in the ESSF have been discussed among the 
key project stakeholders, including IFC, the Bank, the ADB and the Borrower 
(Directorate General of State Assets).  Subproject specific safeguards instruments will be 
subject to consultations and disclosure by IIFF#s clients, as required by Bank Policies.  
 
IIFF#s clients will disclose EA reports, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plans 
(LARAPs), Indigenous Peoples Plans, etc., in a public place accessible to affected 
groups, local NGOs and other stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/25/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/27/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/25/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/27/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  8
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/25/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/27/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  9
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas 
05/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel 
05/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni 
05/22/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal 
05/22/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tunc Tahsin Uyanik 
05/22/2009 
Comments:   
