Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC3238
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P096921 
Project Name:  National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas (PNPM 
UPP) 
Task Team Leader:  George Soraya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (27%);Health (27%);General education sector (27%);Other 
social services (13%);Sub-national government administration (6%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1,800.00
1,850.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is to benefit the urban poor by improving 
services and infrastructure identified and delivered in a more effective and participatory 
manner through the scaling up of a sustainable national program for poverty reduction. 
The results monitoring framework and indicators will build on the revised indicators 
applied for the Urban Poverty Project -2 additional financing (UPP-2 AF) and will be 
finalized during project appraisal. Indicators will also be synergized with those of the 
Kecamatan Development Project of the National Community Empowerment Program 
(KDP PNPM)   
 
3. Project Description 
The National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas(PNPM) is being 
designed as a consolidated poverty reduction program, but between now and 2009 the 
government will continue to maintain separate urban and rural windows for 
implementation managed by the Ministry of Public Works (Urban Poverty Project-UPP) 
Page  2
and the Ministry of Home Affairs (Kecamatan Development Project-KDP). It is 
important to note that beyond 2009, the government may create a special agency to 
oversee all poverty programs, but this is still under discussion. In the meantime, the 
Government of Indonesia (GOI) has developed a framework for close collaboration and 
harmonization of UPP and KDP projects to foster a greater degree of cross fertilization. 
Total financing needs, packaging, and the most appropriate lending instrument are still 
under discussion. It is expected that both projects would launch in early 2008 and be 
implemented through 2011.  
 
The total cost of the PNPM in urban areas is expected to be US$600 million per year. 
This cost will be shared by various donors, domestic financing (central and local), and the 
Bank. The Bank financing is expected to be US$200 million for 3 years, from 2008-2011. 
GOI will initially finance 50% of the program and scale up to full financing by 2012.  
 
The project design builds on the existing portfolio of UPP operations. The executing 
agency will be the Ministry of Public Works. The main components will likely include:  
 
(a) Community Planning and Capacity Building: This component would require about 7 
percent of the project funds. It would fund the cost of facilitators to carry out social 
intermediation activities, training, workshops, meetings and focus group discussions, and 
production of socialization materials and publications. Outputs under this component 
include community development plans (CDP), training and socialization of communities 
about the PNPM, and the formation of community boards of trustees (BKMs).  
 
(b) Kelurahan Grants: This component would comprise about 75 percent of the 
loan/credit. Sub-projects included in the CDPs are supported by block grants for 
kelurahans. These sub-projects cover an open menu of poverty alleviation activities with 
a
short negative list. Typical activities for this component fall into three categories: 
infrastructure, revolving funds, and social assistance.  
 
•
Specific infrastructure investments are pre-identified by communities and consist 
of bridges, roads, public toilets, drainage, health facility repair, etc. Most of these sub-
projects focus on the improvement or repair of existing infrastructure.  
 
•
Revolving funds for community groups are designed to target the poor who do not 
have access to other lending sources. A joint KDP/UPP study on the effectiveness and 
sustainability of revolving funds is under preparation and will be completed by March 
2008. The results of this study will feed into the design of the project.  
 
•
Social assistance is provided through small grants to the poorest or most 
vulnerable individuals to pay for scholarships, health care, etc.  
 
(c) Local Government Capacity Building: This component would use about 5 percent of 
project funds. It would support the training and socialization of local government staff on 
the PNPM and leverage support from local governments to share costs of sub-projects. 
The PNPM will support devolving responsibility to local governments and enhancing 
their capacities established by UPP proceeds uninterrupted as the transition occurs to the 
PNPM. The project will also require that local governments provide counterpart funds for 
administrative work at the kota, kecamatan, and kelurahan levels.  
Page  3
(d) Implementation and Technical Assistance: This component would require about 10 
percent of the loan/credit. For the additional financing, the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) has hired consultants and facilitators to assist in project implementation. This 
arrangement would be evaluated and expanded to deal with the scaling up of the PNPM. 
Technical assistance would be provided through national management consultants 
(NMC) at the central level, and oversight consultant (OC) teams at the provincial level, 
with offices in the participating districts.  
 
(e)  Monitoring and evaluation: This component would require about 3 percent of the 
loan/credit, and would cover the costs of qualitative and quantitative monitoring. A 
management information system (MIS), project website, and complaints handling 
mechanism would also be established. These elements would build on existing M&E 
framework being put in place for the UPP 2 additional financing.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The The National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas (UPP PNPM) 
will cover 8,813 Kelurahan consisting 6,521 kelurahans of UPP2, UPP3 and UPP-2 
additional financing (UPP-2-AF), and 2,292 new location/Kelurahan in all 33 provinces 
in Indonesia. In existing UPP areas, funds will be used to strengthen community 
organizations and carry out more sophisticated poverty alleviation interventions tied to 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals(MDGs). These communities will be 
ready to begin implementing block grants in 2008, while newly added communities will 
initially require socialization and training on the PNPM, and will be ready to receive the 
block grants in 2009.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS) 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS) 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASIS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is an urban CDD program, and the nature of the investments 
(mostly tertiary level infrastructure such as minor road/bridge repairs, footpaths, tertiary 
drainage, and sanitation/public toilets,) are not likely to have any large scale, significant 
or irreversible impacts. In addition, the project will not include any proposal that may 
require Environmental Impact Assessment(AMDAL) (Category A type of operations). 
The environmental screening criteria proposed by the project to address potential 
environmental impacts are acceptable and are the right approach for these kinds of 
investments. Potential impacts from the proposed sub-projects are likely to be site 
specific, not significant and can be managed by adopting good engineering design and 
construction practices.  
 
Furthermore, investments will be planned and implemented through an intensive 
participatory process at the KSM (Community Groups) and BKM (Badan Keswadayan 
Masyarakat/Community Boards of Trustees) levels. Observations in some sub-projects 
under previous iterations of UPP suggest that environmental related-issues mainly occur 
due to inadequate guidance, monitoring and supervision by the facilitators and OCs 
(Oversight Consultants) during the planning and implementation stages. Based on this 
experience, there are two kinds of activities that contribute to environmental risk: (a) 
risks related to tertiary roads, bridges and drainages activities, and (b) risks related to 
public toilets, sanitation and water supply.  
 
The major direct environmental impact associated with roads, bridges and drainage 
activities is erosion, especially from disturbance of unstable soils that are sensitive to 
landslides or from changes in the flow of water. In addition, health issues can also 
emerge when there is lack of planning on the overall drainage setting so as to keep the 
drainage system connected either with subsurface drainage or surface drainage canal 
outlets (e.g. blocked drainage due to improper design and maintenance stops the flow of 
water, which can impact public health). Furthermore, with regard to environmental risks 
related to public toilets, sanitation and water supply activities, public health is the 
mainconcern. There is always the possibility of increasing contamination. For example, a 
water source can become contaminated by surface water entering from outside or 
groundwater can become contaminated by a poorly designed or constructed waste control 
system. One also must consider the formation of an operations and maintenance 
committee for water or sanitation projects. For these types of environmental 
malfeasances, the proposed mitigation and prevention methods are proper training (on 
specific technical measures) and monitoring of the supervising field engineers, especially 
on site selection for water and sanitation projects, use of tested water quality from wells, 
and maintenance of the facilities.  
 
As all sub-projects are small scale, they are expected to have an insignificant amount of 
land acquisition. The screening will drop any sub project if significant involuntary 
resettlement takes place. In UPP-2, for instance, only 14% of the total sub-projects 
Page  5
involved land acquisition or needed land. The average size of land acquired was about 6 
m2 involving 1-5 land owners. The largest land acquisition was 200 m2. Sub-projects 
requiring land are mostly public toilets, water supply reservoirs and related distribution, 
wells, drainage, and footpaths.  For the sub-projects requiring land, there are three land 
acquisition schemes. The most common scheme is land contribution from sub-project 
beneficiaries. This constitutes about 56 % of the sub-projects that need land. It is also 
suspected that the other 40% of sub-projects that need land also obtained land from 
voluntary community contribution, despite unclear identification in the consolidated 
report. Field visits to selected kelurahans and reports from visited OCs confirm that, for 
this category, land is obtained through community contribution.  
 
The second scheme for land acquisition is through compensation. In a very few cases, 
land is obtained through cash compensation with full consultation with land owners and 
funded by cash contribution from beneficiaries of the sub-projects. Recent field visits to 
selected UPP3 sites suggest that only one sub-project acquired land through 
compensation, involving one land owner and about 100 m2 of land. The funds for 
compensation were contribution from the beneficiaries. This land was obtained through 
full consultation/negotiation between the land owner and the beneficiaries. Although land 
needed by most sub-projects in UPP2, UPP3, UPP-AF was obtained through voluntary 
contribution from beneficiaries, a few sub-projects acquired land through compensation.  
 
The third scheme is land provided by the local government, which has taken place in 
very few cases in the project. In one case encountered during UPP3 supervision, the local 
government provided land for the development of a facility that was co-financed by them 
and by the community grants. Learning from the UPPs’ experiences, as UPP PNPM is a 
repeater project of the UPPs, it is expected that UPP PNPM will have similar situation 
whereby most sub-projects that need land will obtain it through community contribution. 
In the case that community and local government voluntarily contribute land, the OP 4.12 
is not triggered. However, documentation of the process will have to be prepared. 
However, in the case involuntary land acquisition takes place, the project will use the 
land acquisition and resettlement policy framework of UPP3, which was adopted in the 
UPP2 AF.  
 
Lessons learned and land acquisition process in UPP-2, UPP-3 and UPP-2 AF  
 
A. 
Land contribution from the community.  
 
As mentioned above, the UPPs have three schemes for obtaining land needed for sub-
projects: contribution from the community members, cash compensation, and 
contribution from the local government. Field visits to selected sites show that there have 
been no negative social impacts to the community members as a result of voluntary land 
contribution. This is because decisions on land contribution were made voluntarily on 
land owners’ initiatives with good consultation among community members and a 
relatively small-amount of land area involved in each sub-project. In fact, voluntary land 
contribution has provided positive impacts on beneficiaries. Facilities are located closer 
to the beneficiaries and construction after sub-project proposal approval is implemented 
relatively fast as land is easily available.  
 
The process of obtaining land through land contribution is as follows: (a) the KSM 
submits a proposal to the BKM for review and approval. One item included in the 
Page  6
proposal, in some cases, is identification of land needed and how the land will be 
obtained. In the case that the proposed sub-project requires land, the proposal already 
identifies that land is available through contribution from member(s) of the community. 
(b) the BKM and the project staff (facilitators) verify in the field and ensure that the land 
contributors have voluntarily agreed to donate his/her/their land for the proposed sub-
project. They also ensure that land contribution is made through participatory 
mechanisms. In many cases, the BKM and facilitators participate in the community 
meetings discussing the land contribution for a particular sub-project. The BKM and 
project staff obtain a statement letter (attached to the proposal) signed by the community 
member(s) who donate the land and witnessed by the chairperson of the community 
(“kepala dusun”) or head of village, and by other witnesses. The letter contains, among 
others, name and address of land contributor(s); location and land area donated; the 
purpose of land donation. (c) once the sub-project proposal is approved by the BKM, the 
land owner who contributes the land points out the site on the ground where to build the 
facility.  
 
B. 
Land acquired through compensation.  
 
In the case that land is obtained through compensation, the process is as follows: (a) the 
KSM submits a proposal to the BKM for review and approval. The proposal already 
mentions that the land will be obtained through cash compensation. Usually land 
obtained through this scheme is an area that is irreplacable by another area because of 
specific needs and the land owner most likely does not get a direct benefit from the 
facility. The Bank observed this as the case for a water reservoir facility that located close 
to a water spring. Beneficiaries discussed and negotiated with the land owner, and agreed 
with the compensation level. (b) the community members then discuss and agree upon 
how the compensation will be shared among them. (c) community pays the compensation 
to the land owners; (d) the BKM and the facilitators verify the process and land 
availability prior to approval of the proposal. (e) the BKM obtains the transaction letter 
for the land from the community and it is attached to the proposal. Although there is no 
experience in the UPPs to date, in the case land owner refuses to sell his/her land despite 
the adequate compensation, the proposed sub-project will have to find other alternative 
site, or, if proper alternative site is not found, the sub-project will have to be cancelled.  
 
C. 
Land provided by the local government.  
 
In a few cases land is provided by the local government. The Bank noted that the local 
government provided state land for a public facility financed jointly between the local 
government and the project grants. The sub-project proposal was prepared together 
between the BKM and the local government and submitted to a selection committee at 
the local government level. The OC and the selection committee (consisting of 
representatives of relevant local agencies and of BKMs) verify, among others, the 
availability of land.  
 
Documentation at sub-project proposal stage and of land acquisition process  
 
Despite the small amount of land acquired and good consultation/negotiation during 
most of the land acquisition process, documentation needs to be improved. At the KSM 
and BKM levels: (a) sub-project proposal that need land include a more detailed plan to 
Page  7
acquire land; (b) documentation of the consultation/negotiation process and of the 
agreement on land contribution/transaction needs to be improved. At the BKM and City 
Coordinator (“korkot”) and OC levels, a more systematicconsolidated report on land 
acquisition needs to be prepared quarterly.  
 
In all UPPs, there is no report on the involvement or impacts on the IVP, as all sub-
projects are located in the urbanized areas. Supervision missions have confirmed that no 
IVPs are involved or affected by the project. However, as the PNPM will cover more 
kelurahans in the eastern islands, although it is very unlikely, in the case that the Project 
involves IVP, it will use the Indigenous and Vulnerable People(IVP) policy framework of 
the UPP-3, which was adopted in the UPP-2 AF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None is anticipated; sub-projects are relatively small-scale, site specific and decentralized 
to serve a particular community.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower is familiar and has the capacity to implement the environmental guidelines, 
land acquisition and resettlement frameworks as well as IVP framework, as they have 
managed the implementation of UPPs over the last 7 years. The National Consultant 
Team (NMC) who is currently assisting the PMU of the Executing Agency will have 
experts who have sufficient experiences in environmental management, social issues 
including land acquisition and gender, and, in handling IVP. He/she will disseminate 
environmental guidelines, land acquisition and resettlement, as well as IVP policy 
frameworks and cultural property identification to the regional management consultants 
(OCs).  He/she will train the OCs and city/district coordinators who then, will train the 
facilitators. He/she will monitor the implementation of the environmental and social 
policy frameworks and will prepare a consolidated report regularly on the occurrence of 
the environmental and social safeguards, based on the consolidated reports prepared by 
the City Coordinators and the OCs.. He/she will also update the project manual regularly, 
prepare formats for documentation at all levels, and provide guidance to the OCs and 
city/district coordinators on the mitigation measures on the negative impacts.  
 
The project will adopt the Environmental Guidelines, Land Acquisition and 
Resettlement Framework, IVP Policy Framework of the UPP-3 which was adopted by the 
UPP-2 additional financing (UPP2-AF) with some modification based on lesson 
learned/implementation experiences of the previous UPPs. The modified Guidelines will 
ensure that the potential environmental and social impacts are addressed as an integral 
part of project design, appraisal and implementation.  
 
Page  8
The Project will not finance sub-projects that use items listed in the negative list, that 
will have potential negative impacts on cultural property and, that will have potential 
large-scale land acquisition/ resettlement.  
 
The NMC will carry out additional trainings for the OCs and city/district coordinators 
for the UPPs on the environmental/land acquisition/IVP policy frameworks and their 
implementation. Kelurahan facilitators and other project staff will be trained in the 
understanding and application of the guidelines and assist in the preparation of sub-
project proposals. The BKMs will be trained in how to apply the safeguards in their 
selection process. Communities will be in charge of deciding all implementation 
arrangements, and follow-up on guidelines and approved proposals will be monitored by 
the kelurahan facilitators and OCs. The current check list for environmental screening 
and for identifying the need, scheme and process in acquiring land will be improved. The 
NMC will provide a detailed outline of information that should be put in the 
environmental and resettlement consolidated report.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the BKMs and the community groups (KSM, as beneficiaries, 
consists of 5-12 households). Communities and BKMs will choose how they want to use 
the funds under the kelurahan grants based on the Community Development Plan (CDP) 
that they will develop through participatory process. Sub-project proposals are discussed 
within the members of the KSMs. In the case for the Kelurahan Block Grants, the KSM 
members will discuss and agree on how to, for instance, obtain the needed land, or avoid 
particular environmental impacts. The BKM, with assistance of the facilitators, will 
screen the sub-projects. BKMs with the assistance of facilitators will ensure that adequate 
mitigation measures are taken.  The selection of proposals by the BKM for the kelurahan 
grant shall be made in a meeting, publicized in advance and open to the public.  
 
The OCs will be trained on the three safeguard policy frameworks who will be then 
carry out similar training for the facilitators and BKMs, as well as raising awareness in all 
participating communities and KSMs. The policy frameworks of the three safeguard 
aspects have been adopted and operationalized in the PNPM manual (which is an 
expanded and improved UPP-2 AF Manual). The UPPs manual have been disseminated 
to more than 130 local governments, and in over 2,000 villages, in the last four years. The 
PNPM safegu
ard policy frameworks will be made available to the public through Bank’s 
Project Information Center in Jakarta and will be included in the PNPM manuals and be 
made available, by the OCs, to the community organizations/dinases preparing proposals. 
In addition, the UPPs manual is available in the UPPs website, namely, www.p2kp.org. 
The PNPM manual will be uploaded in this website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  9
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The PNPM safeguard policy frameworks and guidelines, which are an expanded and 
improved UPP-
2
Additional Financing’s frameworks, will be uploaded in the UPP 
website (www.p2kp.org). At present, the UPP-3 safeguard frameworks, which was 
adopted by the UPP-2 Additional Financing, have been included in the Project Manuals 
and are in the Project website.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  10
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George Soraya 
12/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Vivianti Rambe 
12/06/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Isono Sadoko 
12/06/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni 
12/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
12/14/2007 
Comments:   
