Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3828
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P096532 
Project Name:  Dam Operational Improvement and Safety Project (DOISP) 
Task Team Leader:  Guy J. Alaerts 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
54.93 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.91
20.91 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Objective of DOISP 1 is to increase the functionality and safety of selected large 
MPW-owned reservoirs with respect to bulk water supply capacity.  Outcomes are (a) 
restored operational performance, safety and economic life of selected MPW-owned 
large dams--including reduction of spillway flood risk to downstream population, (b) 
sedimentation impact reduced on MPW-owned dams; and (c) strengthened national dam 
safety institutions.  An implicit aim is that the enhanced functionality of the reservoirs 
would in effect reduce or delay the urgency to build costly new reservoirs.  The primary 
beneficiaries are urban communities and over 2.0 million farm households who depend 
on these reservoirs for their water supply and livelihood, as well as all downstream 
communities who could be placed at physical and/or environmental risk if the safety of 
these dams is compromised.   
 
3. Project Description 
I.  Dam Operational and Safety Improvement Works. (4 sub-components)  
 
This Sub-Component would restore dam performance and safety by providing for: (i) 
design and construction of minor rehabilitation and remedial works [sub-projects] to 
Page  2
restore operational performance and/or safety (including spillway equipment repair 
and/or minor upgrading) of 34 large dams; (ii) surveys, investigations and designs--
including social and environmental management plans--for medium to major works [sub-
projects] to restore and/or improve operational performance and safety for 29 dams to be 
implemented in DOISP 2; (iii) BDSF repair and/or upgrading to improve safety 
monitoring, and preparedness systems for  spillway emergency discharge for 34 dams, 
and interim BDSF repairs and emergency spillway discharge arrangements for 29 dams 
scheduled for later major structural works in DOISP 2; (iv) establishing a river inflow 
and sediment monitoring system to improve the operational hydrology for 63 dams, and 
review flood flow data, estimated flood discharge frequency, and PMF or “Flood 
Envelope Curves” related to watershed area; and (v) assessment of spillway capacity and 
downstream flooding risks for 63 dams (including surveys, models and feasibility studies 
regarding downstream effects to determine the viability of any spillway modification or 
operational change, to be undertaken in DOISP 2).  The Quality Assurance of design and 
construction would be improved by using a peer review system of experts and through 
agency training in construction management and supervision.  
 
II.  O&M Improvement and Capacity Building (3 sub-components)  
 
This Sub-component would support improved O&M and the strengthening of the 
capacity of the dam agency through: (i) preparation of O&M plans, Standard Operation 
Procedures (including rule curves and reservoir water balance) and manuals for 34 dams 
and reservoirs, and for 29 dams and reservoirs to be rehabilitated under DOISP 2; (ii) 
preparation of dam and reservoir management plans and emergency spillway operation 
plans for 63 dams; and (iii) O&M staff training for dam safety monitoring, maintenance 
and operations.  
 
III. 
Reservoir Sedimentation Mitigation (5 sub-components)  
 
The Component would provide for (i) bathymetric surveys using GPS and digital 
equipment to determine the available total storage and water level-area-volume relations 
of at least 30 of the 63 reservoirs known to be affected by accelerated sedimentation; (ii) 
feasibility studies, designs and any necessary ESMF plans for “within-reservoir” 
activities and interventions to be taken in the medium-term(e.g., dredging); that can be 
funded in DOISP 1 or 2; (iii) preparation for a sample study for decommissioning of a 
severely sedimented reservoir, to be financed under DOISP 2; (iv) conduct greenbelt/ 
foreshore protection through participatory programs with local communities living near 
the reservoir, in 20 reservoirs; and (v) piloting of institutional models and plans for 
treatment of 4 upstream rivers and (sub-) catchments with construction of sediment 
retaining and river bank protection structures, partly through community participation 
and incentive programs.  
 
IV. 
Dam Safety Institutional Improvement (1 sub-component)  
 
The Component will support the further strengthening and consolidation of the national 
dam safety assurance institution (with activities funded across DOISP 1 and 2), by 
supporting: (i) a public awareness campaign about dams and reservoirs, and 
Page  3
dissemination to all public and private dam owners of the regulations and guidelines 
regarding dams and reservoirs; (ii) strengthening and development of the DSU better 
fulfill its regulatory roles for all 63 dams under the DOISP shortlist, and of other public 
and mines tailings dams through staff recruitment and training (with outsourcing of work 
to consultants and IWRR); (iii) provision of a fully furnished and equipped DSU office 
capable of housing 30 engineers; (iv) preparation of new or updated DSC Guidelines; (v) 
establishing and supporting a National Dam Safety Panel to review site investigations and 
designs; (vi) establishing a dam engineer and technician training and certification system 
in cooperation with INACOLD; and (vii) incremental costs of the structural CDMU in 
DGWR to operate as the focal point for dam safety monitoring, review and archiving.  
 
V. Project Management. (2 sub-components).  This Component will provide for overall 
Project Management by supporting: (i) the principal Project TA Consultant; (ii) the 
incremental operating costs of the National Project Management Unit’s (NPMU) 
activities for coordinating all project interventions; and (iii) all TA support to prepare for 
DOISP 2.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The sub-projects will be mostly located in Java (West Java, Central Java, Yogyakarta and 
East Java), and some in NTB, NTT, Lampung, East Kalimantan and South Sulawesi. 
Most catchments on these locations are prone to severe erosion because of steep slopes 
and soil structure. In addition since the project is associated with upgrading and minor 
remedial and rehabilitation of existing facilities there will be no major alterations in the 
existing land use patterns. Sub-projects are not expected to require involuntary 
resettlement or acquisition of land as well as impact to indigenous people. Data from the 
Minister of Social Welfare demonstrate that in the 34 reservoir areas under DOISP 1 
there are no indigenous people living there. Therefore the project does not have any 
impact to indigenous people  The project will not fund any activity within natural 
habitats, declared forest and wildlife reserves and protected areas, therefore would not 
have any adverse impact on environmentally and socially sensitive areas. All 34 sub-
projects have been subject to a pre-screening for safeguards. However, if during the detail 
preparation of the sub-projects safeguard concerns would be identified that trigger the 
need for an Environmental Assessment or a Resettlement or Land Acquisition Plan, the 
sub-project can be prepared under DOISP 1, but the implementation would be deferred to 
DOISP 2. This will ensure that the sub-project and its safeguard measures will be subject 
to in-depth appraisal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASIS) 
Ms Sulistiowati Ms. (EASTE) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main focus of the project is to increase the functionality and safety of selected large 
Ministry of Public Works (MPW)-owned reservoirs which would in effect reduce the 
need to build new reservoirs. The project will benefit both urban and rural communities 
and over five million farm families dependent on reservoirs for their water supply and 
livelihood, as well as all downstream communities who could be placed at physical 
and/or environmental risk if dam safety is compromised  
 
The Project will have four groups of sub-projects: Category 1, 2, 3 and 4, reflecting 
growing technical complexity and size of the interventions.  Per reservoir or dam there 
may be 1 or more sub-projects.  Category 1 and 2 sub-projects--the majority--concern 
activities or sites that require generally only minor remedial and rehabilitation works, and 
in some cases consist of detailed investigations, topographic surveys and hydrological 
studies. Category 3 and 4 sub-projects generally involve larger-scale or more complex 
works that necessitate more time consuming preparation studies and design inputs and, 
thus, demand longer preparation times.  
 
All sub-projects ready for implementation in Year 1, 2, 3 and 4 will be of Category 1 or 
2. Of two Category 4 sites, a first localized Phase A will be implemented of the same 
nature as the Cat 1 and 2 projects.  The activities to be financed involve minor remedial 
and rehabilitation works and activities, such as (re-)placing of instrumentation, sealing of 
the crest surface with pavement slabs, stabilization works of local nature at upstream and 
downstream slopes and at the dam toes, cleaning, brush removal and repair work of 
spillways, etc. At the time of project appraisal, four sub-projects of Category 1 and 2, 
have been identified and prepared for implementation in Year 1 and 2. These are Batujai 
Dam (NTB Province), Gondang Dam (East Java Province), Gembong Dam (Central Java 
Province) and Krisak Dam (Central Java Province).  The potential adverse environmental 
impacts associated with these works will mostly be construction-related.  
 
Page  5
Category 3 and 4 dams as well as the remaining smaller sub-projects of Category 1 and 
2, will be implemented in DOISP 2. DOISP 1 will fund their preparation which will 
include the detailed design studies and any required safeguards preparation. These sub-
projects may entail larger-scale or more intrusive activities such as expansion of the 
spillways, raising of dam heights to increase reservoir capacity, larger-scale removal of 
sediment from reservoirs, etc. The potential adverse environmental impacts associated 
with these may be more severe, such as land acquisition, resettlement, deterioration of 
water quality, loss of property, and land use changes.  Also construction related impacts 
may be more intense because of the need for temporary access roads to the sites. 
Notwithstanding, the project will only work on existing sites and will not finance the 
construction of new dams nor their decommissioning.  It is also worthy to note that a 
significant number of these dams were constructed in the early 1900s to regulate their 
respective rivers thereby providing raw water to the then-new irrigation or water supply 
schemes that are now fully dependent on these reservoirs. Local support for these dams is 
high.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The rehabilitation works of the Dams to be financed in DOISP1 will have no longer-term 
impact or in-direct impacts. However, as stated earlier, many of the dams being 
rehabilitated were constructed in the early 1900’s with the some of newest ones being 
completed in the 1980’s. Therefore, most of the longer term impacts of resulting from the 
construction and operation of these exiting dams are now evident. They range from 
considerable sedimentation in the reservoirs, to hydrological and land use changes in the 
downstream areas.  
 
For each dam that is selected for rehabilitation, a rapid due diligence assessment was 
undertaken to determine any significant and outstanding legacy issues, which may 
involve long term environmental impacts that have been left unmitigated. For those dams 
with these issues, their management would become part of the portfolio management 
approach being adopted by the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives are not relevant to the Category 1 and 2 works; however, it is 
expected that during the preparation of Category 3 and 4 works (to be conducted in 
DOISP 2) where potential adverse impacts are anticipated, project alternatives will be 
assessed during EA preparation in DOISP 1.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementing agency is Directorate General Water Resources (DGWR) inn Ministry 
of Public Works (MPW). DGWR will form a Steering Committee at Echelon II level for 
overall project guidance. A National Project Management Unit will be established in the 
Directorate Rivers, Lakes and Reservoirs.  Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will be 
formed in the DSU (Dam Safety Unit) as well as in MPW’s Balai (Besar)WS that will 
Page  6
implement the sub-projects in the field.  TA teams will be recruited to assist these Units. 
The budget will be provided to the PIUs through the sectoral budget. The Institute for 
Water Resources Research (IWRR), a semi-autonomous business unit of MPW will be 
assigned through a consultancy contract.  The training and institution strengthening will 
be implemented through the PIU in DSU.  
 
Generally, MPW is familiar with the Bank’s environmental safeguards policy as the 
Ministry is the client of most of the Bank’s projects and has capacity for preparing and 
implementing specific works relates to the environmental safeguards policies.  
 
All proposed sub-projects are screened by the Consultants Team and PIUs for 
environmental and social impacts and issues as part of the Annual Work Plan (AWP) 
preparation, presentation, review and approval process. This comprehensive process is 
required prior to GOI and World Bank approval of each AWP set of sub-projects. To the 
extent possible, this screening process involves inputs from the local environmental 
agencies (Bapedalda - Badan Pengendalian Dampak Lingkungan Daerah) and selected 
stakeholders. Following approval by the Government of Indonesia (GOI) and World 
Bank, further environmental reviews and checking are conducted for the final 
engineering design as prepared for each sub-project.  
 
In addition to the AWP reports, monitoring of all subprojects is provided by the 
monthly, consolidated quarterly and annual reports prepared under the project by all 
project and consultant teams. Continuously monitoring and management will be 
commenced in regular basis, particularly prior to development, during the construction 
and post development within the implementation period.  
 
Head of DSU will be responsible upon management and supervision on the pre-
construction and construction stages. Community will responsible to the post-
construction and operational activities under direction and coordination head of 
community groups (ketua RW). The consultants might be involved in the monitoring and 
management activities. All the reports will be submitted to the local environmental 
agency (Bapedalda).  
 
To help facilitate and support the role and responsibility of each concerned Bapedalda, 
the project will include environmental specialists on the central consultant teams. These 
environmental specialists, supported by the allocated project resources, will be 
responsible for ensuring the close project coordination and involvement of the respective 
PIUs and Bapedalda. The actual level of Bapedalda involvement over the project duration 
will serve as one of the key project "Performance Indicators" as provided in the 
corresponding project documents and Loan Agreements.  
 
Consultants/environmental specialists will visit all sub-projects that are identified as 
requiring detailed studies (UKL/UPL or ANDAL) to support their preparation of needed 
Terms of Reference (TOR) based on actual conditions and local concerns. These site 
visits should be undertaken with local engineering specialists familiar with the proposed 
sub-project to provide needed information and clarification of design features.  
Page  7
An important role of the Consultants Team and environmental consultants will be to 
provide general guidance and advice to the Provincial/District Public Works units on 
proper application and monitoring of environmental aspects of DOISP contract 
requirements. This guidance and advice can be prepared in the form of technical notes 
and should be based on the issued Bid Documents or approved standard operating 
procedures.  
 
Additionally, in compliance with the GoI AMDAL requirements and the World Ban
k’s 
own safeguards policies, the DGWR has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) to establish the environmental and social management 
procedures and arrangements for individual subprojects. For those 4 sub projects that 
were identified during project preparation, only UKL/UPL (Environmental Management 
Plans, EMPs)  are required by the ESMF and these have also been prepared for each sub 
project.  
 
The ESMF and the EMPs for these four individual sub-projects are being reviewed both 
in Indonesia and by the World Bank, and following there clearance, the ESMF was 
disclosed both locally in Indonesia ( in Bahasa) and at the World Bank’s Infoshop ( in 
English), before project appraisal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
consultative workshop on the advanced draft of the ESMF has been held by the 
Government in Central Java (one of the project locations) in early August 5, 2008. The 
participants were representative for key stakeholders also in the areas where the first four 
sub-projects will be implemented. The draft ESMF and EMP were reviewed in 
Indonesian. The overwhelming response was positive as the participants appreciated the 
positive impact of the reservoirs in their regions, and as they are aware of the need for 
rehabilitation and safety improvement.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/21/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  9
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Guy J. Alaerts 
11/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Vivianti Rambe 
11/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sulistiowati Ms. 
11/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel 
11/17/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
11/18/2008 
Comments:   
