Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3222
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P105002 
Project Name:  ID National Program for Community Empowerment 
Task Team Leader:  Scott E. Guggenheim 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (25%);Water supply (20%);Irrigation 
and drainage (20%);Roads and highways (20%);Primary education (15%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Social safety nets (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
115.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
116.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,476.00
1,476.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
PNPM has the overall development objectives of reducing poverty and improving local-
level governance and service delivery in rural and urban areas in Indonesia. The Bank?s 
latest Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) dated October 2003 identifies two primary 
constraints to reducing poverty in Indonesia: (a) inadequate productive employment 
opportunities resulting from a weak investment climate; and, (b) lack of quality service 
delivery to poor people. Progress in these areas has been hindered due to the underlying 
problem of weak governance. The CAS aims to address these constraints through four 
delivery platforms, including a community-driven development platform. Approximately 
25-35% percent of Bank lending during the CAS period is expected to be directed 
through the CDD platform, primarily through the PNPM programs.  
 
The 2006 CAS Progress Report states that the Bank?s program in Indonesia will be 
expanded through: (a) stronger support for governance reform via civil service reform 
and transparent, nationwide poverty programs; (b) focus on disaster risk management; (c) 
increase in program financing for the remainder of this CAS period; and (d) stronger 
partnerships. The proposed scale-up of the PNPM is fully consistent with the Bank?s 
Page  2
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Indonesia and primarily supports areas (a), (b), 
and (d).   
 
3. Project Description 
The National Community Empowerment Program for Rural Areas (PNPM-KDP) will be 
a
three year Specific Investment Loan (SIL). It provides for one year of block grants to 
communities but two years for scale-up and impact monitoring. Pending budget and 
borrowing approval by parliament, it is probable that further financing through repeater 
projects will be requested by the government to extend the program at least through 2011.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a national project that will cover 50% of Indonesia's 70,000+ villages. for 
safeguard purposes, it covers both environmentally sensitive (forest, coastal, marine) and 
socially sensitive areas, particularly in Papua and in some of the islands near Sumatra.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS) 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASIS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no large scale, significant, or irreversible impacts. PNPM investments are small 
(<$35,000), discrete, and non-cumulative.the project will not include any proposal that 
might require an AMDAL (Category A typers of operations). the environmental 
screening criteria proposed by the project to address potential environmental impacts is 
acceptable and is the correct approach for this type of modular investment. Potential 
impacts from the proposed subporjects ar elikely to be site-specific, not significant, and 
can be managed by adopting good engineering design and construction practices.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Same as above. There are no significant long-term potential impacts triggered by this 
project. The primary environmental impact would be caused by increases in commercial 
activity caused by improved farm to market linkages. However all such roads are small 
(avg. 3 kms).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only significant alternative considered would be to exclude communities living in 
environmentally sensitive areas from particiapting. However, these are very high poverty 
groups. Excluding them without a macro zoning policy would pose major ehtical and 
reputational problems.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower is familiar with WB safeguard policies as they have managed the 
implementaiton of KDP for the past 8 years. In addition, PMD, the project's executing 
agency, is starting a grant-financed project to improve the environmental training and 
oversight programs for Sulawesi and Northern Sumatra. Bank appraisal will assess 
whether the upgraded engineering manuals and training programs sufficiently reflect 
lessons learned about environmental management in CDD projects. Based on experiences 
with the previous KDPs, the primary means to mitigate environmental impacts is through 
better oversight of technical staff. This is easily within the capability of the EA, though it 
needs to be monitored. Social impact monitoring is driven by the project design itself. 
Again, supervision is important but risks are low. 
 
Appraisal confirmed the above analysis. However, appraisal also showed that where the 
training is cut short or where tehcnical oversight is not in place, operational guidelines 
and policies can be bypassed or ignored. Appraisal agreed with government that (a) no 
disbursements will take place if technical facilitators are not on site; and (b) 
environmental training modules will be strengthened for 2008 training.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The consituency for PNPM are people in communities. Disclosure is mandatory, and 
project conditionality includes village-level disclosure of operational rules, including 
safeguard rules. PNPM does not involve any state expropriation; all decisions, including 
safeguard-implying decisions, are by village level consensus.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2007 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/24/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
No free-standing plan is required. The policies and guidelines for both are contained in 
the KDP project operating manual. This is disclosed in many points across the country; is 
available on the GOI website; and has been distributed to thousands of villages. 
Summaries are provided in the PID and PAD. The PID was sent to InfoShop on January 
7, 2008.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
Yes 
Page  5
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Scott E. Guggenheim 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Vivianti Rambe 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Enurlaela Hasanah 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr John Victor Bottini 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cyprian F. Fisiy 
 
Comments:   
