Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3873
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P107661 
Project Name:  Indonesia - BOS Knowledge Improvement for Transparency and 
Accountability 
Task Team Leader:  Mae Chu Chang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 5, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (70%);Secondary education (30%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
600.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2,021.50
2,021.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To improve access to quality education in Indonesia for all children of ages 7 to 15 by 
strengthening school-based management and community participation, improving 
existing fiduciary arrangements for greater transparency and accountability of the BOS 
program and consequently, bringing about better utilization of BOS funds.   
 
3. Project Description 
BOS-KITA will reimburse a portion of the Government's BOS grants made to public and 
private primary and junior secondary schools under the auspices of Ministry of National 
Education (MoNE) for school years 2008-09 and 2009-10.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos (EAPCO) 
Page  2
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental safeguards  
 
The project will not finance any civil works and is not expected to have any adverse 
environmental impacts. Therefore, the project does not trigger any of the Bank’s 
environmental safeguard policies and is an environmental category 'C' program.  
 
Social safeguards  
 
The project does not involve land acquisition.  Therefore, OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources are not triggered by the 
project.  
 
The Bank’s policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) is not triggered because the 
BOS program does not target communities of Isolated and Vulnerable Peoples (IVPs), 
which are normally considered “Indigenous Peoples” in Bank projects. The BOS program 
provides grant funds to all schools in Indonesia, about 80 percent of which is used to 
finance school operating expenditures, and about 20 percent is used to finance goods, 
maintenance and other services in the schools.  The BOS program measures the 
performance of schools in the use of those funds; it does not target, or measure the impact 
of the program on, communities or individuals.Because the BOS program targets all 
schools and students in Indonesia, including children in communities of IVPs, such 
children could benefit from the BOS program through increased enrollment, improved 
student retention, and increased resources at the school level.  However, the BOS 
program does not involve any intervention directed at any particular community.  The 
BOS program includes a social marketing and information campaign to promote 
transparency and accountability by making all communities aware of the BOS program’s 
transfer of funds to schools and the ways in which the schools may use the funds. Outside 
the purview of the BOS program, the MoNE considers the needs of IVPs through a range 
Page  3
of its education policies, including school-based and local-based curriculum content 
options, which allow for representation of IVPs and minorities, as well as special schools 
in very remote places and border areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See above   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
See above   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
See above   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
See above   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  4
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mae Chu Chang 
09/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
09/10/2008 
Comments:   
