Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3468 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P106384 
Project Name: Strengthening the National Statistical System of Indonesia 
Task Team Leader: Vivi Alatas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASPI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (P);Macroeconomic management 
(P);Other economic management (S);Decentralization (S);Managing for development 
results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
8.64
8.64 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project to strengthen the National Statistical System of Indonesia are: i) to 
improve quality (procedures, standards and methodology, statistical infrastructure) and 
availability (timeliness, presentation, dissemination) of statistics produced by BPS; ii) to improve 
the confidence of users in the statistics produced by BPS through promoting engagement with 
users and enhancing responsiveness to their demands; iii) to improve effectiveness and efficiency 
of statistical system through better ICT and streamlining of source data collections; and iv) to 
improve the skills and capacity of BPS staff, especially in the regions.  
 
This will be achieved by streamlining and improving standardization of business processes, 
improving coordination and collaboration among data producers and users, adoption of 
international standards, improving information management system and accelerating ICT 
investment, and training of human resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
This Project is proposed as a Specific Investment Loan, under the umbrella of the multi-country 
STATCAP Adaptable Program Loan. The project will have four components:  
 
Component A: Improvement of Data Collection, Compilation and Dissemination ($3.8 m)  
 
This component will ensure the ongoing relevance and responsiveness of BPS (Statistics 
Indonesia) programs to emerging user needs. In light of escalating demands and limited 
resources, the project will assist with improving priority setting processes around statistical 
collections and exploring trade-offs between competing needs to ensure the BPS work program 
is ‘doable’ with existing resources.  
 
Component B: Investments in ICT and Information Management System ($48.3 m)  
 
This component will support the upgrade of information management system and ICT 
infrastructure to improve standardization, accuracy and timeliness of BPS products. An 
integrated data warehouse will be designed to facilitate internal data collection, processing and 
analysis, as well as dissemination and user accessibility.  
 
The project will also support the introduction of GIS and GPS technologies to integrate 
geographically oriented statistical information systems, and to improve efficiency and accuracy 
of data collection activities in the field. To address the constraints on communications and data 
transfer, connectivity between central and regional offices will be improved through adoption of 
VPN and other customized solutions.  
 
This project would provide an assessment of the feasibility, costs, scope and schedule options to 
provision BPS field offices with appropriate telecommunications access (local office network, 
BPS intranet VPN, and Internet) to technically enable 3 functions:  
 
•
organizational connectivity (email, administrative information sharing, virtual work 
assignment, help desk and related technical assistance)  
 
•
application system and database access (VPN access to BPS Headquarters resources 
including servers, applications, databases)  
 
•
internet connectivity.  
 
In addition, a “model” field office concept will be introduced to design and pilot a “future” 
statistical office in several regions. A “model” field office with portable data capture equipment 
used by enumerators, editing done at the collection site, and the data merged into an electronic 
file back in the field office at the end of the day could create an entirely different vision of the 
future of BPS field work. Given the diverse conditions of regions across Indonesia and limited 
resources, a single phase upgrading of ICT capabilities nation-wide would not be feasible, but 
the “model” office would allow BPS to envision a new paradigm for designing and processing 
surveys, interacting with other BPS offices electronically, disseminating information at the local 
level, and using the Internet to get their job done.  
 
Component C: Human Capacity Development ($3.8 m)  
 
The component will identify gaps between existing skills and needs to develop a corporate 
training strategy, as well as individual training plans. And the project will focus on redesigning 
the curriculum at the Statistical Institute (STIS).  
 
Page  3
Component D: Project Management and Administration Support ($3.3 m)  
 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established in BPS and will be supported by 
specialist consultants to assist with procurement and contract management, as well as a firm to 
provide IVV services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nation-wide in Indonesia (BPS offices at national, provincial and district level)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be assessed during preparation and 
environmental safeguards specialist will support the preparation of guidelines for disposal of 
electronic wastes.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASIS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No adverse environmental impacts are expected since the proposed project will not be 
financing any constructions/civil works. However, it will provide equipment and 
telecommunications access (local office network, BPS intranet VPN, and Internet) to technically 
enable organizational connectivity (email, administrative information sharing, virtual work 
assignment, help desk and related technical assistance), and application system and database 
access (VPN access to BPS Headquarters resources including servers, applications, databases). 
The ‘software’ partof the project will be the major focus of the proposed project, and to 
accommodate and support this development, the proposed project will also provide the 
‘hardware’ (PC and monitors). The provision of the hardware will be limited in quantity.  
 
The proposed project is not expected to generate significant amounts of hazardous 
materials, however, operations and maintenance of the ‘hardware’ activities may result in 
generating electronic wastes (e.g. printed circuit boards from computer, other electronic 
equipment). In order to mitigate environmental issues, the project will develop a simple and 
practical guideline on disposal of computer equipment and peripherals which will be then 
integrated into the project manual.  
 
In addition, if the project design changes and/or civil works are required (especially might 
apply to the ‘model’ field office), then reassessment would be necessary. If this case emerges 
during preparation, the project team will flag it to the safeguard team.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/14/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is anticipated that safeguard-related studies will not be required but electronic wastes 
guidelines will be prepared and included in the project operations manual during the PAD-
stage.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Vivi Alatas 
02/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/12/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Vikram Nehru 
03/21/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
