Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3635 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P107661 
Project Name: Indonesia - BOS Knowledge Improvement for Transparency and 
Accountability 
Task Team Leader: Mae Chu Chang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (70%);Secondary education (30%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
600.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2,000.00
2,000.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective is: to improve access to adequate education for all children 
of ages 7 to 15 by assisting the school system to improve its effective utilization of BOS funds. 
Attainment of this objective would be measured by (1) the percentage increase in (a) net 
enrollment rates, (b) transition rates, and (c) completion rates; (2) the percentage decrease in net 
drop out rates, and would be supplemented by measures of (3) the percentage of schools with an 
acceptable range of student/teacher ratios, (4) the percentage of schools with an acceptable range 
of book/pupil ratios and (5) the percentage of households, especially the poorest quintiles, having 
school fess reduced or eliminated as a result of BOS.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
BOS KITA will be a Specific Investment Loan for USD 600 million. In December 2008, BOS 
KITA will fund sixty percent of central Government BOS grant disbursements to schools to an 
amount not to exceed USD 300 million. The same level and timing of funding will be repeated in 
2009; conditional on the satisfactory implementation of; (1) a BOS social marketing and 
information campaign reaching 90 percent of the target population, (2) the establishment of a 
Central Independent Monitoring Unit (CIMU), and (3) strengthening of the BOS operational 
Page  2
manual to cover school guidelines for purchasing and the scheduling of monitoring and 
reporting. BOS KITA will follow already established Government procedures detailed in this 
operation manual. A preliminary review of the manual indicates the operation procedures are 
sound in most aspects. As the use of BOS funds is governed by this manual, there are no 
significant procurement issues. The funds are mainly for operational expenses and small 
purchases, thus the procurement risk is assessed to be "average".  
 
BOS KITA will be complemented by an existing education Trust Fund. Technical assistance 
financed under the Fund will assist the Government in improving the BOS operation manual. 
This technical assistance will also support Government initiatives to broaden stakeholder 
awareness, develop indicators of implementation performance, and design and undertake 
monitoring to ensure that the Government has timely access to data on which to base policy and 
strategic directions. The primary elements of this support program are (1) the setting up of a 
Social Marketing and Information Campaign (SMIC), and (2) the establishment of a Central 
Independent Monitoring Unit (CIMU).  
 
SMIC will support Government initiatives to socialize guidelines and regulations at the school 
and community level. It will also provide technical assistance to streamline and standardize 
reporting and audit requirements to assist school planning and reporting, especially for primary 
schools. The objectives of the CIMU are threefold; (1) to support program management ensure 
compliance with the program's strategy and guidelines, (2) to establish safeguards against corrupt 
practices, and (3) to track implementation progress against planned targets. Attainment of these 
objectives will include the design and launch of a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system, 
M&E training and capacity building, gathering and managing information to support impact 
assessments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All over the Republic of Indonesia. The BOS program provides support to all children aged 7-15 
who are enrolled in schools, including public or private, under the auspices of Ministry of 
National Education or Ministry of Religious Affairs.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Aurelien Kruse (YPP) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/23/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Discussions on the scope and nature of possible studies will be completed by mid June 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mae Chu Chang 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr James A. Stevens 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
