Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3257 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/10/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P109296 
Project Name: IQ-EMERG. COMMUNITY  INFRASTR. REHAB. II 
Task Team Leader: Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (75%);Water supply (25%) 
Theme: Other social development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Iraq Reconstruction Trust Fund 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
Iraq water sector has been plunged into crisis, with dramatic effect on the incomes and 
health status of the Iraqi people. The lack of preventative maintenance since the 1980s and the 
heavy dependence on public budgetary support have both diminished the effectiveness of service 
organizations to meet the day-to-day needs of households and farmers.  The normal response in 
such a human and economic crisis is to invest in infrastructure, and this is clearly imperative for 
Iraq’s degraded water assets. Further, global experience with post-conflict situations shows that 
the crisis provides an opportunity for instituting sensible reforms on the policy front.  
 
2. 
The Bank’s line counterpart mandated to address rural-water and irrigation services has 
been the Ministry of Water Resources (MOWR).  The Bank, through the multi-donor Iraq Trust 
Funds (ITF) program, has been supporting MOWR since September 2004 through the ECIRP, 
with the size of $20 million, implemented through a Project Management Team (PMT) of 
MOWR.   The ECIRP was effective in December 2004 and due to close in March 31, 2008.  The 
additional financing requires extending the closing date to December 31, 2010.  
 
3. 
The overall development objective of the ECIRP is to finance emergency water 
rehabilitation works in rural areas of Iraq.  The ECIRP will employ a flexible programmatic 
Page  2
approach and also develop feasibility studies for expanding future interventions.  To the extent 
possible, community involvement will be encouraged and technical assistance will be provided 
to strengthen the capacity of local institutions.  
 
4. 
The three specific objectives of the Project are: (i) to restore some of the basic small scale 
water supply and drainage facilities in the rural areas that are currently in a damaged state and 
causing hardship to the rural inhabitants (ii) to carry out the restoration works in a manner that 
creates short-term employment in communities where the sub-projects are located, and (iii) to 
increase community involvement in small scale water infrastructure rehabilitation that will 
eventually result in decentralization through community planning, implementation and operation 
and maintenance of these infrastructures.  
 
5. 
These objectives are to be accomplished by means of piloting and financing labor-
intensive civil work programs in the form of many small sub-projects that are based on 
immediate infrastructure rehabilitation needs and priorities of communities particularly those 
located in low-income areas.  
 
6. 
The principal outputs of the project would thus be: (i) increased short-term employment 
in project areas; (ii) improved access to community infrastructure and services; (iii) enhanced 
capacity to implement infrastructure programs; and (iv) increased private sector activity in rural 
areas through opportunities for local contractors and suppliers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
7. 
The project has been using a phased and flexible approach building on pilots and 
increasing community involvement. This aims to generate near-term employment while 
addressing urgent rural rehabilitation needs. The Project is designed through a flexible program 
of labor-intensive, small-scale civil works to restore and improve rural water supply and 
irrigation infrastructure, particularly those located in low-income areas. The project finances 22 
civil-work subprojects and 10 goods contracts. 11.   The total investment on each rehabilitation 
sub-project is in the range of US$300,000 to US$1 Million.  
 
8. 
Project Components and Costs:  
 
1.
Subprojects in 13 governorates (US$17 million)  
 
2.
Procurement of goods for the MoWR (US$ 2.3 million)  
 
3.
Project management and capacity building (US$0.7 million)  
 
9. 
Project Costs by Category of Expenditure:  
 
Civil works: US$15 million;  
 
Goods: US$2.3 million (e.g., earthmoving equipment, vehicles);  
 
Consulting services & institutional strengthening: US$0.7 million.  
 
Contingencies: US$2 million  
 
10. 
Status of Implementation and Impacts: The project is rated fully satisfactory (per the last 
three ISRs) and has been implemented at a rapid pace. Eighteen subprojects amounting to about 
US$15.2 million are completed in nine governorates.  Four subprojects are underway (with 
completion rates averaging 60%) and expected to be completed by end December 2007.  Project 
Page  3
commitments and disbursements reached 100% and 71% respectively.  Thus far, the project has 
achieved the following impacts:  
 
(a)  Created an estimated 152,000 man-days of employment (against a target 183,000 by the 
closing date);  
 
(b)  Improved 67,000 hectares of irrigated areas (against a target 89,000 by the closing date);  
 
(c)  Benefited over 100,000 farmers (against a target 151,000 by the closing date);  and  
 
(d)  Achieved an average of 6-7 bidders per contract, indicating a competitive procurement 
environment.  
 
11.  
Given the current security conditions and the lack of Bank field presence, there is a need 
for an innovative and flexible approach to implementation, including supervision, monitoring, 
training and disbursement procedures.  The Bank will apply emergency procedures under OP 
8.00 in processing the proposed Additional Financing (for which OP13.20 also applies).  While 
procurement, financial management and disbursement procedures will be organized centrally, the 
project team will rely on a team of qualified local Iraqi consultants to appraise, supervise and 
monitor progress in the field. The consultant team will make periodic visits to sites of 
rehabilitation sub-projects and to sites for which feasibility studies are to be developed until such 
time when security conditions have improved to allow World Bank staff to resume traveling to 
Iraq.  
 
12.  
The Bank staff, in the short-term, will monitor progress based on consultant field reports 
and will have meetings with the client in Amman to discuss progress. Training will also be 
provided to the implementing agencies (project staff of the MOWR and representatives of local 
government/farmers/communities) to strengthen capacity in technical, project management and 
fiduciary skills including environmental and social safeguards.  Investments for training and 
capacity building will be funded under the TA Project of the Bank’s Trust Fund for Iraq.  
 
13. 
The Ministry of Planning and Development Cooperation (MOP) is responsible for 
coordinating the project with the Bank. The MOWR prepares lists of specific priority sub-
projects to be funded under the project focusing on rehabilitation of irrigation canals, drainage 
and water supply systems.  Eligibility of sub-projects is determined according to a set of criteria 
that will include technical, economic and environmental soundness, readiness for implementation 
and affordability.  Details on the eligibility criteria and sample proposals have already been 
provided to MOWR.  
 
14.  
The MOP will review the proposed program and ensure that there is no overlap or 
duplication with other donors’ activities. Since the proposed project is expected to be funded 
through the ITF, it will be vetted and cleared by the Strategic Review Committee of the 
Government of Iraq.  
 
15.  
Project design rests on rapid rural appraisals and simplified feasibility studies for the sub-
projects proposed by the MOWR, which is conducted by the local Iraqi consultants hired under 
the project.  Given the large information gaps on the situation in rural Iraq, especially the lack of 
an in-depth social analysis, community driven interventions will be gradually phased in as 
experience grows both within the Bank and our counterparts in the ministries and local 
government units.  
Page  4
16. 
To ensure fiduciary compliance, the project scope has been initially limited to the water 
sector so as to avoid complex procurement and financial management arrangements across 
several sectoral government entities.  For all Bank operations, including the proposed project, the 
Bank is engaging a qualified firm to monitor procurement, disbursement, and financial reporting 
related to the ITF to support the Bank’s own supervision.  
 
17. 
Donor coordination with agencies active in the water and irrigation sector is actively 
pursued as part of the implementation and monitoring of the proposed emergency intervention.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
18.  
To maintain spatial equity, project implementation has been nationwide, yet specifically 
targeting the poorer rural areas. The ongoing project currently benefits thirteen governorates: Al 
Muthana, Baghdad, Thi-Qar, Sulaymaniyah, Wasset, Najaf, Diyala, Karbala, Erbil, Salahuddin, 
Babel, Dahook and El-Qadisiah.  The Additional Financing will enable scaling up the ongoing 
project through a similar, nationwide coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
19. 
The smaller-scale, spatially dispersed subprojects under ECIRP are currently performing 
better and faster than the larger-scale ITF projects. The project experienced the highest 
disbursement rates and most effective results amongst the ITF portfolio.  Thus, a scaling up has 
been advocated by the ITF donors and has been formally requested by GOI.  
 
20. 
The sector and country units agreed that ECIRP can readily receive additional $15 
million from the uncommitted balance of the ITF.   Moreover, the MOWR indicated it can 
effectively spend up to $50 million before the ITF closure in end 2010, of which the MOWR has 
already prepared technical designs and fast-tracked feasibility studies for a $30-million worth of 
subprojects. Therefore, awaiting Bank and GOI decision is to further increase ECIRP’s finance 
by reallocating another US$15 million from the non/less disbursing components of the other ITF 
projects.  The decision is expected to be made amid the annual meetings upcoming by end 
October 2007.  Accordingly, the Project Paper (PP, per OP13.20) will be prepared assuming that 
the total additional ITF finance could be US$30 million.  
 
21. 
The additional financing will contribute to the same (PDOs) stated above, albeit through 
minimal improvements in project design. The improvements in design aim to further expedite 
implementation, and to enhance impacts and ownership of the end beneficiaries.  The additional 
financing would scale up the ongoing emergency operation, to be able to respond to evolving 
demands in terms of intervention and financing requirements.  The Additional Financing will use 
the same components of the ongoing Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (MNSSD) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project recognizes the emergency nature of the proposed relief and reconstruction 
interventions, and the related need for immediate assistance, while at the same time ensures due 
diligence in managing potential environmental and social risks.  The proposed additional 
financing operation will be used in executing a number of small-scale rehabilitation subprojects, 
each in the range of US$2,000,000 maximum. These subprojects are anticipated to have no 
major environmental or social impacts.  Furthermore, the proposed Project is being processed 
under emergency procedures OP 8.00, and the environmental and social safeguard assessments 
are expected to be carried out during implementation under an environmental and social 
safeguards framework (revised ESSAF), which has been specifically tuned for the Iraq situation 
and has already been disclosed in Iraq and in the Bank’s InfoShop. The proposed Additional 
Financing, as compared to the ongoingproject, will implicate no changes as to ESSAF.   For 
preparation and appraisal of each subproject financed through the Additional Financing, the 
client is responsible for: (1) vetting this subproject against ESSAF, (2) explaining how to address 
the safeguards issues if any, and (3) sharing the results with the Bank towards completing the 
appraisal.  Post project effectiveness, and to account for any safeguards issue that may emerge 
on-the-spot upon starting the field works, the client is to insert legal clauses in the respective 
civil-work biding documents, thus mandating the contractor to address this issue.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To be determined during appraisal.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
To be determined during appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/15/2008 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
January 15, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 
12/04/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/04/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
12/04/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
