Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/26/2008 
Report No.:  AC3531
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P094650 
Project Name:  IQ-EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Suhail J. S. Jme'An 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (95%);Sub-national government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Other urban 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
108.40 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to improve water supply services in 4 priority governorates 
through upgrading and replacing existing water treatment and distribution facilities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project addresses the urgent needs of the people in Ghammas, Nasr, Wasit and 
Maimona urban centers and surrounding rural communities. The project includes the 
upgrading and replacing of water treatment plants, raw water intakes, pumping stations 
and transmission and distribution networks. Also it provides support to the Ministry of 
Municipalities and Public Works (MMPW) to improve its capacity to plan, manage and 
supervise implementation and operation and maintenance through capacity building and 
training of the ministry staff.  
 
The MMPW has submitted a list of 36, geographically diverse priority sub-projects that 
aimed at ensuring balanced development and equitable distribution of funds across the 
various governorates in Iraq. As such, this is a pre-selected and pre-determined type of 
sub-projects prior to appraisal. The project team and the MMPW identified four sub-
projects for IDA financing based on the following criteria: (i) urgent needs; (ii) size and 
Page  2
average completion time of the sub-projects; (iii) balanced development and other 
sources of financing across governorates; and (iv) governorates' local priorities.  
 
The total number of  population benefiting from the proposed project amounts to about 
250,000 people.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers four governorates in Iraq: Ghammas, Al-Nasr, Wasit and Maimona.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Project will be processed as an Emergency Recovery Project (OP8.00), 
consistent with other Bank’s operations in Iraq. Considering the emergency situation and 
the current security conditions in the country, the Environmental and Social Screening 
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) designed for Iraq will be used for this project. The 
main components of the project consist of the financing of water treatment plants and 
water distribution networks in several cities of the above-mentioned governorates. Such 
projects are normally rated as category “B” requiring the preparation of an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) (mitigation, monitoring, institutional strengthening-capacity 
building) prior to initiation of construction activities.  
 
A
general EMP for water supply projects has been prepared. This EMP will be used by 
the consultant during the preparation of the bidding documents for contractors and to 
define site-specific safeguard activities to be implemented by the contractor during the 
construction phase and by the operator during the operation phase.  
 
While components of the project (water intakes) fall on what can be considered as 
International Waterways, the amount of water withdrawn for these waterways ranges 
Page  3
between 0.2 and 0.7% of the corresponding flow rate and hence can be considered as 
minimal compared to the overall flow rate and will not have any discernable impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Besides increasing the quantity of much needed clean potable water, the project will to 
bring about significant direct positive long term health impacts by providing improved 
water quality.  
 
In contrast, a potential long term adverse indirect impact associated with the Proposed 
Project is related to increased water usage which would naturally lead to increased grey 
and wastewater generation. The concerns regarding the management of wastewater have 
been raised with and are recognized by various governmental stakeholders. The country 
has embarked on implementing a strategic plan for the proper management of wastewater 
and it is anticipated that with time, the plan will catch up with the water supply projects 
which are considered as the first priority given their direct impact on health and the 
economy.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Historically, Iraq gets most of its water through river flow and reservoirs along these 
rivers. Hence, the proposed project is consistent with historic practices of withdrawing 
water from rivers, treat it, and distribute it for domestic usage. There are no other viable 
alternatives for water supply in the country at this time.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Generally, Iraq’s capacity to plan and implement safeguard measures is continuously 
increasing as the country gains experience working with international organizations 
including the World Bank. The concept of creating a Project Management Team (PMT) 
with various expertise coupled with knowledge transfer through international consultants 
is playing an important role in ensuring the implementation of safeguard measures. 
Continuous and periodic reviews of monitoring of the implementation measures of 
environmental safeguards are an integral part of the Proposed Project. The Bank will 
oversee monitoring reviews and performance assessment in this context.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Given the emergency and security situation in Iraq, the consultation processes in the 
country have been limited to governmental stakeholders. Wherever feasible, Bank 
disclosure procedures on safeguard policies continue to be practiced.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Considering the ermegency situation and the current security conditions in Iraq, all Bank 
operations are subject to ESSAF designed for Iraq.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Suhail J. S. Jme'An 
03/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Samia Al-Duaij 
03/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
03/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
