Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  46833 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P110862 
Project Name: IRAQ: Public Financial Mgmt Reform 
Task Team Leader: Monali Chowdhurie-Aziz 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 8, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSED 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (50%);Central government 
administration (50%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (S);Decentralization (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Iraq Reconstruction Trust Fund 
18.00
18.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to improve allocation, execution, transparency, and 
accountability in the mobilization and use of all public resources. Cross-cutting reforms in PFM 
will be addressed by the reforms to the national system. The aim will be to strengthen budget 
execution and control, improve public financial reporting, strengthen revenue administration, 
strengthen public procurement and develop capacity in PFM. The primary target group is 
resource managers and their superiors in MoF and MoPDC and the line ministries.  
 
In parallel reforms in subnational PFM will also be undertaken by this project. While there are 
many commonalities between the region and provinces especially in budget execution 
–
there are 
also local differences. Weaknesses faced by one sub-national government, can be strengths in 
another. The project sets up a mechanism by which both the region and provinces can learn from 
each other.  In addition, some provinces have been better able to negotiate the current set of 
arrangements and have undertaken capital spending more successfully than others. There will be 
two main components: (i) to strengthen PFM processes and systems; and (ii) civil service reform.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will build on the analytical reports that have already been written by the Bank and 
those that are ongoing. These include the Subnational Public Financial Management Report 
which has been completed and the Public Expenditure and Institutional Assessment that is 
currently being finalized.. Both these activities have been undertaken with the Government of 
Iraq and reflect the priorities of the GOI. All EUR figures below are tentative 
–
actual 
component amounts are TBD during ongoing Project preparation.  
 
Component 1. Strengthen budgeting formulation and implementation (Total approximately 
EUR 8.7 million). This includes the provision of technical support to all aspects of capital 
budgeting including formulation and procedures for implementation:  execution including 
procurement. Activities include:  
 
•
Improve budget strategy  
 
•
Improve content of and adherence to Budget Call Circular (BCC)  
 
•
Introduce budget ceilings for recurrent and capital expenditure as part of  Budget Call 
Circular  
 
•
Design and introduce a comprehensive Budget Manual as a point of reference and 
guidance for budget officials  
 
•
Introduce a realistic medium-term policy-based perspective to planning and management 
of public finances at the national level  
 
•
Strengthen Capital Investment Budgeting Procedures  
 
Component 2. Strengthen public sector procurement (Total approximately EUR 2.4 million).  
Improvements to the systems of Public Procurement are crucial to ensure successful budget 
execution.  This Component would include:  
 
•
Support the public sector procurement system  
 
•
Develop sector specific standard bidding documents based on overall laws  
 
•
Establish a procurement tracking, information and monitoring system 
includingpublishing a procurement bulletin  
 
•
Strengthen the capacity of key Iraqi implementing institutions, NGOs and private sector 
in public procurement  
 
Component 3. Strengthen treasury operation, financial  control, accounting and reporting. 
budget (Total approximately EUR 3.2 million). This includes the provision of technical support 
to Budget Preparation and Planning. Activities include:  
 
•
Develop User Manual and guidelines for suite of reports (developed by IMF)  
 
•
Strengthen the Financial Control framework  
 
•
Strengthen Treasury Operation at the national and subnational level.  
 
•
Modernize Accounting Procedures  
 
Component 4. Develop sustainable institutional arrangements to provide training in PFM at the 
level of the region and the provinces. (Total approximately EUR 1.5 million). The central 
ministries have training departments which need to be modernized. Trainers within these 
departments can be trained.  This Component would include development of new coursework 
Page  3
and capacity to provide training as the budget system evolves and new entrants enter the system.  
The institutional strengthening of the existing training institute in Baghdad will be undertaken by 
twinning it with a similar institute outside Iraq. This institute and its international twin will also 
be used to provide training to build capacity described in components 1, 2 and 3 when 
appropriate.  
 
•
Design and set up a system for assessment of training needs and planning of training 
activities  
 
•
Prepare comprehensive training plan with strategies and modes for training  
 
•
Assess the capacity of the existing training institute  
 
•
Provide systems that support training  
 
•
Identify target groups for training  
 
•
Identify trainers who will be trained to provide training   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented throughout Iraq.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Safeguard policy in Iraq is directed by the Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF) (as revised in April 2006), which proscribes special procedures to account 
for the continuing instability in the country. At this time, no safeguard policies are considered 
triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Project is proposed as Category C, and therefore, no EA/EMP is required, and at this 
time, no safeguard related studies are proposed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Monali Chowdhurie-Aziz 
08/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
08/27/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Farrukh Iqbal 
08/27/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
