Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3319
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P107698 
Project Name:  Strengthening Emergency Health Response in Northern Iraq 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Jacques Frere 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 2, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Iraq Reconstruction Trust Fund 
8.20
8.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the RHERP is to assist the Kurdistan Regional Government to build 
capacity in the establishment of rapid, coordinated and effective response services to 
health emergencies, including those resulting from acts of violence, accidents, or natural 
disasters.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would achieve its objective through the following four components:  
 
(i) Emergency Coordination Centers.  The objective of this component is to strengthen 
emergency coordination and response in the three Northern Governorates of Erbil, 
Sulaymaniya and Dohuk through establishment and equipping of Emergency 
Coordination Centers in each of the three Governorates, and creation of a reliable 
communication system for pre-hospital emergency services;  
 
(ii) Capacity Building and Training in Emergency Procedures.  The objective of this 
component is to build capacity for patient treatment in medical and paramedical staff 
providing pre-hospital emergency services;  
 
(iii)  Blood Banks.  The objective of this component is to upgrade the capacity of 
existing blood transfusion services in the three Northern Governorates to provide a timely 
Page  2
supply of safe blood and blood products banks to respond to the needs resulting from an 
emergency;  
 
(iv) Project Management.  The objective of this component is to ensure effective 
administration and coordination of project activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will be centered in the three Northern Governorates: Erbil, Dohuk 
and Sulaymaniya.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSHD) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will include construction of three new emergency response centers and one 
Blood Bank. In addition, the Sulaymaniya and Dohuk Blood Banks will be renovated. 
Therefore, the Project has been categorized as Environmental Category B. The 
requirement to carry out a limited Environmental Analysis as part of project preparation 
will be waived but, for sub-projects with adverse environmental impact, a limited 
Environmental Analysis will be done during project implementation but before sub-
project approval. At the same time, before appraisal, the implementing agency should 
agree to apply the following minimum standards during implementation: (i) inclusion of 
standard environmental codes of practice (ECOP) in the repair and reconstruction bid 
documents of all sub-projects; (ii) review and oversight of any major reconstruction 
works by specialists; (iii) implementation of environmentally and socially sound options 
of disposal of debris and medical waste ; and (iv) provisions for satisfactory budget and 
institutional arrangements to monitor effective implementation and adequately maintain 
sanitary facilities after completion.  
 
Page  3
Resettlement and Land Acquisition.  The project will include both new construction and 
renovation of emergency response centers and Blood Banks on 5 sites on Government-
owned land without squatters.  Therefore, World Bank Operational Policy (OP4.12) on 
Involuntary Resettlement would not be triggered since there would not be any 
involuntary relocation of populations or expropriation of privately owned land.  
However, the Bank-approved Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF), specifically elaborated for due diligence of emergency projects in 
Iraq, should be used to ensure that this is indeed the case and, should there be any need 
for expropriation of privately owned land and/or involuntary relocation of population, the 
same guidelines would be followed.  Quarterly and annual implementation progress 
reports should include a section for reporting compliance with World Bank safeguard 
policies.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For sub-projects with adverse environmental impact, a limited Environmental Analysis 
will be done during project implementation but before sub-project approval.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementing agency should agree to apply the following minimum standards during 
implementation: (i) inclusion of standard environmental codes of practice (ECOP) in the 
repair and reconstruction bid documents of all sub-projects; (ii) review and oversight of 
any major reconstruction works by specialists; (iii) implementation of environmentally 
and socially sound options of disposal of debris and medical waste ; and (iv) provisions 
for satisfactory budget and institutional arrangements to monitor effective 
implementation and adequately maintain sanitary facilities after completion.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  4
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Disclosure of the ESSAF is no longer required per the revised ESSAF guidelines dated 
April 21, 2006.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  5
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Jacques Frere 
05/12/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Samia Al-Duaij 
05/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
05/12/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
05/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Akiko Maeda 
05/14/2008 
Comments:   
