Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3393
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jamaica 
Project ID:  P095673 
Project Name:  Jamaica Early Childhood Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christoph Kurowski 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Pre-primary education (70%);Health (30%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Other social protection and risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Following the objectives of the National Strategic Plan, the Project Development 
Objective is to: (i) improve the monitoring of children’s development, the screening of 
household-level risks, and early intervention systems; (ii) enhance the quality of early 
childhood schools and care facilities ; and (iii) strengthen early childhood organizations 
and institutions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of two components.  Component 1 will co-finance the 
implementation of the NSP using SWAp modalities; Component 2 will pay for technical 
assistance (selected consultant services) under standard financing arrangements.  
 
Component 1: Co-Financing the implementation of the NSP under SWAp modalities  
 
Component 1 co-finances the implementation of the NSP’s seven action areas:  
 
•
Effective parenting education and support for early childhood development;  
 
•
Effective preventive health care for 0-6 year olds;  
Page  2
•
Early and effective screening, diagnosis and early intervention for at-risk children 
and households;  
 
•
Safe, learner-centered, well-maintained early childhood facilities;  
 
•
Effective curriculum delivery by trained early childhood practitioners;  
 
•
The sector and sector agencies are governed by frameworks that promote 
achieving results in a consultative environment, and all sector institutions are achieving 
targets; and  
 
•
Timely, clear, current, appropriate, evidence-based information to support early 
childhood development.  
 
Parenting education and support:  This action area foresees the strengthening of the 
ECC’s parenting Sub-Committee, the development and implementation of a national 
ECD parenting education and support sub-strategy, and a public awareness campaign.  It 
includes the creation of an accreditation system for early childhood parenting education 
and support programs and a grant facility to support service providers in meeting 
accreditation standards.  
 
Preventive health care:  This action area includes the reorganization of well-child 
clinics, including the mainstreaming of well-child services at the primary care level, 
expansion of the staff, the introduction of an accreditation system for health centers 
offering well-child services, and the strengthening of the referral system.  Furthermore, 
the action area will support the transformation and scaling up of nutritional programs to 
sustain achievements in reducing undernutrition and, at the same time, address the 
emerging epidemic of overnutrition.  To enable parents and health practitioners to 
monitor child development comprehensively, the action area also proposes the 
introduction of a child development passport, to be used in all health centers.  
 
Screening, diagnosis, and early intervention:  This action area includes the development 
of a national policy for screening, referral and early intervention.  It also provides for the 
development of a screening system for household-level risks and its application to all 
households enrolled in the GoJ’s income support program.  In addition, it entails the 
strengthening of the early intervention system through a new cadre of health 
professionals, entitled child development therapists, who will address vision, hearing, 
speech impairments and behavioral development challenges.  
 
Safe, learner-centered facilities:  This action area foresees the strengthening of the 
inspectorate for ECI’s at the ECC.  It includes the strengthening of thesupport system for 
ECI’s, including the recruitment of development officers to technically support ECI’s, the 
training of ECI caregivers in safety standards, and the GoJ’s grant facility for community 
schools.  In support of the above NSP objectives, the Component will finance operational 
costs (e.g., salaries of inspectors and development officers) by reimbursing expenditures 
under the eligible budget line Grant to the ECC.  The Component will also finance the 
implementation of the ECI’s development plans to meet service standards by reimbursing 
expenditures under the eligible budget line Grants to Community Schools.  
 
Page  3
Trained practitioners: This action area proposes the implementation of a comprehensive 
ECD human resource strategy entailing the reform of training curricula, the increase in 
training capacities, the upgrading of skills of ECD practitioners and the development of 
continuing education and licensing systems.  In support of these NSP objectives, the 
Component will finance training and operational costs by reimbursing of expenditures 
under the eligible budget line Grant to the ECC.  
 
Governance:  This action area includes the reorganization of the ECC, including the 
expansion of its staff base.  Furthermore, it foresees the development of a national ECD 
policy, as well as proposals for local governance arrangements, ECI management models, 
and the reengineering of the national budget to allow for the comprehensive monitoring 
of ECD expenditures.  In support of the above NSP objectives, the Component will 
finance operational costs (e.g., salaries of ECC staff) by reimbursing expenditures under 
the eligible budget line Grant to the ECC.  
 
Evidence-based decision-making:  This action area foresees the strengthening of the 
national ECD management and information system and national ECD statistics.  These 
systems will include the application of an internationally developed, locally adapted 
instrument to monitor the early child status and enable the ECC to report for the first time 
on the performance of the ECD system, including the HR situation and the child 
development status at age 4.  In support of these NSP objectives, the Component will 
finance operational costs (e.g., staff salaries for IT specialists, utilities such as electricity) 
by reimbursing expenditures under the eligible budget line Grant to the ECC.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance under Standard Financing Arrangements  
 
Component 2 will finance selected consultant services critical to achieve the Project 
Development Objective.  It will fund the elaboration of a national policy on screening, 
referral and early intervention, including the development of a screening system for risks 
at the household level.  It will finance the elaboration of a service delivery model for 
nutritional programs, and the development of a strategy for the reorganization and 
strengthening of well-child clinics.  In addition, it will pay for the redesign of the 
GoJ’s 
grant facility supporting ECI’s and the development of a comprehensive ECD human 
resource strategy.  It will finance background studies to strengthen the legal framework 
governing ECD, to develop a national ECD policy, and to elaborate proposals for local 
governance and ECI management models. Furthermore, it will finance the evaluation of 
the NSP 2008-12 at mid-term and towards the end of the implementation period as well 
as the development of the NSP 2013-17.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is of national scope supporting the Early Childhood Commission's (ECC) 
National Strategic Plan (NSP). There are no salient physical characterstics relevant to 
safeguard analysis.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not finance construction or expansion of any ECD insfrastructure.  Nor 
will it finance any activities that will generate health care waste.  
 
Regarding the Maroon and Rastafarian communities, although Bank safeguard 
mechanisms are not triggered (since they are not considered ‘ethnic groups’), the social 
assessment recommends that a culturally sensitive approach to service delivery be 
introduced as an incentive to attract and retain Rastafarian and Maroon children into the 
system.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The financing and accountability rules for the Grant to Community Schools may change 
during project implementation and permit for minor refurbishments of existing 
infrastructure.  Such small-scale activities would be limited to minor interior building 
remodeling and are not expected to generate negative environmental impacts requiring 
attention under OP/BP 4.01. Nonetheless, as a good practice measure, basic construction 
Page  5
rules for contractors detailing provisions to minimize dust, noise and other nuisances, 
safeguard worker health and safety, and require adequate disposal of any construction 
materials will be outlined in the Project’s Operational Manual, and will be incorporated 
into all bidding documents.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders of the project are Government policy makers, implementing 
agency staff, not-for-profit ECD providers, parents and community/church leaders.  
 
As mentioned above a culturally sensitive approach to service delivery will be 
introduced as an incentive to attract and retain Rastafarian and Maroon children into the 
system.  
 
During project preparation a participatory community socio-economic diagnostic study 
was undertaken and also a comprehensive stakeholder analysis.  
 
The project documents will all be posted on the Ministry of Health and Environment 
website (http://www.moh.gov.jm/).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christoph Kurowski 
03/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Josefina Stubbs 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
03/14/2008 
Comments:   
