Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4310
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jamaica 
Project ID:  P105122 
Project Name:  Rural Economic Development Initiative 
Task Team Leader:  Ellen Hamilton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 22, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 3, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Other industry (50%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (50%);Rural non-farm income generation (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed REDI project is to improve 
market access for poor rural agricultural producers and tourism product providers.  The 
Project's outcome indicators are:  
 
Increase (percentage) in turnover (sales) of participating rural enterprises;  
 
Number of participating rural enterprises functioning as registered business entities 
(maintaining records, having a manager);  
 
Number of direct jobs created in rural communities receiving project assistance.  
 
Percentage of critical infrastructure projects that achieve their expected results for 
improvement in the value chain as rated by users and JSIF staff.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is expected to be a SIL and the project consists of three components:  
Component 1. Rural Subprojects in Agriculture and Rural Tourism; Component 2. 
Page  2
National Technical Assistance and Capacity Building; and Component 3. Project 
Management.  
 
Component 1. Rural Subprojects in Agriculture and Rural Tourism (Total Cost USD 
16.75 million).  This component will finance two types of rural subprojects.  Type 1 
subprojects will support small-scale revenue generating enterprises in agriculture and 
tourism. Type 2 subprojects will support provision of critical infrastructure, marketing, 
and management in the agriculture and tourism sectors.  The component will directly 
benefit an estimated 7,500 lower-income rural residents who will gain from revenue-
generating sub-projects and from critical market-oriented infrastructure, marketing and 
management.  
 
Component 2. National Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (Total Cost USD 
1.25 million).  The main objective of this component is to strengthen relevant national 
organizations to enhance their capacity to continue assisting the rural enterprises and 
other project partners and ensure the sustainability of the rural enterprises.  Hence, the 
component will finance technical assistance and capacity building for key organizations 
and agencies that deliver support services in agriculture and rural tourism at the local 
level.  
 
Component 3. Project Management (Total Cost USD 2.0 million).  This component will 
finance project management, technical expertise (tourism and agricultural specialists, 
monitoring and evaluation), staff training, the annual audit, vehicles, office equipment, 
and other operating costs.  This component will also ensure that effective fiduciary 
arrangements are in place during implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Geographic Scope/Project Area: The project will have national coverage. However, in 
order to maximize development impact, the project will initially focus on eight parishes: 
Clarendon, Manchester, St. Elizabeth, Westmoreland, Hanover, St. James, Trelawny, and 
St. Ann as well as the blue and John Crow Mountain regions.  
 
Project Beneficiaries: The project will directly benefit an estimated 7,500 lower-income 
rural residents who will benefit from revenue-generating sub-projects and from critical 
market-oriented infrastructure, marketing, and management.  The project will encourage 
the inclusion of young people and women and an estimated 15% of all direct 
beneficiaries will be youth (under 30 years old) and 35% will be women.  An additional 
20,000 rural residents will benefit indirectly from the training and capacity building 
provided to RADA and TPDCo staff.  
 
Subproject Cycle.  All subprojects will be selected through a competitive process.  The 
initial objective will be to open up the process to as many subprojects as possible to help 
ensure that the rural enterprises with the most drive and determination, and the ideas with 
the most significant market potential and potential to catalyze rural tourism development, 
have an opportunity to compete for grants.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anjali Acharya (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is a Category B project. No major adverse environmental impacts are envisaged as a 
result of the project. Some of the potential negative environmental impacts associated 
with tourism sub-projects include trail disturbance; natural resource loss from tampering 
of flora/ fauna; desensitization of existing natural fauna from human presence; possible 
damage to seafloor from divers/ snorkelers; improper sewage and solid waste disposal 
etc. Similarly, potential negative environmental impacts associated with agricultural sub-
projects include water pollution (groundwater contamination from seepage of animal 
waste; feedlot and fertilizer runoffs etc.); solid waste pollution (improper disposal of 
agro-processing wastes) etc.  
 
Among the Bank's safeguard policies, the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural 
Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP4.36) and Pest Management (OP 4.09) are triggered.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The proposed project will support multiple 
small sub-projects; as such the size and nature of these projects are not expected to have  
significant negative environmental impacts. Environmental screening procedures and an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) have already been developed in the PIU 
under a previous Bank project, and will be applied to these sub-projects. Revisions to the 
existing EMF to screen for environmental impacts from new types of sub-projects 
(tourism and agricultural) as well as appropriate environmental mitigation plans are being 
prepared. The project will ensure compliance with the Bank safeguard policies for small-
scale infrastructure investments through the incorporation of specific guidelines in the 
Operational Manual.  
 
Page  4
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The sub-projects financed under the REDI project are 
not expected to have significant impacts on critical natural habitats. However, this policy 
has been triggered as a precaution. Environmental screening procedures have already 
been developed within JSIF, and during preparation, the EMF will be reviewed to ensure 
the screening of sub-projects for impacts on natural habitats, with appropriate 
environmental management plans.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36): The sub-projects financed under REDI will not result in 
significant conversion of degradation of critical forest areas. However, this policy has 
been triggered as a precaution, as there may be possible sub-projects supporting forest 
restoration activities (such as afforestation). Any such activities will be minor and 
positive in nature from a forest perspective. Until there is a more defined program in this 
areas, a sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues is not warranted. During 
preparation, the revised EMF will include guidance on assessing the potential for 
improved biodiversity and ecosystem functions from forest restoration activities.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09): This Bank policy has been triggered as agricultural sub-
projects may directly or indirectly contribute to the increased use of pesticides because of 
the intensification of the production of certain crops. The Operations Manual will include 
specific provisions regarding the prohibition of certain types of pesticides (those on the 
World Health Organization's Hazardous Pesticides List) and guidelines for the selection, 
application, storage, handling, transport, and disposal of pesticides. The selection criteria 
for sub-projects will also encourage the use of sustainable farming practices to promote 
the application of IPM, organic farming practices and renewable energy.  
 
The project is not expected to cause any adverse social impacts. Long-term impacts are 
expected to be positive or neutral from a social standpoint. The project is seeking to 
improve productivity and rural incomes while mainstreaming social safeguards into 
production. These investments are expected to generate positive impacts. The project 
does not trigger social safeguards.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Recent supervision missions for other Bank projects in Jamaica reviewed experience of 
the PIU in the implementation of the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to 
identify possible problems encountered, highlight lessons learned, and assess institutional 
capacity. Overall, the PIU is found to have adequate capacity to administer environmental 
screening procedures and implement mitigation plans.  
Page  5
The institutionalization of the EMF has continued to improve, with environmental 
management procedures on track to being fully developed. Supervision of selected 
subproject sites has shown that the EMF procedures and mitigation plans are also being 
implemented well in practice. The automation of processes helps keep the Environmental 
Officer#s workload manageable; with additional subprojects under the proposed REDI 
Project, staffing may be revisited.  
 
Regular training of Technical Officers continues to strengthen their capacity to 
implement and monitor environmental management actions. Customized environmental 
management plans (EMPs) are being appended to contracts and bid documents. The PIU 
has recently achieved ISO 14001 certification, becoming one of the first such institution 
in the Caribbean to receive this recognition.  
 
The project is managed by a PIU which has a central office, where social and 
environmental specialists monitor operations, ensure compliance with social safeguards, 
and coordinate the activities. The PIU is implementing the ISO 14.00O which monitors 
possible social impacts resulting from environment interventions. Several forms and 
checklists will be put in place to monitor and evaluate subprojects. The approval process 
for subprojects includes a check list, which determines potential risks, impacts and 
mitigation measures. The regional environmental and social specialists monitor their 
implementation, under the oversight and guidance of the central PIU.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are rural inhabitants, specifically small farmers. These small 
farmers typically live in poor areas and often participate in some tourism activities in 
addition to the agriculture to supplement their farming income. These lower-income rural 
residents have limited market access as well as inadequate infrastructure, and marketing 
and management training. The studies carried out during the design of the project have 
also included consultations with potential project beneficiaries. A national workshop was 
carried out at the design stage to inform and receive feed-back from potential project 
beneficiaries, local and national NGOs and international donors.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/10/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/10/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/12/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
N/A 
Page  7
constraints? 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ellen Hamilton 
06/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Anjali Acharya 
06/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
06/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
06/16/2009 
Comments:   
