Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4040 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/17/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jamaica 
Project ID: P107407 
Project Name: JM Education Transformation Capacity Building 
Task Team Leader: Cynthia Hobbs 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to support the implementation of the government's 
Education Transformation Program (ETP). Specifically, it will assist to: (i) operationalize the 
institutions that are key to improved capacity for delivering high quality education; (ii) mobilize 
additional resources for the education sector; and (iii) garner stakeholder support for the ETP.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will be financed through a single investment loan. The WB team is proposing a mix 
of results-based and standard disbursements to finance the project. The project would consist of 
three components.  
 
Component 1: Enhanced Management and Accountability would contribute to the 
implementation of the Government of Jamaica's (GOJ) ETP, specifically by making operational 
key agencies to form a coherent system to monitor progress and improve accountability and 
education quality. The agencies include the: (a) National Education Inspectorate (NEI) - project 
funds would support the staffing, operational costs, and resources required to carry out school 
inspections nationwide; (b) Regional Education Authorities (REAs) - project funds would 
Page  2
support staffing, especially in new technical areas of the REA (school improvement and student 
support), operational costs, resources, and training of staff; and (c) Jamaica Teaching Council 
(JTC) - project funds would support the staffing and operational costs to develop and carry out a 
licensing scheme for public school teachers, as well as in-service training of teachers to support 
the achievement of standards.  
 
Component 2: Mobilization of Resources through the National Education Trust (NET). The 
GOJ is establishing the NET to coordinate and administer resources for the education sector. The 
NET will solicit and administer donations from the private sector and the Jamaican Diaspora, in 
addition to capital resources from the government. NET funds will mainly finance school 
infrastructure. Project funds would support operating and staffing costs to set up the 
organization, and technical assistance to establish the financial management and administration 
systems.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening will finance:  
 
¢
Technical Assistance: to develop functions, procedures and operations of the NEI, REAs and 
JTC, and targeted management and information systems for the school inspections and licensing 
of teachers.  
 
¢
Communication Strategy: technical assistance to design and implement a communication 
strategy to ensure ownership across all levels and assuage anxiety resulting from the 
organizational changes.  
 
¢
Project Operating Costs: incremental costs associated with management of the project, 
including administrative and management staff, audit costs, project monitoring and evaluation, 
and other expenses. The GOJ will define the governance structure for the project prior to the pre-
appraisal mission.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The NEI, JTC and NET would all be based in Kingston, and much of the project would focus on 
setting up these agencies. The REAs would be located in the regions, with the main focus on two 
pilot regions. Training would take place across the country, and the communications strategy 
would reach out to stakeholders nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project focuses on institutional capacity building of key agencies in the education sector, and 
as such, no safeguards are triggered. However, project support for the NET is considered a linked 
component since it will eventually dedicate funds to school construction. The Bank's team, 
including an environmental specialist(s), will work with government and NET staff to ensure full 
understanding and application of environmental and resettlement safeguards as appropriate.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge Ignacio Mesa Regueiro (LCSHE) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/15/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No studies will be carried out during project preparation. It was agreed with the Regional 
Safeguards Adviser that the task team will work with the GOJ and NET staff during project 
implementation to ensure that the NET Operational Manual includes sound environmental 
and social guidelines consistent with World Bank standards. Safeguards expertise could also 
be used to establish coordination mechanisms and train GOJ and NET staff.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cynthia Hobbs 
04/02/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
04/07/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
