Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3438
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jamaica 
Project ID:  P105024 
Project Name:  Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  Chingboon Lee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and risk management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
36.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
79.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
4.00
83.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project will support Jamaica in strengthening its social protection system.  To this 
end, it will: (i) further improve the effectiveness of the Program for Advancement 
Through Health and Education (PATH) to foster investment by poor families in human 
capital accumulation; (ii) develop a structured system for assisting working-age persons 
of PATH households seek and retain employment; (iii) enable the formulation of a 
reform program for the pension schemes for public sector workers; and (iv) develop a 
social protection strategy.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project, comprising four components, will be supported by an IBRD loan 
of US$40.0 million.  The first component, which focuses on improving the effectiveness 
of the PATH, will take up the largest share of the loan (US$34.9 million).  The second 
component will build institutional capacity for piloting and scaling-up the Steps-to-Work 
program. The third component aims to improve pension system administration and build 
capacity for public pension reform.  The fourth component will assist the Government in 
developing a social protection strategy. The proposed Project, comprising four 
components, will be supported by an IBRD loan of US$40.0 million.  The first 
Page  2
component, which focuses on improving the effectiveness of the PATH, will take up the 
largest share of the loan (US$34.9 million).  The second component will build 
institutional capacity for piloting and scaling-up the Steps-to-Work program. The third 
component aims to improve pension system administration and build capacity for public 
pension reform.  The fourth component will assist the Government in developing a social 
protection strategy.  
 
Component 1: Improving effectiveness of the PATH (US$34.9 million)  
 
This component will support the PATH through: (a) co-financing for conditional cash 
transfers to children 0 to 17 years-old (child grants); and (b) technical improvements to 
the Program.  
 
Sub-component 1.a PATH Grants (US$32.0 million)  
 
Under this sub-component, IBRD loan proceeds will be pooled with government 
resources to finance PATH child grants, the cost of which in 2007 was about US$14 
million.  Beginning in 2008/2009, this figure will increase to about US$22 million as a 
result of increased financing needs to: (a) adjust the benefit level for inflation; (b) 
increase the size of the grants for secondary school students; (c) give a bonus to boys to 
motivate higher grade retention and completion and (d) give a one-off bonus to students 
moving to tertiary education or training.  These enhanced benefits, recently approved by 
the Cabinet, are underpinned by the results of rigorous analysis by the MLSS and 
extensive consultations with stakeholders.  
 
To encourage expeditious implementation of activities aimed at strengthening program 
administration and effectiveness (supported under sub-
component 1.b), the Bank’s share 
in the financing of eligible PATH expenditures will increase when anumber of 
performance milestones linked to the technical improvement of the Program, are met.  
Criteria for the choice of these milestones will include, inter alia, realism and 
measurability without ambiguity.  Two sets of milestones with target achievement dates 
of December 2009 and June 2011, respectively, have been proposed (see Table 1).  Final 
decision on these milestones and the parties responsible for the actions to be taken 
towards the achievement of each milestone will be taken during project appraisal.  
 
The cost-sharing percentage, beginning at 29% will increase to 35% when the first set of 
milestones has been met.  When the second set is achieved, this figure will rise to 40%, 
resulting in faster draw-down of loan proceeds for PATH grants.  In the event that 
milestones for both stages are achieved ahead of the target dates, an accelerated 
disbursement schedule.  
 
Sub-component 1.b Institutional strengthening of PATH (US$2.9 million)  
 
This sub-component will be centered on two sets of activities: (i) strengthening and 
improving administrative systems; and (ii) improving accountability, monitoring, and 
evaluation.  
 
Page  3
i. To strengthen and improve administrative systems, support will be provided for: (a) 
reviewing and improving the targeting, enrollment, and recertification of beneficiaries; 
(b) implementing a Content Management System (CMS) to improve the accuracy of data 
entry and records management; and (c) training of social workers in case management.  
 
ii. To improve accountability, monitoring and evaluation, the Project will finance: (a)  
development of a strategic monitoring system based on the enhanced MIS; (b) two 
process evaluations on program implementation; (c) development of service standards as 
well as mechanisms to monitor compliance with standards; (d) strengthening of the 
financial management and internal audit capacity of the Program; (e) an impact 
evaluation to
 assess the Program’s contribution to school enrollment, attendance and high 
school completion; (f) an assessment on program targeting accuracy; and (g) 
development and implementation of appropriate public education and social marketing 
programs.  
 
Component 2: Piloting and Scaling-up the Steps-to-Work Program (US$2.0 million)  
 
This component will support capacity building within the MLSS to launch a new 
initiative, the ‘Steps-to-Work’ Program (StW). Unemployed youth and adults from poor 
families, especially those in PATH households, will be targeted for referral to the 
relevant support services  to enable them to get a job or become self-employed.  The StW 
Program, beginning as a two-year pilot in six parishes to benefit approximately 8,700 
members of PATH households, will be assessed at the end of the piloting period.  In 
addition to the process evaluations financed by the Project, the Government will mobilize 
other funding sources to carry out an impact evaluation.  A preliminary plan for scaling-
up the pilot will be developed during the project implementation period; finalization of 
this plan to enable nation-wide rollout of the pilot will only be possible when the findings 
of more detailed assessments (i.e. impact evaluation) are available. Specifically, the 
Project will finance: (a) capacity building activities (training, studies to improve program 
design and operation, MIS development, updated directory of service providers, etc.); (b) 
incremental operating costs associated with the Program; and (c) M&E including impact 
and process evaluations.  
 
Component 3: Improving pension system administration and building capacity for 
reform (US$2.6 million)  
 
The pension component will support two core sets of activities focused on the schemes 
for public sector workers: (i) preparation of a reform program; and (ii) improving 
administration and information systems.  
 
Sub-component 3.a Preparation of a reform program (US$0.14 million)  
 
This sub-component will support the preparation of a White Paper outlining a multi-year 
reform program for the schemes for civil servants, including an assessment of the 
associated fiscal, welfare and institutional impacts.  The White Paper, constituting the 
blue-print that guides the preparation of the necessary legislation, will draw from the 
recent technical note prepared by the Steering Committee on Pension Reform on the main 
issues facing the pension system and presenting a preliminary assessment of alternative 
Page  4
reform options.  To this end, the Project will finance: (i) training on financial modeling of 
pension systems, cash flow forecasting, and the design and operations of defined benefit, 
notional defined contribution, and defined contribution systems; (ii) technical assistance 
on policy analysis; and (iii) preparation of the necessary legislation.  Drawing from its 
past experience and using its own resources, the Government will undertake the 
necessary consultations with stakeholders during the process of preparing the White 
Paper.  
 
Sub-component 3.b Improving administration and information systems (US$2.46 
million)  
 
Activities under this sub-component are aimed at improving the pension administration 
system in order that pensions are calculated, awarded and paid in a timelier manner.  To 
improve record-keeping and the payment system, the Project will finance the: (a) 
development of a  computerized database to keep track of the career histories of public 
sector workers ; and (b) redesign of the current payment process and supporting IT 
infrastructure.  The new system will be open to modifications and additions to 
accommodate the eventual reforms and to facilitate the transfer of information and 
reconciliation of cash flows between the civil service and the NIS .  
 
Component 4:  Development of social protection strategy (US$0.5 million)  
 
This component will support the Government in developing a social protection strategy 
to inform decision-making on the right mix of policies and programs for pensions, labor 
market and social welfare, to meet the goals specified in the National Development Plan 
for reducing poverty and vulnerability.  The Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ), the 
agency charged with initiating and coordinating planning of economic and social 
development, will be consulting with stakeholdersin the process of developing the 
strategy.  To this end, the Project will finance: (i) diagnostic studies, the most important 
of which is a vulnerability and social safety net assessment; (ii) formulation of a 
discussion paper (Green Paper) outlining reform options for consideration, public 
discussion and consultations; and (iii) consensus-building on the reforms required to 
address the gaps identified.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is of national scope supporting the Program for Advancement through Health 
and Education (PATH). There are no salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard 
analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (WBIVP) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
03/10/2008 
Comments:   
