Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/18/2009 
Report No.:  AC4512
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jamaica 
Project ID:  P107407 
Project Name:  JM Education Transformation Capacity Building 
Task Team Leader:  Cynthia Hobbs 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Project is to build the capacity of the key agencies (NEI, 
JTC, REAs, NET) which are established to support the national Education System 
Transformation Programme (ESTP).   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Enhanced Performance and Accountability would contribute to the 
implementation of the GOJ's ESTP by making operational the following key agencies to 
form a coherent system to monitor progress and improve accountability and quality: 
National Education Inspectorate (NEI), Jamaica Teaching Council (JTC), and Regional 
Education Authorities (REAs).  
 
Component 2: Mechanisms to Mobilize Resources to the National Education Trust 
(NET) would contribute to the implementation of a marketing and public awareness 
strategy to mobilize resources for the NET, and training for NET and other relevant 
Government staff in the use of public-private partnerships.  
 
Page  2
Component 3: Communications, Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation 
would support: (i) the implementation of a strategic communications strategy to ensure 
ownership across all levels and assuage anxiety among key stakeholders resulting from 
the organizational changes; (ii) provision of staffing, training, purchase of necessary 
equipment and materials for project management, and operating costs; and (iii) technical 
assistance to the MOE to carry out process and summative evaluations of the ESTP, as 
well as annual external audits of project financing.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The NEI, JTC and NET would all be based in Kingston, and much of the project would 
focus on setting up these agencies. The REAs would be located in the regions. Training 
would take place across the country, and the communications strategy would reach out to 
stakeholders nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge Ignacio Mesa Regueiro (LCSHE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project financing does not directly support any activities that impact on the 
environment or trigger other safeguards. The Project does not finance any infrastructure 
construction or maintenance. Thus, there are no direct safeguard issues or impacts 
associated with the proposed project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Although no construction will take place under the Project, the Project does provide 
technical assistance to the National Education Trust (NET), which will become 
responsible for infrastructure investment in the education sector. This has been identified 
as a linked activity.   
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Jamaica (GOJ) has indicated that national infrastructure standards 
and an approval process are in place and have been followed in the case of existing Bank-
financed projects in the education sector. The GOJ facilitated a copy of the National 
Environment and Protection Agency (NEPA) standards and a description of the approval 
process for infrastructure, which the Bank reviewed. The review found that the NEPA 
procedures were well defined and the MOE had a solid process for approving 
infrastructure investments. The MOE has requested technical assistance to review 
standard school designs and environmental management of civil works in the education 
sector. The Bank's safeguards team has offered future support to GOJ for capacity 
building on environmental and social safeguards issues. This would take place during 
project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders/ beneficiaries of eventual construction of school works include 
technical contractors and the local community (leaders, teachers, and students). The 
MOE's Communications and Stakeholder Relations Division has already carried out 
consultations at all levels, and they are launching a national campaign to keep 
stakeholders informed about different aspects of the ESTP. Once agreed to, the 
environmental safeguards framework could be posted on the MOE's website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cynthia Hobbs 
09/18/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Holland 
09/18/2009 
Comments:   
