Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3780 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jamaica 
Project ID: P105122 
Project Name: Second National Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Ellen Hamilton 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Other industry (50%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Rural non-farm income generation (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
11.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
11.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to increase income and jobs in poor communities in 
selected rural areas. The focus of income generation interventions will be supported by increased 
agricultural competitiveness in small and medium farms, community-based tourism 
development, and strengthened linkages between agriculture and markets in general.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is expected to be a SIL and will have the following three components:  
 
Component 1: Rural Income Generation subprojects: These subprojects will provide matching 
grants for income and job generating activities in rural communities, with particular focus on 
post-harvest improvements and linkage to markets as well as a focus on community based 
tourism development. The specific combination of investments for producer groups in each 
community will be based on a business plan, to be developed using a stakeholder participation 
process and external technical assistance.  
 
Page  2
For agricultural interventions, the project will take a value chain approach to identify and assess 
appropriate markets and the technologies required at the post-harvest/pre-market level to produce 
and process competitive crops, livestock and fishery products.  The project would support 
collective infrastructure that improves post-harvest processing and market access such as 
collection, sorting and packing centers and storage facilities (e.g., cold storage).  Wherever 
possible, investments will be ecologically-friendly and sustainable manner (i.e., new storage 
facilities built underground can have and almost negligible carbon footprint would also partly 
mitigate risks from storms).  The project would also support community-level agricultural 
enterprise centers that can provide market intelligence and technical support for improving 
access to specific markets such as hotels, supermarkets, or food processors.  
 
For tourism interventions, the project will support the development of community-based 
tourism enterprises as part of an integrated rural development strategy. In the coastal regions 
there is already a menu of community-based products at various stages of development, but 
many of these initiatives are ad hoc and not well organized.  The proposed project plans to adopt 
a
more holistic approach to CBT interventions and address the upstream policy and strategy gap 
for CBT as well as the downstream support to individual community projects.  There are many 
potential products in the hinterland and scope exists to introduce these products to the coastal 
tourism markets in the form of excursions, tours and handicrafts. The project aims to use a 
participatory process of assessment to identify these potential products which may cover a range 
of themes including culture, events and festivals, crafts, cuisine and other local activities, scenic 
sites and accommodation capacity.  Based on the findings from this diagnostic process, 
interventions in product and market development will be selected with the overall objective of 
establishing sustainable enterprises that create jobs and raise rural incomes.  
 
Community Targeting/Beneficiaries: The direct beneficiaries of the agriculture and tourism 
activities are expected to be rural communities and rural producer groups comprising mainly (i) 
small farmers (with typically less than 5 acres of land for agriculture) and (ii) poor rural residents 
engaged in tourism related activities.  To meet the Objective of increasing rural incomes and 
enhancing economic opportunities, the direct target beneficiaries will not be limited to the most 
poor and vulnerable but will also include those immediately above them who can generate a 
surplus for the market and have potential to take advantage of new market opportunities.  The 
eligibility criteria for selecting the project’s subprojects and the communities/geographic areas to 
be targeted will be defined during preparation.  
 
Component 2: Technical assistance. The objective of this component is to provide technical 
assistance for various activities. Possible priorities for technical assistance include:  
 
1.
Development of strategies and generic business plans for accessing supply chains (in 
particular those related to agriculture and tourism activities) that can offer opportunities for small 
and medium farmers groups and enterprises in the targeted rural areas;  
 
2.
Skills enhancement to help implement the aforementioned business plans.  
 
3.
Research and development of specific interventions to be scaled up under Component 1 
to ensure economic, technical and social viability and sustainability;  
 
4.
Training and other institutional capacity development;  
 
5.
Outreach to youth and women; and  
Page  3
6. 
Limited and targeted support to related government agencies (for example RADA, 
TPDCo) involved in rural development.  
 
Component 3: Project management. This component will support the implementing agency by 
financing consultant services, goods, training and operating costs for management and 
administration, as well as monitoring and evaluation of project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Sub-projects will be identified in poor rural communities across Jamaica.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under previous Bank projects, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF) has established a set 
of steps and procedures for compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies, articulated in an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF), including sample mitigation plans for expected 
environmental impacts from various types of sub-projects.  
 
The ICR for the National Community Development Project (NCDP) finds that the EMF 
developed by JSIF complies with the requirements of Jamaican environmental laws and 
regulations as well as with the relevant policies of its funding agencies.  The EMF covers all 
projects financed by JSIF, not just NCDP.  
 
The ICR further states that to ensure the effectiveness of the EMF, JSIF implemented an 
Environmental Management System to identify, monitor and control environmental aspects. An 
external evaluation of subprojects under implementation in NCDP confirmed that guidelines 
were being followed and found that fewer than 20% showed minor potential environmental 
impacts that were easily mitigated.  
 
Also, JSIF is currently in the process of international certification for its environmental 
management through ISO 14001, which is the most stringent of international environmental 
standards. The ICR report also states that during NCDP, significant attention was also placed on 
environmental management issues, with the Bank supporting JSIF’s ISO accreditation process.  
 
New sub-projects under the proposed NCDP2 project will be screened through the established 
EMF. In order to adapt the environmental screening (with sample mitigation plans) for new types 
of sub-projects under NCDP2, a consulting firm is being hired to review JSIF’s existing EMF.  
 
Currently, a full-time Environmental Officer (EO) oversees all aspects of implementing the 
EMF (for various projects), including ongoing training and refresher courses for JSIF social and 
technical staff who work with communities, conduct site screenings and design mitigation 
measures at the subproject level. Environmental screening information is fully integrated into 
JSIF’s Monitoring Information System (MIS), and the EO plays and active role in reviewing and 
providing quality control (through follow-up site visits when necessary) on the screening and 
subsequent definition of necessary mitigation measures for each subproject.  
 
The project will be managed by a PIU (JSIF) that has limited experience with consultations. 
Thus the project has undertaken an assessment to identify the needs for capacity building  
Page  4
relating to the monitoring - of social impacts of the project, and to define the framework that will 
be followed to ensure participation, the adequacy of the consultations and community support for 
the project. It will also include the identification of key stakeholders, and the mechanism for 
consultations. These will help to mainstream social sustainability into capacity building.  
 
JSIF’s overall capacity to implement the required environmental and social impact measures 
will be reviewed during preparation of the proposed loan to evaluate whether it is sufficient to 
absorb the additional workload generated by the proposed project’s activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anjali Acharya (ENV) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project will support multiple small sub-projects, as such the size and nature of 
these projects are not expected to have a negative environmental impact or any involuntary 
resettlement activity. Environmental screening procedures have already been developed within 
JSIF, and will be applied to these sub-projects. Additionally, as the sub-projects will not involve 
involuntary settlement or indigenous peoples, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12 safeguard policies are not 
triggered for this project.   The project will ensure compliance with the Bank safeguard policies 
for small-scale infrastructure investments through the incorporation of specific guidelines in the 
Operational Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The sub-projects financed under the NCDP2 are not expected to have significant impacts on 
critical natural habitats. However, this policy has been triggered as a precaution. Environmental 
screening procedures have already been developed within JSIF, and during preparation, the EMF 
will be reviewed to ensure it screens sub-projects for impacts on natural habitats, with 
appropriate environmental management plans.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This policy has been triggered as agricultural sub-projects may contribute to the increased 
use of pesticides because of the intensification of the production of certain crops. This will be 
further investigated during preparation.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
One consultation, prior to appraisal, on the Environmental Management Framework.  
Documents for disclosure before appraisal: Environmental Management Framework.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ellen Hamilton 
11/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
11/26/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
