Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/04/2009 
Report No.:  AC4149
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P105036 
Project Name:  Second Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy 
Task Team Leader:  Francis Peter Buckland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (35%);Primary education (35%);Pre-primary education 
(30%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
122.14 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
117.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)17.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
2.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
111.36
370.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Second Education Reform for the Knowledge 
Economy Project (ERfKE II) is that "Students enrolled in all streams of pre-tertiary 
education in Jordan will acquire skills necessary for participation in the knowledge 
economy".   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Establishment of a National School-based Development System. The 
objective of this component is to establish a well functioning, school-based development 
process as the main vehicle to deliver to all young people of the Kingdom a quality 
education focused on developing the abilities, skills and attitudes associated with a 
knowledge based economy.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Policy, Planning, M&E and Organizational Development. The objective 
of this component is to build upon ERfKE I investments related to policy, planning and 
M&E, and to ensure that outputs from these activities fully support and inform the 
adoption of a school centered approach to the delivery of education services.  
 
Component 3: Teaching and Learning Resources. The objective of this component is to: 
review and further develop teacher employment, utilization and professional development 
policies and practices; and fine-tune curriculum and student assessment to ensure 
alignment with Knowledge Based Economy reforms continued from ERfKE I.  
 
Component 4: Special Focus Program Development. The objective of this component is 
to improve inclusive access to learning for all children in Jordan through special focus on 
three critical subsectors: Early Childhood Education, Special Education and Vocational 
Education.  
 
Component 5: Quality Physical Learning Environments. The objective of this 
component is improved provision of quality education facilities in a cost effective and 
sustainable manner so that students have access to environmentally friendly and 
efficiently operated quality physical learning environments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rural and urban areas   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental issues associated with project activities will be school construction-
related that are expected to be site-specific and temporary in nature. Activities will likely 
be associated with minor adverse environmental impacts that can be mitigated with the 
implementation of mitigation measures outlined in an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP).  The decision to select a given site would depend to a great extent on the 
feasibility of including mitigation measures to properly address environmental, social and 
cultural heritage issues that may be encountered during the design and implementation of 
the proposed project.  
 
On the social side, the Ministry of Education (MOE) carried out a school mapping 
exercise and concluded that out of the 82 new schools that will be constructed, land for 
80 of these schools is already owned by MOE. Sites identified for construction of two 
schools belong to private individuals. MOE has prepared a Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) 
for these two sites. The LAP will substitute for a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The 
LAP was reviewed for consistency with Bank Policy, and has been translated and 
disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project activities will not result in any long term impacts or irreversible impacts. Any 
negative environmental or social impact will be mitigated with the implementation of 
environmental measures as outlined in the EMP and in the LAP, respectively.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
generic EMP was prepared by the MOE and satisfactorily implemented during ERfKE 
I
project.  This EMP will be used as a guide for ERfKE II. The EMP was updated to 
reflect the proposed project by revising project description; project components; 
implementing arrangements; capacity of implementing agency; monitoring and reporting 
arrangements; EMP implementation costs; and consultation and disclosure. In addition to 
the generic EMP, site-specific environmental measures will be included in bidding 
documents for contractors.  
 
MOE will be responsible for the overall implementation of the project, and the Ministry 
of Public Works and Housing (MOPWH) will be responsible for the implementation of 
the civil works component. Directorate of Planning under MOE will be responsible for 
site selection and identification of needs. Directorate of Buildings and International 
Projects (DBIP) under MOE will be responsible for providing standard school designs. 
Page  4
DBIP will accomplish this in direct coordination with MOPWH, Government Building 
Directorate (MOPWH-GBD) that will be fully responsible for the implementation of all 
civil works contracts under the project. As collaboration between the two ministries 
(MOE and MOPWH) is fundamental to the satisfactory implementation of Component 5, 
the Operational Manual will detail the roles and responsibilities of each entity.  
 
MOPWH will implement the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and include site-
specific environmental measures in bidding documents for contractors. It is required that 
any construction work that is carried out should also comply with national regulations 
governing environment, pubic health and safety. The mission was informed that Jordan is 
a
member of FIDIC (Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs-Conseils) and the 
relevant clauses and sub-clauses will also be included in the bidding documents. 
Therefore any projects with planned civil works will apply FIDIC (International 
Federation of Consulting Engineers) guidelines as conditions of contract for construction. 
These guidelines include clauses and stipulations for the contractor which relate not only 
to environmental protection, but also to social issues relating to staff and labor (wages, 
conditions of labor, laws, working hours, health and safety, etc.).  
 
Furthermore, the Architectural and Engineering Guidelines dated September 2008 that 
was undertaken by ERfKE II will be applied during implementation of all civil works 
relating to Component 5.  These guidelines contain the required specifications for school 
design including number of classrooms, sanitation facilities, drinking and water fountains 
required depending on the students. It also defines the ratios of students-classroom, 
classrooms-sanitation facilities and students-drinking water fountains, in both urban and 
rural schools. Accordingly, standard school designs have been prepared by Ministry of 
Education - Directorate of Buildings and International Projects (MOE-DBIP) for ERfKE 
II that has taken all of the above into consideration.  
 
Effective implementation of the EMP and required clauses from FIDIC will ensure 
incorporation of environmental management measures during design and construction. 
However, it is essential that routine supervision of ongoing civil works is carried out by 
the implementing agency (through consultants) and compliance with environmental 
measures is recorded and included in progress reports that are submitted to the Bank. As 
MOPWH-GBD is responsible for all civil works contracts under ERfKE II; it will ensure 
effective application of environmental and social measures (Environmental Management 
Plan and Land Acquisition Plan). It is therefore responsible for undertaking routine 
supervision of ongoing civil works.  The GBD will apply the EMP as well as relevant 
FIDIC clauses and sub-clauses during implementation. The project has prepared a 
monitoring checklist to help MOPWH-GBD with supervision and monitoring, and for 
providing input into the monthly progress reports that it will submit to the DCU. In the 
monthly progress reports it will include details such as water supply and sanitation, 
drinking water, waste disposal, physical cultural resources and issues encountered in 
implementation of the EMP, if any. The DCU will use this information to assess 
compliance with environmental and social measures; and include a section on EMP 
progress update in reports that it will submit to the Bank on a bi-annual basis.  
 
Page  5
MoE had provided relevant training to its staff in proper administration of 
environmental and social concerns, both in terms of addressing environmental and social 
issues as well as the welfare of beneficiary communities during ERfKE I. These trained 
engineers from MoE have been transferred to MOPWH for the life of ERfKE II, which 
also helps with continuity of implementation. MOPWH will further enhance the capacity 
of its staff, as required on a need basis.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Concerned municipalities were consulted during the site selection for new schools. Sites 
for new construction were selected according to various criteria, including several 
environmental specifications such as geographic and topographic characteristics, 
suitability of soils and sub-soils, slope of land, presence or absence of important natural 
habitats, vulnerability to natural hazards, historic characteristics, access to electricity, 
sewer and water supply, and land ownership. Additionally, the Ministry of Environment, 
Jordan Water Authority and the Department of Antiquities were consulted to determine 
the specific requirements related to access roads and streets, availability of basic 
infrastructure services and requirements, and possible proximity to areas of cultural 
significance.  
 
The safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP 4.12) are triggered and accordingly, an Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) and Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) have been prepared by MOE. Both 
documents have been translated into Arabic.  Both English and Arabic versions are 
disclosed on specific government websites and other relevant places in-country, including 
project governorate offices.  These documents have also been disclosed at the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/18/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/19/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Peter Buckland 
02/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Samia Al-Duaij 
03/03/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
03/03/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
02/23/2009 
Comments:   
