Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4320 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/11/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P116200 
Project Name: Jordan Silos Extension 
Task Team Leader: Julian A. Lampietti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (100%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to expand the s
ize and improve the management of the Government’s 
strategic grain reserves.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Expanding grain storage facilities. This component would finance an additional 
220,000 MT of new storage to the existing facilities in Juweidah and Irbid. The capacity of the 
Juweidah complex would be increased by 120,000 MT and the Irbid complex by 100,000 MT. 
The new storage would be an extension of the existing facilities which already include sufficient 
supporting infrastructure such as office space, workshop space, weigh-bridges, and power and 
water connections. The additional storage space will consist of vertical concrete bins, handling 
systems for loading and unloading, and temperature control systems. This component will 
finance civil works, goods, and services.  
 
Component 2: Improving grain management. This component would automate the existing 
management system between and within the strategic grain reserves in Aqaba, Rassifya, 
Juweidah, and Irbid and the Ministry of Industry and Trade. The computerized management 
Page  2
system will facilitate maximization of use of available storage capacity, improve the rotation of 
stocks, and facilitate the harmonization of the quality of the stored products.  Improving the 
rotation is critical to maintaining stock quality and avoiding losses. The automated system may 
also improve the international tendering procedure by providing an earlier signal of when the 
procedure should be launched. Operating costs will be lowered by reducing the number of times 
stocks are handled and automating basic manual processes. This component will finance goods 
and services including information technology hardware, customized management information 
software, and training of staff in how to use the automated system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Of the 320,000 MT in facilities expansion, the Irbid (near the Syrian border) and Juweidah (near 
Amman) complexes require 220,000 MT of expansion, which are proposed for Bank financing.   
 
E.  Borrowe
r’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is not expected to trigger any major social and environmental safeguards. Both 
project sites are fully owned by the JSSGC and there is adequate space for expansion. They are 
located in industrial zones and far away from residential housing. There are no by-products 
produced as a result of grain storage. There is some internal handling of pesticides in order to 
fumigate the grain, but the project is expected to reduce the need for fumigation as stock rotation 
improves, and professional standards will be mandated. Jordanian law requires a full 
Environmental Impact Assessment of the project. The JSSGC will work with the World Bank to 
make sure that the assessment and necessary disclosure and consultations are undertaken in a 
timely manner.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is located in already existing industrial zones within Jordan and are at 
considerable distance from residential housing. As a result no major environmental impact are 
expected. There are no by-products produced as a result of grain storage. The Jordanian national 
environmental law requires a full Environmental Impact Assessment of the project. The JSSGC 
will work closely with the World Bank to make sure that the assessment and necessary 
disclosure and consultations are undertaken in a timely manner. An Environmental Management 
Plan will be produced delineating key issues, mitigation measures, roles and responsibilities and 
costs associated with mitigations. Particular attention will be given to disposal of construction 
waste and packaging material for imported goods. In addition, special attention will be given to 
air quality as a result of the planned activities once the project is completed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
There is some internal handling of pesticides in order to fumigate the grain, but the project is 
expected to reduce the need for fumigation as stock rotation improves, and professional 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
standards will be mandated. The Environmental Assessment will produce guidance on proper 
handling and storage of pesticides as well as safe disposal of used containers.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
They are located in industrial zones and previous construction on the sites did not uncover 
any chance finds, however, the team will revisit the sites to confirm this.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Both sites appear to be owned free and clear by the JSSGC and that there are no residences 
within the boundaries. They are already occupied by silos and there is sufficient space within the 
boudary of the site for expansion.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/07/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Jordan Silos and Storage Grain Company will launch  safeguard-related studies after the 
first preparation mission in May 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
04/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
04/28/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
