Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3658 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/16/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P105036 
Project Name: Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy II 
Task Team Leader: Francis Peter Buckland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (35%);Primary education (35%);Pre-primary education 
(30%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Graduates from all streams of pre-tertiary education in Jordan have acquired skills necessary for 
participation in the knowledge economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Elements  
 
The proposed Project will provide support to the education reform program in the following 
five areas:  (i) adopting a school and community centered approach to education program 
delivery; (ii) re-orienting policy formulation, planning, performance monitoring, and the 
associated institutional structures necessary to facilitate school and community centered program 
delivery; (iii) deepening and broadening the qualitative dimensions of all inputs into the teaching 
learning process; (iv) supporting further development of special focus programs, including early 
childhood education, vocational education and special education; and (v) provision of resources 
to ensure equitable  provision of safe and efficient infrastructure, designed to enhance the 
learning environment.  
Page  2
Project Components  
 
Project components are envisaged to include the following:  
 
Component 1:  School and Community Centered Program Delivery  
 
The purpose of this component is to enhance the quality of education through the adoption of a 
whole school approach and the engagement of field directorates, school principals, teachers, 
administrators, parents, and community partners in design and delivery of the education 
program. Interventions are expected to include:  (i) supporting the establishment and facilitation 
of school and education councils: (ii), supporting participatory design and implementation of 
school based development plans; (iii) facilitating the establishment of communities of practice; 
(iv) initiating cluster school approaches to remediation and staff development; and (v) sharing 
teaching and learning strategies and enhancement of the school environment.  Realigning roles 
and responsibilities from a hierarchical structure to one of support for shared decision making 
will be approached through the adoption of a rigorous and progressive system change process 
that addresses political support, leadership capacity, the institutional framework, institutional 
capacity, and financial and other resource requirements.  
 
Component 2:  Policy, Planning and Organizational Development  
 
The purpose of this component is to strengthen Government policy, planning and management 
capacity in order to support the achievement of quality learning outcomes at the school level.  
Adopting a system change approach to school and community centered program delivery will 
entail a reassessment of the extent to which the current organizational structure of the MoE most 
effectively supports the decentralization process.  The issue of organizational change will be 
addressed under this program component. In order to achieve the objectives of the component, 
MoE policy and planning procedures will be realigned to ensure the establishment of 
performance standards and equitable allocation of resources from the central level, while 
becoming increasingly responsive to the directorate, school, and community levels.  The ministry 
will realign and strengthen the respective functional units currently responsible for policy and 
planning and undertake capacity development initiatives to enable this group to serve as the focal 
point for facilitation of policy analysis and strategic planning for the education system.  
 
Performance monitoring will assume increased importance as decentralization measures are 
initiated.  In addition, increased timeliness and rigor in continuous assessment of learning 
outcomes will be required. To this end, internal and external monitoring and evaluation 
procedures will be strengthened to evaluate student, program, and sector performance.  The 
Educational Management Information System (EMIS) tool will be further developed to ensure a 
ready flow of data necessary to service the associated performance assessment monitoring.  
 
Component 3:  Teaching and Learning Resource Development  
 
The purpose of this component is to deepen and broaden interventions designed to support 
reorientation of all elements of the teaching and learning continuum that contribute to qualitative 
Page  3
improvement in learning outcomes.  The component will include review and transformation of 
policies and procedures related to teacher recruitment, employment, deployment, compensation 
and management, building on the initiatives in ERfKE I.  Teacher pre-service training will be 
strengthened through the introduction of a requirement that all new entrants must complete a two 
semester program of intensive orientation to best teaching/learning strategies linked to the 
development of knowledge economy skills.  Provision of in-service professional opportunities 
for teachers, school principals and administrators will be expanded at the local and central level.  
This objective will be supported through the establishment of a “National Institute for Learning 
and Leadership in Education” that will serve the following three purposes: (i) to serve 
asanational hub for the development and delivery of professional development programs to 
support excellence in teaching, learning and leadership; (ii) to provide opportunities for regional 
participation, partnership and exchange of best practice relating to teaching, learning and 
educational leadership in the Arab world; and (iii) to serve as a knowledge bank for the 
identification, assembly and dissemination of information relating to excellence in educational 
learning and leadership. Additional resources will also be provided under the project to expand 
access to relevant curriculum and learning resource materials.  
 
Component 4:  Special Focus Program Development  
 
This component will comprise three subcomponents to address:  (i) Early Childhood Education; 
(ii) Vocational Education; and (iii) Special Needs.  Anticipated interventions in these three areas 
are expected to include the following:  
 
Early Childhood Education (ECE)  
 
Early Childhood Education programming has made solid progress in ERfKE I reflected in the 
development of a National Curriculum, extensive teacher training, the construction and 
equipping of ECE classrooms and development and supply of education materials, introduction 
of quality assurance programs and the introduction of parent involvement initiatives.  
Recognizing the value arising from ECE programming, MoE is committed to expand access and 
support further development of the ECE sub-sector.  ERfKE II will provide resources to:  (i) 
enhance institutional development and further strengthen management and technical capacity; 
(ii) extend opportunities for professional development; (iii) continue expanding access to quality 
kindergartens; and (iv) support further development of parent and community involvement 
activities.  
 
Vocational Education  
 
The National Agenda has established clear expectations regarding rationalization and 
harmonization of the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) sector.  Under 
the guidance of the Employment and Technical Vocational Education and Training (E-TVET) 
Council established by the National Agenda, the Project will initiate the first phases of a program 
to realign the MoE secondary vocational stream with similar initiatives being undertaken by the 
Vocational Training Corporation (VTC) and the community colleges administered by Al-Balqa 
University.  This will include redeveloping the policy objectives for the vocational stream and 
undertaking a realignment of the program framework in accordance with these objectives.  
Page  4
Following endorsement by the E-TVET Council, MoE will divest itself of all programs that are 
inconsistent with agreed objectives, and focus energies and resources on the development of 
institutions and programs that are compatible with the objectives.  The specific scope and range 
of activities will be influenced by the pace at which wider reform of the system proceeds, and 
attention will be directed at those reforms and measures that will make the most significant 
contribution towards laying the foundation for a substantial and ongoing reform program.  
 
Special Needs  
 
The National Agenda calls upon MoE to place increased effort on the provision of appropriate 
educational opportunity for children with special needs.  A working group has been established 
and an intervention proposed for implementation under ERfKE II.  This would include:  (i) a 
review and updating of policies, procedures and practices leading to legislation and by-laws to 
support special education in all exceptionalities; (ii) reorganization of the responsible 
Directorate; (iii) revision and qualitative improvement of learning programs, resources and 
facilities; (iv) implementing teacher training programs; and (v) launching a community 
awareness initiative.  
 
Component 5:  Quality Physical Learning Environment  
 
Population growth coupled with external factors results in a need to continue to expand the 
school construction program in order to ensure expanded access to primary and secondary 
education.  Similarly, Information and Communication Technology (ICT)-related infrastructure 
needs to be expanded and enhanced together with the provision of equipment for science 
laboratories that will provide access to a rich and quality physical learning environment for all 
children.  Studies, currently under way, that assess the current situation regarding access to and 
utilization of physical facilities and ICT and other learning resources will provide a basis for 
rehabilitation, extensions and new construction, plus prioritized provision of equipment and 
learning resources for schools.  Recognizing that planning will be essential in targeting 
rehabilitation, extension and new construction, the provision will be based on credible planning 
criteria.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Jordan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
NA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
EA will be conducted during preparation/pre-appraisal missions.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
September/October 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Peter Buckland 
06/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
06/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
06/06/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
