Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC3177
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P093201 
Project Name:  Promotion of a Wind Power Market 
Task Team Leader:  Reynold Duncan 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
130.00
137.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the project is to help create a sustainable wind power market in 
Jordan in order to increase the supply of electricity in an environmentally sustainable 
way.  This would be achieved by overcoming barriers to windfarm development, such as 
gaps in the legal and regulatory framework that restrict or slow down wind power 
development.  Also, an inadequate tariff; lack of institutional capacity and information on 
wind resources, and lack of knowledge, especially in the financial sector about wind 
energy and how to evaluate the risks involved in lending for this type of activity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of the following four main components:  
 
Component 1 (US$130 million):  Promotional wind farm development on a BOO basis, 
comprising a 60-70 MW wind farm and wind energy converter, for which the GEF grant 
will provide a performance-based subsidy.  
 
Page  2
Component 2 (US$6.5 million):  A fund for renewable energy will be established to 
channel performance-based subsidy and other financing support for wind power 
promotion.  
 
Component 3 (US$3 million):  Technical assistance aimed to assist with barrier removal 
in wind energy development; the critical focus being on enhancement of the legal and 
regulatory framework, tapping financing from the thriving local market and enhancing 
knowledge on the benefits of renewable energy in general and wind energy in particular.  
 
Component 4 (US$2.4 million): Project development support that will provide a 
contingent funding designed to promote market development for renewable energy 
beyond the proposed project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed site lies to the north east of the town of Shawbak, in the area of Maan. The 
area of land potentially available for the project covers some 3 km2 and is public. The 
land is owned by the Ministry of Agriculture. The site is bound to the south by a 
telecommunications facility that comprises a single ca 200 m radio mast and associated 
buildings and infrastructure.  To the north the site is bordered by a petrol filling station 
and a small Jordanian Army base and to the east by a road (Kings Highway) and then 
arable farm land (wheat fields). To the west of the site the topography falls rapidly to the 
west.  The closest houses not including any located at the army base are located on the 
southern edge of Rhashadya to the north of the site. The site is currently unused.  There is 
no farming on the proposed site which is fenced off from the general public.  There are 
no known access rights to the proposed site that could affect the project in any way.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSSD) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An environmental and social baseline assessment was concluded in August 2007 and 
found no significant issues with regard to the environmental and social impacts of the 
proposed wind farm.  The assessment recommends additional survey work be undertaken 
to assess the potential impact during the bird migratory seasons of Autumn and Spring.  
 
The proposed site is located away from surface water courses, wells, local residences 
and businesses.  The landscape is rural and the existing road infrastructure in the areas is 
deemed adequate to transport wind farm equipment and accessories.  There are a number 
of archaeologically interesting sites at the proposed site, although proper placement of 
turbines can sufficiently mitigate adverse impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Limited.  Upon construction completion, it is envisaged that only security personnel will 
be on site to protect the wind farm from potential vandalism.  The operation and 
maintenance of the wind farm is expected to be performed by off site personnel.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are considered to be few alternatives to the proposed wind farm that would meet 
the project
’s global objective.  Whatever hydropower potential Jordan has, has been 
developed already, and the capital cost of large-scale solar power remains a less viable 
option. Wind offers the most viable alternative to achieve the government's target of 4 per 
cent renewables in its energy mix by 2015.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The government prepared a Resettlement Policy and Environmental Framework in 
August 2007. The successful bidder will be required to undertake the preparation of an 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental and Social Monitoring and 
Mitigation Plan (EMMP) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the specific 
project site and in accordance with the laws of Jordan, Bank and IFC guidelines, and will 
be responsible for implementing EMMP and RAP. The findings of the August 2007 
assessments will be made available to all qualified bidders.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the people who could be affected by the project close to the 
project site.  Others are the GOJ, represented by the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of 
Environment who will review the EMMP, the project developer (to be identified) and the 
power off-taker, NEPCO. At the scoping stage consultations were made these 
representatives (except the developer) at the offices of the off-taker. Future consultation 
Page  4
and disclosure shall be in accordance with a consultation plan prepared in August 2007, 
including house to house meetings with local residents and disclosure of documents at 
locations easily accessible to the affected communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/12/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/12/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
Page  5
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Reynold Duncan 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
