Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3207 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P104960 
Project Name: JO-AMMAN SOLID WASTE 
Task Team Leader: Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
4.50
4.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to enhance the quality and the 
environmental and economic performances of municipal solid waste management in Amman 
City by (i) improving the efficiency and service standards of solid waste collection and transfer 
services; (ii) upgrading/expanding the existing semi controlled landfill and use of landfill gas 
(LFG) to produce electricity; and (iii) assist the Greater Amman Municipality (GAM) in 
benefiting from Clean Development Mechanism and accessing the international carbon market.  
 
Indicators to be used to measure the success of the proposed project include: (i) percentage 
reduction in unit cost (JD/ ton of waste) of solid waste management (collection, transport and 
disposal); (ii) percentage of municipal waste collected and disposed in environmental and social 
acceptable manner; (iii) revenues/year raised through the sale of carbon emission reductions and 
electricity; (iv) percentage increase in revenues as a proportion of landfilling costs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Infrastructure (US$20.0 million) which will consist of: (a) expanding the existing 
landfill disposal capacity with addition of landfill cells, including leachate treatment and proper 
landfill gas management systems; (b) design, construction and equipment of two transfer stations 
for MSW; (c) design, supply, installation, commissioning and initial operation of a landfill gas 
Page  2
(LFG) to power facility at the Al Ghabawi landfill site.  Initial estimates show that on 
commencement of operation in 2009 there would be sufficient gas to generate about 4.5 MW on 
a
continuous basis (4.5MWe) from the first cell, increasing to about 7MWe by 2012 with 
commencement of gas conveyance from the second cell. Subcomponents a) and b) would be 
designed so as to achieve the optimal combination of unit size and phasing to match the 
envisaged landfill expansion plan, and avoid idle power capacity due to insufficient landfill gas 
capture.  
 
The implementation of this component should result in upgraded and enhanced municipal waste 
transfer, and disposal facilities as well as capture and LFG use and electricity production.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (US$2.0 million) which 
will consist of: (a) assistance and studies for improved efficiency and standards of solid waste 
service, promotion of recycling activities and private sector participation in GAM areas; (b) 
establishment of information management and monitoring systems for improved management of 
solid waste services; (c) establishment of a cost accounting and financial management system for 
improved cost recovery; (d) design and implementation of a public awareness and 
communication program on SWM; and (e) GAM capacity building for managing and monitoring 
Clean Development Mechanism activities. The expected results of implementing this component 
include: improved managerial and technical capacities of GAM leading to better planning, 
implementation, and monitoring of municipal solid waste services in Amman City; and improved 
financial management system of SWM with reduced costs and increased revenues.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (US$0.5 million).  This component will support all project 
management activities, including technical issues, procurement, and financial management.  
 
The project would be financed by a US$18 million IBRD loan to the municipality of Amman, 
which would contribute with US$4.5 million in counterpart funding; as agreed with the Ministry 
of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC) and with the Ministry of Finance, the IBRD 
loan to GAM would be guaranteed by the central Government of Jordan.  
 
In parallel with preparation of the proposed project, the World Bank (Carbon Finance Unit) will 
assist GAM in the development of the related CDM project. The World Bank would purchase 
part of the Carbon Emissions reductions generated by the project in the period 2009-2015 for an 
amount to be finalized at ERPA stage, which is at present estimated at about US$15 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All investments planned under the proposed project will be located in Greater Amman 
Municipality areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Jordan has prepared Category A projects in accordance to Bank standards in 
the past.  The Ministry of Environment is in charge of the EIA system in Jordan including the 
review and approval of EIA studies. Current Borrower institutional capacity in terms of 
environmental and social safeguards as well as the MoE will be reviewed during the upcoming 
preparation mission. The outcomes of such a review will help identify areas of improvements 
along with recommendations to enhance the existing capacity.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
ESIA study under preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Will be confirmed under the ongoing ESIA study   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/16/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The borrower has initiated the preparation of an Environment and Social Assessment that 
meets Bank and Government requirements. Terms of References of the ESIA study have 
been reviewed and approved by the Bank. The final report should be ready before the 
appraisal mission.  
 
In terms of meeting the requirement of the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP/BP 4.12), it 
will be determined, early on in the preparation process, and based on the results of a 
feasibility study currently under way, if any private land will need to be acquired for the 
construction of transfer stations. In that case, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) will be 
prepared.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raffaello Cervigni 
03/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
