Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/30/2007 
Report No.:  AC3278
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P100534 
Project Name:  Jordan Employer Driven Skills Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Soren Nellemann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (100%) 
Theme:  Improving labor markets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.10
2.10 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Enhance the internal and external efficiency of the E-TVET sector to make it more 
flexible and demand driven through the development of employer community 
participation in (i) sector policy formulation; (ii) institutional development and reform; 
and (iii) skill development program design and delivery.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will implement the following activities: (i) making effective the participation 
of the employers in the planned ETVET Council through wide capacity building; (ii) 
increasing the interaction of employers in skill development through their active role in 
occupational profiling, definition of related competences, program design and delivery, 
and certification, (iii) turn the TEF Fund into an efficient mechanism for effective use of 
the financial resources, with active role of employers, and (iv) create the conditions for 
increasing the relevance and quality of the TVET, especially at the level of VTC. From 
the perspective of the beneficiaries the focus is on increased employability through 
increased relevance of qualifications.  At the policy and system management level, the 
development issue is to establish a functioning dialogue between governmental, public 
entities and the employers, and to make this dialogue effective and result-oriented.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
NA   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud (MNSSD) 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNACS) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
NA   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
NA   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NA   
 
Page  3
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Soren Nellemann 
11/30/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
11/30/2007 
Comments:  The project was transferred to the Team during the PCN, April 2007. 
