Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3614
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P104960 
Project Name:  JO-AMMAN SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND CARBON 
FINANCE 
Task Team Leader:  Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
21.50
21.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The development objectives of the proposed project are to strengthen the 
operational, financial, and environmental performance of MSWM in Amman.  
Specifically, the project will help achieve the following:  
 
(i) 
  Environmentally upgrade and expand the existing municipal solid waste landfill 
to meet the city’s disposal needs up to 2013 and generate electricity while mitigating 
GHGs; and  
 
(ii) 
Improve the cost effectiveness of the existing municipal solid waste collection 
and transport system and improve overall cost recovery.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development:  This component 
will finance technical assistance and capacity building activities benefiting GAM 
departments involved in the planning, development, operation, and evaluation of MSW 
services. This component, which will build on the recommendations regarding 
organizational restructuring in the Master Plan, will include: (i) support for strategic 
planning in SWM systems including collection, recycling, sorting, transfer and 
landfilling; (ii) support for piloting private sector participation in SWM services in GAM; 
Page  2
(iii) development of information systems to track technical, environmental and financial 
performance of MSW services; and (iv) development and implementation of a public 
information, education, and communication program.  
 
This component will also finance (a) technical assistance to GAM in operating the 
landfill site and monitoring the LFG recovery contract; and (b) engineering services for 
supervising all civil works contracts, including construction of cell 3 and upgrade of the 
existing leachate treatment facility.  
 
Component 2:  Infrastructure Development: This component  includes three 
subcomponents aimed at improving the cost recovery and effectiveness of disposal and 
transfer, strengthening management and capacity expansion of the existing landfill, and 
using LFG to generate electricity.  The investment activities are:  
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Landfill construction and upgrade of leachate treatment facility:  
The sub-component would finance civil works construction of cell 3 at the existing Al 
Ghabawi landfill and the upgrading of the existing leachate treatment facility.  
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Construction of two transfer stations:  Under this sub-component, 
the project will expand the transfer system by financing the construction and equipment 
of two new transfer stations to service the North and South-east areas of Amman. These 
two facilities aim at increasing the proportion of MSW transported through transfer 
station from 75% to 95% and thereby reducing the cost of both collection and transfer of 
municipal wastes in Amman.  
 
Sub-component 2.3:  Design, Build and Construction of an LFG recovery system: Under 
this sub-component, the project will finance the design, supply, installation, 
commissioning and initial operation for 5 year of an LFG recovery system (extraction of 
LFG and energy generation) for cells 1, 2, and 3 at al Ghabawi landfill.  The sub-
component will also include final capping of these cells as well as upgrading of the 
leachate drainage system in order to maximize LFG recovery.The total capacity of the 
power plant to be installed during the project period will be 6 MW. Implementation of 
this sub-component will also enable income generation from the sale of CERs and 
electricity.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management. This component will finance necessary technical 
assistance to the Project Management Unit (PMU), which is being established to 
undertake the day-to-day management of the project.  The technical assistance to the 
PMU will facilitate the PMU’s overall supervisory, coordinating, and monitoring role.  
 
Attached Carbon Finance Operation: The World Bank has entered into an agreement 
with GAM to purchase part of the CERs resulting from the project, amounting 0.9 million 
tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2e) of CERs from 2009 to 2014. It should be pointed out that 
in accordance with rules governing the CDM, a portion of the carbon revenues is to be 
allocated to sustainable development. GAM has already agreed with the MoE that 15% of 
the carbon revenues will be allocated to support pollution abatement activities as part of 
the Environment Protection Funds Program housed at and managed by the MoE.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All investments planned under the proposed project will be located in Greater Amman 
Municipality.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
According to the ESIA report, the proposed project will have a strong positive impact on 
the overall environment of the project area while addressing global environmental issues 
i.e. mitigating Greenhouse Gas (GHG). It will particularly address the deficit in 
municipal solid waste disposal capacity; improve disposal practices, and address related 
gas and leachate management issues, and hence mitigating negative impacts of the 
existing disposal facility on environment and natural resources.  
 
The project will contribute to global climate mitigation agenda through the reduction of 
2.8 million tons of CO2eq during a 20 year period while generating 240,000 MWh 
electricity by 2014 and will mobilizing additional revenues that will be used to enhance 
solid waste cost recovery in Amman and to financially support sustainable development 
activities through allocation of 15% of 
carbon revenues to Jordan’s Environmental 
Protection Fund.  
 
Other substantial benefits are related to the rationalization of collection and transfer of 
municipal solid waste in GAM. The operation of the two planned transfer stations in 
conjunction with the existing ones will reduce the distance of within city trips the overall 
trips made to the landfill. This will decrease affecting traffic levels which will have a 
positive impact on the road and streets users of the surrounding areas  
 
Page  4
Major adverse impacts associated with the project are: Leachate management and 
polluting discharge; odor, and gas emissions. The design of the proposed project took 
into consideration these potential impacts and appropriate mitigation measures are ready 
part of the project.  
 
Other impacts: Adverse environmental impacts during the construction phase might be 
significant; however, they are short term, reversible and unlikely to be significant. 
Typical impacts are noise nuisances, air pollution due to dust formation, safety hazard 
from construction of activities, etc.  Good construction practices will be included in the 
bidding documents of the project and would mitigate most of these temporary impacts to 
acceptable levels.  
 
The Project is not expected to have serious social issues. However, since the location of 
the two transfer stations financed by the project has not yet been decided, the project may 
result in resettlement and/or land acquisition.  O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was 
therefore triggered, and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The anticipated long term impacts are very limited. They would include (i) groundwater 
pollution from uncontrolled leachate generation and consequently, increase of odors at 
the landfill and surrounding areas; (ii) potential contamination of soil, sub-soil and 
groundwater from undetected liner leakage; and (iii) potential risk of accidental spills and 
discharges, fires or other accidents at the transfer stations and the landfill.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
An analysis of alternatives was carried out during the ESIA preparation. A number of the 
key alternatives have been included in this report as potential options to be implemented 
for each project component. For each alternative, the potential benefits and impacts 
resulting from its implementati
on
have been identified. The ‘no-project’ scenario would 
result in continuing with the current negative environmental consequences at Ghabawi 
including odors nuisance, soil and water contamination because of the lack of disposal 
capacity; poor design and management of leachate and treatment facility; and potential 
fire risks due to the absence of landfill gas venting system, etc.  
 
Waste management alternatives such as centralization and decentralization of landfill in 
several areas of GAM were considered, with the conclusion that the current management 
option of centralization, given the generally low capacity of local authorities outside 
Amman, their limited budgets, and the lack of experienced engineering staff in the Solid 
Waste Management sector, represents the best approach.  
 
Regarding SW transfer procedures and management, the option of constructing 2 new 
transfer stations is also considered as a positive alternative for improving the existing 
conditions. In addition, alternatives for treatment activities at the landfill were examined. 
Upgrading the Leachate Treatment Plant and constructing the Landfill Gas to Energy 
Page  5
Plant, which is the full project alternative, provides the best overall reduction in negative 
environmental impacts. For the Leachate Treatment Plant, the most effective approach is 
a
combination of several treatments since the proposed treatments will not be effective 
individually.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
All the mitigation and monitoring measures proposed as above mentioned have been 
defined for each of the construction and operation phases.  The different entities 
responsible for various aspects of the project and Solid Waste Management have been 
defined and the specific role of each of them clarified, in order to set out the 
responsibilities of each entity.  
 
The Environmental and Social Management Plan () specifies appropriate environmental 
management and supervision mechanisms, mitigation measures, an environmental 
monitoring plan, training activities and budget allocation necessary to implement the 
proposed mitigation measures and to strengthen the Borrower’s capacity in term of 
environmental management. The incremental costs for implementing the  was estimated 
at US$ 490,000. The  will be closely monitored during supervision missions, and will be 
presented as part of progress reports submitted by GAM.  
 
In particular, considering the fact that the sites for the two new transfer stations have not 
been selected yet although the related site selection analysis is being conducted and 
subsequently a simplified environmental assessment process including public 
consultation will be carried out prior to construction. The ESIA report will be 
subsequently disclosed in a manner acceptable by the Bank.  
 
A
Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established, to be in charge of the 
management of the project. As part of its mandate to monitor project implementation, the 
PMU, in close coordination with GAM’s Health and Environment Department, will 
ensure the implementation of the mitigation measures and will address any additional 
issues that may be identified during project implementation. A part time environmental 
specialist will be hired during project implementation to assist the PMU in supervising 
the implementation of the ESMP. During appraisal, GAM has committed to implement 
the ESMP, and related cost was reflected in the overall project budget.  
 
An area of concern regarding social impact is the situation of waste pickers during waste 
collection. Although there is no established waste picker in the landfill site and at the the 
existing transfer stations, they do go through waste discarded by residents and businesses 
to collect items of value and very few (less than 5-10 persons) cross illegally the fences 
of the landfill at night. Component 1 of the Project includes support for the promotion of 
recycling activities as part of PSP development, as well as the design and implementation 
of a public awareness and communication program.  As part of an ongoing PSP study 
managed by the Jordanian Executive privatization commission in close coordination with 
GAM, an estimate of the number of waste pickers involved, where they work, 
Page  6
organization, what is being picked, links to middle-men, potential sources of conflict, the 
role of NGOs, etc.  
 
Based on the findings of the survey and recommendations of the EPC-managed study, 
follow-up activities should be considered with the aim of improving the current situation 
of the waste pickers at the collection sites. This would potentially allow for better 
organized participation of the poorest sections of the population as well as improved 
recycling by linking waste picking and recycling activities. The study will further explore 
options with regard to the hiring of waste pickers for the collection and sorting of the 
recyclable materials. Options should be based upon the findings of the socio-economic 
survey, but may include the formalization of current activities, e.g., by giving waste 
pickers licenses, as has successfully been done elsewhere. The role of the private sector, 
civil society and GAM would have to be clarified at a later stage. However, in view of 
the intention of GAM to privatize SWM, links to the private sector should be given 
particular attention in the EPC study.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the ESIA preparation, the borrower consulted with stakeholders twice.  The first 
round of consultation took place during the scoping stage of the ESIA and was held on 
February 5th  2008.  This meeting helped the environmental consultants define the scope 
of work, and focus on the most relevant environmental and social issues, through 
feedback of the participating stakeholders.  
 
An appropriately advertised second public consultation took place on June 12, 2008 and 
was attended by sector ministries and GAM officials, NGO representatives and local 
population, This meeting followed by the appraisal mission has  allowed the finalization 
of the ESIA.  The final ESIA approved by the Bank will be disclosed in country and 
through the Infoshop as the final ESIA for this project" .   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/07/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/07/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/07/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  8
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
06/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
06/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
06/30/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
06/30/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
06/30/2008 
Comments:   
