Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/13/2009 
Report No.: 49497   
 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P108850 
Project Name:  Al-Qatrana Power 
Task Team Leader:  Vladislav Vucetic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 6, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:   
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Regulation and 
competition policy (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00 
 IBRD 
Guarantee 
50.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
406.00
466.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Al Qatrana project will provide a reliable, secure, and efficient electricity supply that 
is critical to sustaining economic growth and social development in Jordan. Jordan 
clearly needs the projects capacity as the existing generation capacity of about 2,500 MW 
is at the level of the current (and growing) peak demand, leaving the system without 
adequate reserve margin, which is normally required to be about 10-15 percent of peak 
demand.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes development, construction, ownership, and operation and 
maintenance of a new 373-MW combined-cycle gas turbine (CCGT) power plant by 
Qatrana Electric Power Company, a single-purpose joint company owned by subsidiaries 
of Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) and Xenel Industries Limited, a Saudi 
Arabian investor. The power station will be constructed on a site located at Al Qatrana, 
about 90 kilometers south of Amman and 250 km north of Aqaba. The plant will use as 
primary fuel natural gas imported from Egypt through the Arab Gas Transmission 
Pipeline (AGTP) and distillate fuel oil as a back-up. The National Electric Power 
Page  2
Company (NEPCO) will be responsible for purchasing and supplying natural gas and 
distillate fuel oil to the power plant and will purchase all of its electrical output through a 
25-year power purchase agreement. The plant will be of a traditional design with two gas 
turbines (Siemens-supplied STG-2000E GT with rated capacity of 168 MW), two heat 
recovery steam generators, one steam generator (130 MW, supplied by Skoda), an air-
cooled condenser, and other associated equipment and structures. Operation of the plant 
will be subcontracted to the Korea Southern Power Company, Ltd., a wholly owned 
subsidiary of KEPCO. The maintenance services will be subcontracted for the first 6 
years of operation to Korea Plant Services & Engineering Co., 80-percent owned 
subsidiary of KEPCO. NEPCO will connect the plant to the power system through a 500-
meters long 132-kV electrical transmission line. Two options are considered for 
connecting the plant to the AGTP: (i) #hot-tapping# into the AGTP next to the power 
plant site, which would involve installing a new valve in the AGTP and connecting the 
power plant through a short  new pipeline of few hundred meters that would go through 
government-owned land; or (ii) construction of a new 12-inch pipeline that would  run in 
parallel to the AGTP to the already built-in AGTP connection station in Al Sultani area, 
about 22 km south of the power plant site. Final decision on which option to choose is 
expected to be made in the Summer 2009. NEPCO will finance gas connection, including 
the cost of the 22-km gas pipeline, which # if that option is selected --  will be 
constructed by Fajr, the gas company operating the AGTP in Jordan. Water will be 
supplied by Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ), which will construct and own an 
approximately two-kilometer long water pipeline from a pumping station on the water 
main line to the delivery point at the project site.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Al Qatrana project site enjoys a number of strategic advantages due to its proximity 
to main road, substation, gas connection, water connection, and absence of any 
encroacher/squatter on or near the site. The site is an uneven and a barren land with no 
evidence of any past or current residential, agriculture, or commercial activities to 
indicate any major environment contamination or social issue. The nearest habitation is 
about two kilometers away which extends into the town of Al Qatrana, about three 
kilometers from the site. The proposed power plant will not generate major quantities of 
solid wastes. Small quantities of non-toxic solid waste, when generated, will be recycled, 
reused, or disposed through a licensed contractor in a scientific manner in an authorized 
landfill. The plant will be constructed in conformance with Jordanian building and 
architectural codes. Given the site layout, the building structures are designed to 
minimize adverse visual impacts. The site management will have an emergency 
management plan, which will outline the preparedness and response in case of 
environmental emergencies or fire accidents due to operation or site storage of flammable 
material. There is no evidence of any cultural properties or structures of archeological 
importance within 5 km of the site, or along the gas pipeline route, but project 
implementation arrangements will include chance finds protocol.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Julie G. Viloria-Williams (SASDA) 
Page  3
Mr Sanjay Srivastava (SARDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) indicates that the project 
activities are not likely to result in adverse impacts that are significant, cumulative, or 
irreversible. The environment and social impacts due to power evacuation will be 
minimal as the evacuation of electric power generated at the power station will be 
through a 400/132 kV substation located adjacent to the site along the southern boundary, 
owned and operated by NEPCO. The existing substation does not use transformer oil or 
condensers containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB, a known carcinogen); does not 
need to replace batteries or transformer oil; has a proper spill management and fire 
emergency management system; and does not house non-operational staff at the site. The 
environmental impact of construction of approximately 22-km gas pipeline -- if this gas 
connection option is selected -- and 2-km water pipeline connections will be managed by 
implementation of occupational health and safety measures outlined in the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). The social impact resulting from the limited land acquisitions 
for gas pipeline construction will be mitigated through implementation of an Abbreviated 
Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP), to be prepared if the pipeline is to be built.  
 
The dispersion modeling exercise shows that the emission levels will be within the 
Jordanian and World Bank limits.  The maximum predicted NOx concentration (of 0.207 
ppm with distillate fuel oil or 0.2058 ppm with gas) will be lower than Jordanian standard 
(of 0.210 ppm). This also conforms to the World Bank ambient air quality standards. The 
maximum predicted SO2 concentration (0.04012 ppm with gas) will be lower than 
Jordanian standard (of 0.300 ppm) and the World Bank ambient air quality standards. 
Monitoring results indicate that H2S levels exceeds Jordanian standards by 12.9 percent 
(of 24-hour average) and by 1.2 percent (hourly average), indicating noncompliance with 
the local laws. Since the project will not emit any H2S and the World Bank does not have 
guidelines/standards on H2S levels in the ambient air, the city government will be 
responsible to identify the source and prepare a plan to mitigate its adverse impact. 
Page  4
Relative to dust levels, TSP levels exceed the Jordanian limits (daily limit 260 ug/m3). 
These higher levels of TSP and PM10 are reportedly due higher level of ambient dust in 
the area, which is characterized by a desert like landscape and vulnerable to dust storms. 
CO levels were observed to be below the Jordanian standards (9 ppm 8-hour average and 
26 ppm 1-hour average). The noise model shows for a worst case scenario (with all 
power turbines operational) that night time noise levels from the power plant could be 
exceeded by about 1 dB(A).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not involve the displacement of local people. However, OP 4.12 
Involuntary Resettlement is triggered due to the possible construction of a new twenty-
two-kilometer underground gas connection pipeline linked to the gas delivery junction. A 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed that would guide 
the preparation of an ARAP, once decision on gas connection option is made. A draft 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the prospective 22-km gas pipeline has 
been completed, but some additional work will be needed to determine the exact routing 
of the gas pipeline, which would allow ARAP to be finalized and disclosed if the pipeline 
is to be constructed.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The site selection was made on the basis of power system configuration considerations 
(the need to add generation support between Aqaba and Amman), the vicinity of the 
necessary infrastructure: electricity and gas networks, water supply, and road access, and 
the limited environmental and social impacts.  The site does not have a history of any 
past or current residential, agriculture, or commercial activities to indicate any major 
environment contamination or social issue.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The responsibility for implementing the mitigation measures for the power plant will be 
with Qatrana Electric Power Company, while NEPCO will be responsible for the 
electricity transmission, water, and gas connections. NEPCO will assign staff for this 
purpose, including for implementation of an agreed RPF and ARAP. Qatrana Electric 
Power Company, represented by its project manager, will be responsible for 
implementation of EMP and RPF aspects through its contractors, consultants, and other 
specialists during construction, operation, and decommissioning. NEPCO will coordinate 
with other entities within Jordan, including Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, 
the Ministry of Environment, the Water Authority of Jordan, and the gas company. 
Overall coordination of project activities over the life of the project will be the 
responsibility of a Joint Coordinating Committee, comprising Qatrana Electric Power 
Company and NEPCO staff, as provided for in the Power Purchase Agreement. The 
committees responsibilities will include ensuring that the EMPs, RPF, and ARAP for the 
proposed project and the associated infrastructure are implemented in a coordinated 
manner.   
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholders consultation was held both during the project scoping and after 
finalizing the key findings and EMP. The consultation endorsed that the key social 
impacts of the project are likely to be positive and will include: (i) continued good quality 
of electricity supply through the provision of adequate generation capacity from an 
efficient source; (ii) increased jobs and employment opportunities to the communities 
around the project area as well as skilled staff in other parts of the country, both during 
the construction period and during operation; (iii) improved social services due to better 
access to electricity leading, in turn, to better community education, health, and other 
community facilities; and (iv) confirmed changes in the community and local government 
attitude toward partnership and collaboration with Qatrana Electric Power Company 
through carrying out a corporate social responsibility program, which should integrate 
social and environmental concerns in their business and emphasize interaction with the 
community.  
 
The ESIA report has been disclosed locally on NEPCOs website and is easily 
accessible.  It has also been disclosed through the World Bank InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/19/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/19/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/19/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vladislav Vucetic 
07/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
07/09/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
07/09/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
07/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
07/09/2009 
Comments:   
