Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.47351 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/27/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P108850 
Project Name: JO-AL QATRANA POWER PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Vladislav Vucetic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00 
 IBRD 
Guarantee 
50.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
406.00
466.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to help meet the electricity needs of the country in an economically and 
environmentally sustainable manner. The Bank’s IBRD PRG aims at providing additional 
comfort to private investors and, thus, helping the GoJ to attract private investment and reduce 
cost of financing. The outcome of the selection process for project sponsors demonstrates that 
the PRG achieved that objective. Now that a successful bidder has been selected in reliance on 
the Bank’s term sheet, the Bank needs to proceed with due diligence and appraisal of the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project consists of 373-MW gas-fired combined-cycle power station to be 
developed, owned, and operated by a private-sector project company. It is expected that the 
power plant will consist of two (2) gas turbine-generators, two (2) heat recovery steam 
generators (HRSGs) and one (1) steam turbine-generator.  
The proposed contractual structure of the transaction will be appraised to ensure that it is 
consistent with industry standards with respect to the allocation of commercial, technical, and 
political risks among the parties in a limited recourse project financing structure.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
The power station will be constructed on a site located at Al Qatrana, Jordan (approximately 90 
km south of Amman, 250 km north of Aqaba and within 3 kilometers from the town of Qatrana).  
The project site is within close proximity to the existing Arab Gas Pipeline, which will transport 
natural gas from Egypt to be used as the main fuel source. Distillate fuel oil will serve as backup 
fuel for emergency operations only; the backup fuel will be transported by truck on existing road 
infrastructure and stored at an on-site storage to be constructed, owned, operated and maintained 
by the project company.  The water for steam generation will be provided by the Water 
Authority of Jordan. An existing water pipeline passes close to the proposed site. 
 
The site will be leased from the Ministry of Finance/Department of Lands and Survey and 
prepared by the project company.   
 
The evacuation of electric power generated will be through a 400/132 kV NEPCO’s substation 
owned, and operated by NEPCO and located adjacent to the site. The interface point(s) between 
the Project Company’s scope and NEPCO’s scope is envisioned to be at the 132 kV high voltage 
bushings of the main power transformers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Jordan has prepared Category A projects to Bank standards in the past, most 
notably the Amman East Power Plant Project.  The Ministry of Environment is in charge of the 
EIA system in Jordan including the review and approval of EIA studies. The Al Qatrana Power 
Plant Project ESIA will be prepared by independent experts engaged by the successful bidder.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava (SARDE) 
Ms Julie G. Viloria-Williams (MNSSD) 
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The successful bidder will be responsible for preparation of an Environment and Social 
Assessment that meets Bank and Government requirements.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Environmental Assessment, to be prepared by the successful bidder, will determine whether 
this safeguard is to be triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Environmental Assessment, to be prepared by the successful bidder, will determine whether 
this safeguard is to be triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The preferred bidder will be responsible for preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework, if 
the OP/BP 4.12 is triggered and this will be determined after the ESIA is completed.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/27/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Government of Jordan has initiated collection of baseline data for the proposed power 
plant site.  The successful bidder will be responsible for preparation of an Environment and 
Social Assessment that meets Bank and Government requirements. Terms of References of 
the ESIA study has been reviewed and approved by the Bank. The final report should be 
ready before the appraisal mission.   
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vladislav Vucetic 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
