Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/15/2009 
Report No.:  AC4567
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P116696 
Project Name:  Kazakhstan - Tax Administration Reform Project (JERP) 
Task Team Leader:  Munawer Sultan Khwaja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Tax policy and administration (50%);Economic statistics, modeling and 
forecasting (25%);Other public sector governance (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
17.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
53.40
53.40 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed project are: to (i) to reform and strengthen 
the tax administration in order to improve the level of voluntary compliance; (ii) to 
enhance effectiveness to fight tax evasion; and (iii) to increase administrative efficiency 
and reduce the potential for corruption. The project would have a positive impact on the 
business climate by improving client services, strengthening institutional and human 
capacity in the tax administration, and reducing the burden of taxpayer compliance.   
 
3. Project Description 
It is envisaged that the project will consist of four basic components, the implementation 
of which would be managed by different units of the TC:  
 
Project description:  
 
The following four project components build on what has already been achieved and 
support each other to deliver a coherent institutional reform agenda:  
 
(a) 
An Institutional Development component that would finance the following 
activities: (a) a comprehensive review and redesign of the organizational structure at 
headquarters and regional offices; (b) reorganization and consolidations of local offices 
based on rationalization; (c) analysis and reform of the managerial structure and decision-
Page  2
making modalities; (d) comprehensive review of HR policies, civil service legislative 
framework and development of reformed workforce planning and strategy; (e) review of 
the HRMIS and its integration with the TC IT system and the e-government gateway; (f) 
HRMIS hardware and licenses; (g) development of training strategy and curriculum; (h) 
feasibility study for a training institute; (i) development of technical infrastructure for 
training institute and distance learning system; and (j) building capacity through study 
tour, managerial/HR training, and language training.  
 
(b) 
An Operational Development component that would finance the following 
activities: (a) review and redesign of the business processes; (b) development of an 
integrated database for taxpayers; (c) streamlining of data/information exchange 
procedures with relevant government bodies; (d) development of universal filing 
methodology; (e) development of a risk-based audit selection methodology; (f) 
development of analytical methods in market intelligence, non-compliance trends, risk 
perception of risk, and use of feedback from current audits; (g) development of a cameral 
audit information system; (h) development of protocol for information exchange with 
other agencies and procedures for use of third party information and indirect methods; (i) 
development of modalities possible transfer of local taxes to municipalities; (j) 
improvement in enforced collection and arrear management; (k) design of a modern call 
center; knowledge database, web-based access to taxpayer account and single-client 
software;  (l) review and reform of the departmental appeal system; (m) proposed 
development of a specialized tax court (m) redesign of the VAT registration system in 
accordance with the harmonization protocol under the customs union; (n) development of  
a
VAT information exchange system for the customs union; (o) design of an automated 
VAT refund system; (p) review and reform of the excise taxation procedure; (q) improve 
in non-resident taxation, including automated enquiry and economic monitoring; (r) 
building capacity through study tour and training for the above activities, including 
training for tax court judges; (s) provision of software for process reengineering; (t) 
provision of software and laptops for specialized field audit software.  
 
(c) 
An IT Infrastructure Development component that would finance: (a) capacity 
building in organization and management of the IT modernization; (b) design and 
software development for integrated tax management system and related hardware; (c) 
design and development of data management software and related hardware/equipments; 
(d) development of concept, architecture and applications for data processing centers 
(DPC); (e) development of central and 4 regional DPCs, including printing and mailing 
systems; (f) development of voice and data networks; (g) development of call center; (h) 
development of video-conferencing facilities; (i) development of risk management 
system and (j) development of  subsystems for the IT infrastructure.  
 
(d) 
A Project Management component that would finance goods, consultants# 
services, training and operating costs of the Tax Committee to support Project 
coordination, implementation and management. This will include: (a) tax reform advisor; 
(b) change management advisor; (c) procurement consultants including IT procurement 
consultants; (d) monitoring and evaluation of project including taxpayer surveys; (e) 
translation services; (f) project audit; and (g) project management operations.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Kazakhstan. There is no civil work involved.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been rated as Category #C# for environmental purposes. None of the 
envisaged activities will require any special permission on environmental issue. Hence 
the proposed Project will not be subject to the Environmental Impact Assessment 
procedures or any permission relating to environmental protection aspects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project does not involve safeguard issues. Hence there are no stakeholders who are 
affected.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Page  5
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Munawer Sultan Khwaja 
07/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Munawer Sultan Khwaja 
07/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
07/15/2009 
Comments:   
