Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3414 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/21/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P102177 
Project Name: Education 
Task Team Leader: Ernesto P. Cuadra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (40%);Tertiary education (40%);General education sector 
(20%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Bank project will aim to restructure and rebuild the Technical and Vocational 
Education (TVE) system in order to (i) increase youth employability and capabilities for 
continuous skills upgrading, and (ii) offer business a trained workforce with the skills and 
competencies that will enable them to compete in the global economy.  
 
The proposed Bank project will achieve this objective by:  
 
(a) 
streamlining the secondary and post-secondary TVE network of institutions and programs 
of study;  
 
(b) 
introducing a competency based-curricula and teaching practices that prepare youth for 
continuous learning and equip them with high level foundational skills, and broad workplace and 
technical skills and competencies for high productivity, professional flexibility in the workplace, 
for acquisition of new skills and for on-the-job training; and  
 
(c) 
introducing governance and management practices that make the TVE system more 
accountable, flexible and efficient.  
 
Progress towards the achievement of this objective will be measured through the following 
indicators:  
Page  2
•
Youth employability, measured as time to first job after graduation.  
 
•
Participation of graduates from TVE programs in retraining or other type of continuous 
education programs.  
 
•
Employers’ satisfaction with skills and competencies of graduates of TVE programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Technical and Vocational Education Restructuring Program seeks to rebuild and to improve 
the efficiency of the current TVE system by transforming it from a supply-driven system into a 
demand-driven system that has the capacity to offer programs that are responsive to the learning 
and skills development needs of students and business in a cost effective manner. The proposed 
project will consist of two main components:  
 
Component 1: Improve quality and relevance of TVE by reforming the structure and programs 
of study of TVE at the secondary and post-secondary level. The main objectives of this 
component are to (i) rebuild the programs of study of secondary TVE by promoting a full 
integration of general and TVE secondary education programs and institutions; (ii) restructure 
and streamline the current network of post-secondary technical and vocational education 
institutions and programs of studies, including the introduction of a credit system, to make it 
more responsive to the demands of graduates from secondary education and the needs of the 
local economy.  
 
The proposed project would fund technical assistance for: (i) the development of a standard set 
of occupational “concentrations” or families that would be offered to all secondary school youth; 
(ii) the establishment of a new outcome based system for attestation and certification of skills 
and competencies; and (iii) conducting background studies and stakeholder consultation to guide 
the consolidation of institutions. It would also finance the development and provision of new 
programs of study, development, printing and distribution of new textbooks and teaching 
materials, training of teachers, management training of education administrators at all levels of 
the system and provision of equipment and upgrade of workshops.  
 
Component 2: Improve system efficiency and accountability through reform of governance and 
financing. By and large the aim of this component is to upgrade management and governance 
capacity throughout the TVE system and to rationalize funding allocation mechanisms so that the 
allocation of resources is done using transparent criteria based on real demand and results. This 
will be done through the following set of interrelated interventions.  
 
(i) 
Introduction of a national qualification framework to help guide the integration of 
programs, the introduction of the credit and a competency-based system for the accreditation of 
skills and competencies.  
 
(ii) 
Develop a reliable system for attestation and certification of skills and competencies. 
This system will make available a transparent signaling system that would help students market 
their skill and would guide employers’ hiring decisions.  
 
(iii) 
Introduction of quality management practices at all levels of the system, including 
capacity to monitor and evaluate the performance of the TVE institutions and the quality of TVE 
programs, as well as capacity for collecting, analyzing and using information for the systematic 
identification of skills development needs of individuals and enterprises, for assessing and 
Page  3
monitoring the performance of the system, and for allocating resources based on demands, needs 
and results.  
 
(iv) 
Introduction of funding mechanisms that allocate resources based on needs and results 
using a per-capita budgeting mechanism that is transparent and easy to monitor.  
 
The proposed project would fund technical assistance for the establishment on of a national 
qualification system, for the introduction of new funding mechanisms and for all the related 
management training required for the successful implementation of these changes. It would also 
finance the purchase of equipment and software required for the establishment of a management 
information system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
n/a   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECAVP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Category C   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/23/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ernesto P. Cuadra 
02/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
02/20/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
