Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3996 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P114765 
Project Name: Southern Kazakhstan Electricity Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader: Istvan Dobozi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
248.56 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.44
1.44 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary project objective is to ensure that business enterprises and households in southern 
Kazakhstan have improved access to reliable, cost effective and high quality supply of 
electricity. This objective will be achieved by increasing the capacity of the power transmission 
network to provide adequate supply of electricity to the rapidly growing southern part of the 
country, with particular focus on the Almaty region. Existing and prospective supply deficits in 
the region are a barrier to both economic growth and human development. By addressing these 
deficits, the project will help to ensure that broader societal objectives in terms of improved 
employment, incomes and standard of living can be achieved.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Key components:  
 
Alma Substation  
 
•
Construction of a new 500/220 kV Alma Substation (SS)  
 
•
Reconstruction and extension of Almaty 500 kV SS  
Page  2
•
Reconstruction and extension of YukGRESS SS  
 
•
Construction of 500 kV Overhead Transmission Line (OHTL) Alma SS -YukGRESS SS(319 
km)  
 
•
Construction of 500 kV OHTL Alma SS - Almaty SS (63.2 km)  
 
•
Construction of 220 kV OHTL Alma SS - Kensai SS (47.3 km)  
 
•
Extension of  220 kV OHTL Almaty CHP-3 SS - Shelek SS to loop into Alma SS (49.8 km)  
 
•
Extension of 220 kV OHTL Almaty CHP-3 SS - Robot SS to loop into Alma SS (6.1km)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Alma Substation  
 
•
The Alma SS will be located in the Ili District of Almatinskaya Oblast.  
 
•
The 500 kV OHTL YUKGRESS SS - Alma SS crosses Zhambyl and Almatinskaya Oblasts.  
 
•
The 500 kV OHTL Almaty SS - Alma SS goes around Sorbulak Lake and the Kaskelenka 
River.  
 
•
The 220 kV OHTL Alma SS - Kensai SS circumvents populated areas and the Almaty airport 
area.  
 
•
Routes of extension lines 220 kV Almaty CHP-3 SS - Shelek SS and 220 kV Almaty CHP-3 
SS and Robot SS cross the Ilisky District and Almatinskaya Oblast.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
KEGOC has had a decade-long relationship with the World Bank under two ongoing 
transmission projects (transmission system rehabilitation and North/South transmission line). In 
both cases, KEGOC prepared EA documentation of the highest technical quality and properly 
implemented all environmental management requirements in accordance with World Bank 
specifications. During supervision missions of these projects, KEGOC performance of EMP 
implementation was evaluated and always found to be satisfactory and in full compliance with 
requirements specified in the project EMPs. KEGOC prepared a detailed draft Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) for the proposed project, which include institutional measures. During 
project preparation, the Task Team’s environmental specialist will discuss the environmental 
management procedures proposed by KEGOC, including the latter’s institutional capacity to 
implement the agreed mitigation actions. If deemed appropriate, specific institutional capacity 
building measures will be incorporated into the project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The site selected for the Alma  SS is not near any buildings and is removed from any 
residential areas. The Almaty SS and YuKGRES SS extension/reconstruction projects will be 
confined to the boundaries of existing plant fence lines. There are no significant environmental 
issues other than the normal issues of dust, noise and disposal of construction wastes, etc. During 
operation, the chief issues are noise, security and worker health and safety issues associated with 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
high electric fields and the potential for contamination from leaking of transformer heat transfer 
fluids. No PCBs will be permitted for use in any transformer equipment to be purchased under 
the project for Alma, Almaty and YuKGRES SSs.  
 
Likewise, for the OHTLs, during construction there are no significant environmental issues 
other than the normal issues of dust, noise and disposal of construction wastes, etc. The selected 
routes and rights-of-way do not cross any environmental protection areas, structures or sites of 
cultural significance or areas of proven mineral reserves. For the most part, the land use along 
these routes is for grazing or agricultural production. In addition, to protect surface water quality, 
special attention must be paid where transmission lines routes cross rivers or streams and where 
worker construction camps are sited. The routes selected do not interfere with any migratory bird 
flight patterns. During operation, the chief issue is noise (corona discharge) and public health and 
safety from the high electric field strength.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Although the project sites/Rights-of-Way have no areas/structures of historical or cultural 
value, the EMPs will include appropriate measures (consistent with GOK and World Bank 
requirements) to address “chance find” occurrences.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Civil works under the two existing substations (Almaty SS and YuKGRES SS 
extension/reconstruction), some of which will be confined to the boundaries of existing plant 
fence lines. Land will, however, be needed to be expropriated for the new “Alma” SS (14.65 ha.) 
and the transmission towers (36.95 ha.). Furthermore, since the exact number of towers that will 
be built is unknown at this point in time and will follow from the detailed working designs for 
the power lines during the first year of implementation (after selection of the turn-key 
contractor), the exact scope and incidence of all land acquisition requirements cannot be 
precisely assessed now. Thus, a specific Land Acquisition Plan will be prepared as a condition of 
appraisal to cover expropriation for the Alma SS. And a Policy Framework will be prepared to 
cover land acquisition that may be needed for the towers. Even though land acquisition will be 
necessary, it is clear that this will not result in the physical displacement of people. Land will be 
acquired by KEGOC through a special government fund with compensation to be provided to the 
affected private owners.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November 1, 2008 - January 20, 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Istvan Dobozi 
10/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
10/23/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
