Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3997 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P114766 
Project Name: Kazakhstan Moinak Electricity Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader: Istvan Dobozi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
61.16 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.34
1.34 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary project objective is to ensure that business enterprises and households in southern 
Kazakhstan have improved access to reliable, cost effective and high quality supply of 
electricity. This objective will be achieved by increasing the capacity of the power transmission 
network to provide adequate supply of electricity to the rapidly growing southern part of the 
country, with particular focus on the Almaty region. Existing and prospective supply deficits in 
the region are a barrier to both economic growth and human development. By addressing these 
deficits, the project will help to ensure that broader societal objectives in terms of improved 
employment, incomes and standard of living can be achieved.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Key components:  
 
•
Construction of a 220 kV Overhead Transmission Line (OHTL) from Moinak Hydropower 
Plant (HPP) to Shelek Substation [SS]  (119.1 km)  
 
•
Construction of a 220 kV OHTL from Moinak HPP to Saryozek SS (214.7 km)  
 
•
Construction of outdoor switchgear at Moinak HPP  
Page  2
•
Reconstruction and extension of Shelek SS  
 
•
Reconstruction and extension of Saryozek SS   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
•
The Moinak HPP - Shelek SS 220 kV line will start at the 300 MW Moinak HPP currently 
under construction on the Charyn River and pass through the Enbekshikazakhsy District of 
Almaty Oblast.  The area is characterized as grazing land.  
 
•
The Moinak HPP - Saryozek SS 220 kV line will start at the Moinak HPP and pass through 
the Enbekshikazakhsy and Kerbulaksky Districts of Almaty Oblast crossing the Charyn and Ili 
Rivers.  
 
•
Reconstruction and extension activities at the Saryozek SS and Shelek SS willbe conducted 
within existing fence lines.  
 
•
Construction of the Moinak outdoor switchgear will be conducted within the existing project 
site for the HPP.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
KEGOC has had a decade-long relationship with the World Bank under two ongoing 
transmission projects (transmission system rehabilitation and North/South transmission line). In 
both cases, KEGOC prepared EA documentation of the highest technical quality and properly 
implemented all environmental management requirements in accordance with World Bank 
specifications. During supervision missions of these projects, KEGOC performance of EMP 
implementation was evaluated and always found to be satisfactory and in full compliance with 
requirements specified in the project EMPs. KEGOC prepared a detailed draft Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) for the proposed project, which include institutional measures. During 
project preparation, the Task Team’s environmental specialist will discuss the environmental 
management procedures proposed by KEGOC, including the latter’s institutional capacity to 
implement the agreed mitigation actions. If deemed appropriate, specific institutional capacity 
building measures will be incorporated into the project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Saryozek SS and Shelek SS extension and reconstruction projects will be confined to the 
boundaries of existing fence lines. As discussed above, during construction of  OHTLs, there are 
no significant environmental issues other than the normal issues of dust, noise and disposal of 
construction wastes, etc. The selected routes and rights-of-way do not cross any environmental 
protection areas, structures or sites of cultural significance or areas of proven mineral reserves. 
For the most part, the land use along these routes is for grazing or agricultural production. In 
addition, to protect surface water quality, special attention must be paid where transmission lines 
routes cross rivers or streams and where worker construction camps are sited. The routes selected 
do not interfere with any migratory bird flight patterns. During operation, the chief issue is noise 
(corona discharge) and public health and safety from the high electric field strength.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Although the project sites/Rights-of-Way have no areas/structures of historical or cultural 
value, the EMPs will include appropriate measures (consistent with GOK and World Bank 
requirements) to address “chance find” occurrences.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Civil works under the two existing substations (Saryzek and Shelek) and construction of the 
Moinak outdoor switchgear will be carried out "within existing fence lines," thus not requiring 
new land acquisition. Land will, however, be needed to be expropriated for the transmission 
towers (8.10 ha.). Furthermore, since the exact number of towers that will be built is unknown at 
this point in time and will follow from the detailed working designs for the power lines during 
the first year of implementation (after selection of the turn-key contractor), the exact scope and 
incidence of all land acquisition requirements cannot be precisely assessed now. Therefore, a 
Land Acquisition Policy Framework will be prepared as a condition of appraisal. Even though 
land acquisition will be necessary, it is clear that this will not result in the physical displacement 
of people. Land will be acquired by KEGOC through a special government fund with 
compensation to be provided to the affected owners.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Moinak transmission component will evacuate power from the Moinak HPP that is 
currently under construction. Since the transmission lines and the outdoor switchgear are linked 
to the integrity of the Moinak HPP this policy is triggered as it represents a potential reputational 
risk to the World Bank. Further information regarding the design and operation of the HPP 
would need to be evaluated by the World Bank dam specialist to determine if safety issues have 
been satisfactorily addressed in a manner consistent with this policy. It has been tentatively 
agreed with the ECA Regional Safeguard Coordinator that a visit to the site by the dam specialist 
is not necessary unless the information provided by the Borrower raises some significant issues.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November 1, 2008 - January 20, 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Istvan Dobozi 
10/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
10/23/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
