Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/27/2008 
Report No.:  AC2716
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P086592 
Project Name:  Second Irrigation and Drainage Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (60%);Agricultural extension and research (30%);Sub-
national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
122.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
289.00
289.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective would be to improve irrigation and drainage 
(I&D) service delivery and land and water management for the benefit of sustainable 
increases in productivity in irrigated agriculture.  This would mainly be achieved through 
rehabilitation and modernization of I&D systems, better management, operation, and 
maintenance (MOM) of these systems, and more efficient use of associated irrigated 
lands, all with broad participation of users.   
 
3. Project Description 
The three main components of the Second Irrigation and Drainage Improvement Project 
(IDIP-2) would be: (i) Rehabilitation and Modernization of I&D Systems; (ii) Sustainable 
Management, Operation and Maintenance; and (iii) Agricultural Development.  In 
addition, there would be a Project Management Component.  The proposed project takes 
into account many of the lessons learned from the first Irrigation and Drainage 
Improvement Project (IDIP-1) and the ADB-funded Water Resources Management and 
Land Improvement Project (WRMLIP). The proposed project is scheduled from 2009 to 
2014, covering 113,000 ha in ten sub-project areas (SPAs), providing support to areas in 
Page  2
Almaty, Kyzylorda, South Kazakhstan, and Zhambyl Oblasts that have favorable agro-
climatic conditions for increasing irrigated crop productivity.  IDIP-2 is planned as the 
first phase of a two-phase development program to be followed by the second phase 
(IDIP-3) which is proposed to be implemented from 2011 to 2017, covering 107,000 ha 
in seven sub-project areas.   
 
-- Component 1:  Rehabilitation and Modernization of I&D Systems  
 
I&D Infrastructure.  The component would support rehabilitation and modernization of 
I&D infrastructure, with the details of the proposed interventions to be determined during 
the final design stage during project implementation.  Each system would be examined in 
careful detail by design consultants, with full farmer involvement, to determine what 
rehabilitation and modernization is actually needed, considering the farming methods 
employed.  The approaches would aim at utilizing much of the existing networks, with 
interventions aimed at reconstructing destroyed or damaged sections of the systems, 
including hydraulic structures, taking out bottlenecks, and introducing improved modern 
designs, thereby increasing the timely and adequate availability of water to the farmers, 
improving water management at all levels, and ensuring adequate evacuation of excess 
water and control of groundwater tables.  
 
Assistance to I&D rehabilitation and modernization is based on the requirement to 
supply the selected farms with adequate quantities of irrigation water in a timely manner 
and to remove excess amounts to reduce water table build up and salinity. Support for 
rehabilitation will cover both off-farm and on-farm works.The inclusion of off-farm 
works would ensure that main conveyance and drainage networks do not fail at a later 
date or provide constraints to the full operation of lower-order systems that have been 
rehabilitated.  
 
Irrigation Dams.  In addition to the proposals for the rehabilitation and upgrading of 
I&D systems, interventions are required to ensure that the dams from which water is 
derived for certain sub-project areas (SPAs) both function as planned and do not present 
any threat to the downstream areas. Conservation and exploitation of large dams and 
associated reservoirs in Kazakhstan also fall under the responsibility of the Committee of 
Water Resources (CWR; implementing agency). There are four dams plus one large weir 
linked to one of the dams in the overall project area and each of these structures requires 
some rehabilitation and improvement works, which is envisaged in two stages.  The first 
stage would be undertaken during IDIP-2 and includes implementation of already 
identified priority works such as replacement of gates and mechanical and electrical 
lifting equipment, cleaning of toe drainage systems, and repair to upstream and 
downstream slopes.  In addition, IDIP-2 will finance detailed investigations to determine 
the additional interventions required for the safe operation of the dams, including 
installation of piezometers and settlement stations, and geotechnical investigations.  The 
works required for these additional interventions would be undertaken during IDIP-3 and 
would include any major repairs or upgrading of the dams considered necessary as 
derived from the studies and investigations undertaken under IDIP-2.  
 
Page  3
-- Component 2: Sustainable Management, Operation and Maintenance (MOM)  
 
The component would focus on addressing the institutional, technical, and financial 
issues facing the I&D sector by building institutional capacity to enable the main system 
service provider, Rural Consumer Cooperatives (RCCs), and water users to improve their 
efficiency and productivity of water use.  It would support the development of RCCs; 
modernization and strengthening of I&D system management, operation and 
maintenance; and modernization and strengthening of on-farm water management. Sub-
components would include: (i) institutional development; (ii) modernization and 
strengthening main system MOM; and (iii) modernization and strengthening on-farm 
water management.  
 
Institutional Development.  The purpose of this subcomponent is to: (i) form RCC 
Support Units in each SPA in order to support RCCs ; (ii) develop viable and sustainable 
RCCs in the SPAs so as to form a sound institutional, financial, and technical base 
leading to improved MOM of the on-farm I&D systems; (iii) carry out a comprehensive 
review of the current legislation related to water resources, and irrigation and drainage in 
order to identify areas where the legislation can be strengthened to further support the 
development of irrigated agriculture; and (iv) establish and support a RCC Regulatory 
Authority (RA) to oversee, regulate, and support the formation and development of RCCs 
in Kazakhstan.  
 
Modernization and Strengthening of Main System MOM.  This sub-component seeks to: 
(i) modernize and strengthen the main system service providers such that they can 
provide a good level of service to the water users through reviewing current work 
activities, making recommendations for upgrading and 
modernization of the providers’ 
activities, and then providing support to implement agreed changes; (ii) determine the 
minimum levels of operation and maintenance expenditure required to sustain irrigation 
and drainage systems over time; and (iii) adopt modern processes, e.g. remote sensing 
and GIS for monitoring land condition, water-logging, and salinity, and for determining 
crop types and crop areas, by building on and strengthening existing capabilities in 
Kazakhstan.  
 
Modernization and Strengthening of On-farm Water Management.  This sub-component 
would analyze the current on-farm practices in a representative sample of the SPAs, make 
recommendations for improvement, and implement these.  Current on-farm practices 
relate to improper linkage of water requirements at field level to water supply in on-farm 
canals, and improper use of hydraulic structures, and at field level to long furrow or 
borderstrip length, and too high irrigation flows in furrows or borderstrips that are not 
properly adjusted for different soil types.  Inefficiencies in distribution of irrigation water 
at the on-farm level are leading to over-abstraction of water from the source, low levels 
of productivity per unit of water diverted, and waterlogging and salinization.  Measures 
aimed at developing effective and efficient operation and maintenance of the on-farm 
irrigation system by RCC staff can have a dramatic impact on the performance of 
individual farmers within the RCC command area.  
 
Page  4
-- Component 3: Agricultural Development  
 
The Agricultural Development component would cover all SPAs, organized around two 
clusters: (i) capacity strengthening of farmers and farm managers through participatory 
training, improved agricultural and water management practices on demonstration sites, 
and provision of advisory services by establishing Farmers Service Centers (FSC); and 
(ii) support to system maintenance and farm mechanization, through demonstrations and 
advice on best mechanization options, including advisory services to enab
le farmers’ 
access to existing credit and leasing schemesfor machinery purchasing.  
 
Capacity strengthening of farmers.  The farmers’ capacity strengthening activities would 
comprise participatory training, research and development activities, all conducted on 
demonstration sites, and the establishment of and support to Farmer Service Centers to 
provide advisory and extension services.  
 
Support to System Maintenance and Farm Mechanization.  Farmers will eventually 
require sufficient mechanical capacity to improve crop production through more timely 
tillage, planting, sowing, and harvesting as well as to ensure that the on- and inter-farm 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure is maintained.  IDIP-2 will provide resources for the 
following activities: (i) procurement of a select number of packages of farm and 
irrigation maintenance equipment for demonstration and evaluation; and (ii) technical 
support at the SPA level, not only to enable farmers’ access to existing credit and leasing 
schemes for machinery purchasing, but also to study the farm and maintenance 
machinery and equipment needs and preferred funding arrangement for a major 
component that could be implemented under IDIP-3.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
During the implementation of IDIP-1, it was found that the wide spread of the project 
area, covering the entire country, made management difficult and overhead costs in terms 
of consultants, staff, operations and logistics, much higher. IDIP-2 will concentrate in a 
smaller and more compact area that have favorable agro-climatic conditions for 
increasing crop productivity, namely the southern areas in South Kazakhstan, Kyzylorda, 
Zhambyl, and Almaty Oblasts. These locations have warmer weather and comprise large 
plains with a comparative advantage in cropping activities.  They offer good possibilities 
for growing higher value crops like cotton with export potential, and generating higher 
employment locally through the processing of cotton and manufacturing of related 
products. Farm sizes in these areas are quite small and population density is higher so that 
any I&D rehabilitation would extend benefits to a large number of the rural people.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSSD) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
-- Environmental Assessment  
 
IDIP-
2
has been classified as Category “B” for purposes of OP 4.01 on Environmental 
Assessment because it is not expected to involve any significant or irreversible adverse 
environmental impacts. The project will involve neither the construction of new irrigation 
systems nor the resettlement of people and land acquisition is not expected. Any potential 
adverse environmental impacts are expected to be effectively prevented or minimized by 
application of the appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures identified in the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that was prepared for the project and that will 
be implemented by CWR during the project.  The framework EMP includes guidelines 
for regular monitoring and measurements.  For each sub-project area, a site-specific 
environmental assessment will be carried out, which will comprise the development of an 
Environmental Impact Assessment  and Environmental Management Plans.  
 
As indicated above, land acquisition or displacement of people or property is not 
expected.  Thus, OP 4.12 is not triggered.  This will be confirmed through the site-
specific EAs.  Should any site-specific EA indicate that the assumption is incorrect (i.e., 
infrastructure works would displace people and/or property, whether legal or illegal) the 
PIU will consult with the Bank prior to contracting or proceeding with those works.  
 
-- Pest Management  
 
Farmers use agro-chemical pesticides in the project areas, particularly in the cotton-
growing areas, but the current use of pesticides (and fertilizer) is relatively low due to 
economic conditions.  However, it is likely that as a result of improved water availability 
at field level, farmers may become more confident, and start using more fertilizer and 
agro-chemical pesticides.  As the EMP provides appropriate mitigation measures for 
addressing any impacts linked to improper pest management, e.g. pest management and 
Page  6
IPM promotion in the farmer capacity training program, a separate pest management plan 
was not required.  
 
-- Safety of Dams  
 
An assessment of the four dams and one large weir in the sub-project areas was 
conducted during project preparation, focusing on technical and dam safety issues.  A 
dam safety report was prepared that describes priority interventions and proposals for 
investigations.  This report is disclosed.  During IDIP-2, the identified priority works will 
be implemented (replacement of gates and mechanical and electrical lifting equipment, 
cleaning of toe drainage systems, and repair to upstream and downstream slopes) and a 
detailed review and assessment of the relevant dams will be carried out to identify the 
needed remedial works to be undertaken under IDIP-3. Appropriate qualified engineering 
contractors that have experience with development or rehabilitation of dams will then be 
contracted to undertake the necessary remedial measures.  
 
-- Projects on International Waterways  
 
Most SPAs involve irrigation systems that draw water from rivers that are international 
waterways shared by Kazakhstan with neighboring Kyrgyzstan (upper riparian) and 
Uzbekistan (both upper and lower riparian).  As there will not be any enlargement of 
existing irrigation systems or development of any new irrigation areas, project 
interventions are not expected to adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flows to 
the downstream riparian state (Uzbekistan is a riparian country as it shares the Aral Sea 
with Kazakhstan).  Also, any potential changes in water flow or deterioration in water 
quality during the construction works will be mitigated through implementation of the 
EMP.  The rehabilitation and modernization of infrastructure and improvements in water 
management should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby generating water 
savings and providing reliable water supply to the users.  Considering the above, the 
project falls under the exception to the notification requirement contained in this 
safeguard policy, and was approved by the Regional Vice President for Europe and 
Central Asia on April 7, 2008.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The overall environmental impact of the project is expected to be positive, and no 
significant, irreversible, cumulative or long-term adverse impacts are expected. The 
rehabilitation and modernization of selected I&D systems will realize definite 
environmental benefits by improving irrigation water management, decreasing water 
losses, and reducing soi
l
alkalinity, salinity and waterlogging.  Furthermore, the project’s 
proposed support for strengthening environmental monitoring and analysis will improve 
CWR’s overall ability to monitor the environmental impacts of project interventions and 
take appropriate actions where necessary. The potential adverse environmental impacts 
are increased agrochemical pollution and water contamination from increased use of 
fertilizers and pesticides, soil erosion associated with existing practices of irrigation and 
agricultural production, and environmental impacts resulting from construction activities, 
Page  7
including improper disposal of excavated sediments from canals. These adverse impacts 
are not significant and can be effectively prevented, minimized, or eliminated by 
appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures and effective construction 
supervision. Overall, the environmental benefits of the project’s interventions are 
expected to outweigh any potential adverse impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The possibility of limiting farmer training and advisory services to a few pilot areas was 
considered, but rejected in part based on the need to provide training and advice on 
appropriate pesticide use/handling and integrated pest management in all areas where 
improved irrigation service is likely to increase farmers' potential to intensify production 
and/or grow higher value crops   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementation of IDIP-1 has shown that Kazakhstan has adequate environmental 
legislation, institutional capacity, and mechanisms to deal with any environmental issues 
during   project preparation or implementation. This includes an environmental 
assessment procedure for projects, including a State Environment Expertise Review. 
Under IDIP-1, most environmental issues were related to construction activities. CWR 
and its design engineers incorporated environmental clauses in the bidding documents 
and ensured that contractors adhered to these clauses to ensure that implementation of the 
works were carried out without causing environmental damage. Such activities were 
monitored by the construction supervision engineers and CWR. The same will be 
institutionalized under IDIP-2 and World Bank reviews will confirm that the EMP for 
IDIP-2 will be implemented satisfactorily.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During project preparation several consultations took place in the sub-project areas, with 
the participation of RCC management teams, farmers, local administration officials, and 
other interested parties.  The meetings focused on explaining the project scope and 
components, the technical, financial, and environmental impacts to be expected, and the 
involvement of stakeholders in the project.  The Committee of Water Resources held 
consultations in Astana with participation of staff of the Ministry of Ecology and 
Biological Resources, Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning, and Ministry of 
Agriculture.  The key stakeholders are the water users in the project areas, most of whom 
are members of Rural Consumer Cooperatives.  All project interventions will be 
determined through a participatory process with the involvement of the management and 
members of RCCs.  Thus, further stakeholder meetings and consultations, including 
consultations on site-specific EAs/EMPs, will take place in each sub-project area during 
project implementation.   
 
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/24/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
As the EMP provides appropriate mitigation measures for addressing any impacts linked 
to improper pest management, e.g. pest management and IPM promotion in the farmer 
capacity training program, a separate pest management plan was not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
Page  9
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
07/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Katelijn Van den Berg 
07/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
07/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
07/27/2008 
Comments:   
