Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3604
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P099270 
Project Name:  SOUTH-WEST CORRIDOR ROAD PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
848.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
149.00
149.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the of the Govern
ment’s western Europe to western China corridor 
development program is to improve transport efficiency and safety, and promote 
development along one of Kazakhstan’s main strategic road transport corridors. 
Transport efficiency will be improved through provision of better infrastructure and 
services along the entire corridor to reduce transport costs, and through gradual reform of 
the entities responsible for all categories of roads. The Bank would finance the South 
West Corridor (SWC) from Shymkent to Aktobe Oblast as an Adaptable Program Loan 
(APL) comprising three phases that are designed to take into account the pace of 
institutional reforms, the readiness for implementation, and the capacity of the 
Committee for Roads (the Committee).  
 
The development objective for Phase-I of the proposed Program (this project) is to 
increase transport efficiency along the South West Corridor between Kyzylorda to 
Aktobe Oblast border, and initiate reforms to improve road management and traffic 
safety in Kazakhstan.  The aim is to support local and regional socio-economic 
development. Benefits will include transport efficiency gains and traffic safety 
improvement.  
Page  2
The main beneficiaries will be domestic and regional businesses and traders, as well as 
local populations living along the road corridor. Kazakhstan has a higher population 
density in the southern sections of the road, with traffic volumes which are relatively 
high, approximately 10,000 vehicles per day (vpd) close to Shymkent city, mainly due to 
local commuting. Traffic volumes decrease further north with the majority of traffic 
comprising trucks transporting goods (around 500 vpd North from Aral). The government 
expects ribbon development to be attracted along the corridor as a result of the project 
intervention. However, this will require incentives to attract private sector investments to 
be integrated within the overall South West Corridor development program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance major upgrade of road infrastructure along one portion of the 
corridor, from Kyzylorda to the border with Aktobe Oblast. The project will also assist 
the government to prepare a road safety and road service action plan.   The project would 
serve local travel as well as international transportation of general cargo and other goods 
produced locally and in the region (Tajikistan, the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan).  
Institutional measures would include the introduction of an efficient road management 
system incorporating modern methods for planning and executing road maintenance, and 
strengthening the capacity of the Committee to efficiently implement all investments.  
The preliminary design prepared by the Ministry of Transport and Communication 
(MOTC) envisaged the widening of the road and the construction of bypasses around 
some of the towns currently traversed by the road.  The feasibility studies financed by the 
government, which include an EIA and EMP, were completed in December 2007.  
 
Following preliminary discussions with the MOTC, it is envisaged that the road sections 
to be co-financed by the Bank would be divided into three separate phases:  
 
•
Phase 1: rehabilitation of the carriageway between Aktobe/Kyzylorda Oblast 
border to Kyzylorda (approx 564km). This road section would be implemented first as it 
is currently in very poor condition and presents a major obstacle to efficient transport. 
The works will consist mainly of reconstruction along the existing alignment and about 6 
comparatively short bypasses around roadside towns.  Preliminary designs already exist 
and will be updated once the detailed designs are completed.  This phase also includes 
studies to review options for institutional reforms in the roads sector, implementation of 
new road construction and maintenance concessions, the preparation of a road safety 
improvement action plan, and the preparation of a road services action plan. The 
objective would be to have this first Bank-financed project approved ahead of the 
preparation of the 2009 Budget so that the road works can start in early 2009.  
 
•
Phase 2 and 3: These will upgrade other sections of the same road corridor 
southwards from from Kyzylorda to Turkestan (approx 275 km), and from Turkestan to 
Shymkent (approx. 186 km), respectively.  These road sections are also expected to 
require mainly reconstruction along the existing road alignment, but will also entail 
significant bypasses around Kyzylorda. In addition, MOTC is considering widening these 
sections to a dual carriageway. The final decision regarding the construction of four lane 
Page  3
sections will be made in the course of further and more detailed preparation. In any case 
it is expected that these sections will be classified as environment category “A” and thus 
a
full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be required. Moreover, land 
acquisition may also be necessary.  
 
The proposed lending instrument would be an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) that will 
indicate the overall Program loan amount as well as the individual loan amounts for each 
Program phase (as above). The current project deals only with Phase 1, which would 
comprise the following components:  
 
(a) 
Component 1:  Civil works to upgrade road sections from Aktobe Oblast border 
to north of Kyzylorda.  This will include consultant services for supervision of the civil 
works. It is planned that around 8 civil works contracts will be awarded ranging in value 
between US$ 110 – 130 million. Details of this will be included in the procurement plan.  
 
(b) 
Component 2:  Project Management Consultants.  It is anticipated that the PMC 
will comprise 4–5 international staff and 18–20 national staff to support theCommittee 
with the management of all contracts to be financed under all phases of the Program by 
all IFIs.  
 
(c) 
Component 3:  Institution Development.  The following activities will be 
incorporated under the component:  Training to enhance capacity in procurement and 
financial management; Development of local design institutes, universities and 
consultants to enhance road design, harmonize standards (e.g., Superpave), and promote 
technical innovations; and Implementation of a customized road management system  
 
(d) 
Component 4:  Road safety improvements and provision of services along the 
corridor. 
Design of a road safety action plan following recommendations from the 
Road Safety Capacity Review that is financed by the Global Road Safety Facility, and 
design of a services delivery action plan along the SWC corridor.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Bank financed activities will allow the upgrade of an existing road alignment of up 
to 1,025 km length in SW Kazakhstan, termed the South West Corridor (SWC), which 
requires rehabilitation and/or upgrade.  The road section to be financed from the current 
first project lies between the city of Kyzylorda and the border with Aktobe Oblast on its 
north-west end. The alignment covers approximately 564 km and spans the large 
Kyzylorda Oblast (administrative district). It reaches from just north of the bustling and 
growing district capital Kyzylorda northwards, where the density of population and 
traffic decrease significantly to very low values, with most of the traffic relating to transit 
of cargo.  The right of way (ROW) for the road provides for buffer zones of about 30 
meters width on either side of the road, which are commonly not built up or used for 
agricultural purposes.  The description of the alignment is presented below:  
 
The road section was constructed in 1970 and since 1990 there was no investment.  The 
condition of the pavement is poor.  The railway line is running in parallel to the road in 
most of the locations and therefore it could provide a solution for haulage of materials.  
The issue of bringing suitable material on the construction site will be critical.  Although 
Page  4
there is evidence that the existing infrastructure was built using locally available 
materials, their use is questionable.  At least six bridges need reconstruction; most are 
rather small (20 to 30 meters), one is about 120 meters long.  In some areas the road 
crosses moving sand dunes and the rehabilitation design will have to take this into 
consideration.  
 
The environmental conditions for the project are characterized by arid climate, sparse 
vegetation, few year-round surface water courses and large areas with naturally hyper-
saline soils. Saksaul forests, which are adapted to dry, saline conditions with extreme 
temperature differences, play an important role in soil stabilization and erosion control.  
The landscape is very arid, barren, hardly vegetated and prone to wind erosion, dust 
generation, moving sand dunes.  Surface drainage exists mainly seasonally, when flash 
floods can occur and draining waters can have a high erosion potential.  The landscape 
has a very soft relief with wide valleys and basins, separated by slightly elevated 
plateaus.  Land use is restricted to animal grazing in the natural environment (mainly 
camels, sheep, goats, some cattle), but with low intensity.  Permanent settlements are 
extremely sparse.  
 
Land acquisition related to the project location and current planning stage is likely to be 
managed as follows: In most sections, the road can be reconstructed and even widened 
within the existing right-of-way, thus requiring no land acquisition.  New service centers 
will be established at strategic locations, and some existing centers will be upgraded.  
This may require some land acquisition, but the remoteness of the locations will assure 
minimal impact, if any, as they are expected to be located where there is limited grazing 
or no active use of the land.  
 
The planned by-passes may require land acquisition (although most land is likely to be 
government property), but are not expected to cause relocation, as they will traverse 
uninhabited land only.  Additional land may be required for temporary use during 
construction, for which private owners will be compensated and the land returned to its 
original condition after use.  There is no evidence of illegal or temporary occupation or 
use of land along the roadway or within the right-of-way and therefore the project does 
not envisage the removal of unauthorized structures from the right-of-way in carrying out 
the rehabilitation works.  
 
The client has prepared a Resettlement/Land Acquisition Policy Framework prior to 
Appraisal, which was reviewed and accepted by the Bank.  It provides detailed 
information about procedures and standards set in Kazakhstan for the acquisition of 
private land and rights-of-way and identifies any additional provisions that will be 
undertaken to assure compliance with OP 4.12.  The Policy Framework also describes the 
format and timing of the submission of additional, site-specific data and  Land 
Acquisition and Resettlement and Plans during detailed design and afterwards.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment: Generally a safeguards categorization of "B" is proposed for 
the existing road sections earmarked for rehabilitation/reconstruction as well as for the 
bypasses. The rationale is that the major part of construction works will be confined to 
the existing ROW. The corridor of the ROW is generously dimensioned, thus no 
significant / major impact on local population's health, safety or quality of life is 
expected.  
 
The bypasses are not affecting sensitive habitats or protected areas.  During two separate 
missions with walk-over surveys conducted by the Bank team it was verified that the 
impacts by the construction of the bypasses will be minor, localized, and manageable 
with readily available standard mitigation measures.  The impact of the works on soils 
and vegetation is expected to be minimal, if managed diligently. Rehabilitated road 
sections show natural re-vegetation only 2-3 years after works, despite the arid climatic 
conditions.  The extraction of fill and aggregate materials will be restricted to non-river 
sources in the project area. The project will mostly rely on sand quarried from borrow 
pits along the road alignment, which may be reinforced with geotextile or lime addition. 
Extraction procedures are well regulated under Kazakh environmental laws, rehabilitation 
is compulsory and noncompliance is prosecuted.  
 
As this project is categorized “B” it requires the elaboration of a simplified EA only, as 
well as of EMPs and MPs for the construction and operation phases. These documents 
have been produced by the borrower and are available in a level of detail corresponding 
to the current planning stage, which is a feasibility study.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  The project will require some land acquisition, primarily for 
by-passes and service centers, but it is not expected to require the relocation of people or 
evacuation of land that is used temporarily or illegally.  The project does not envisage the 
removal of unauthorized structures from the right-of-way in carrying out the maintenance 
Page  6
works.  The client has prepared a Resettlement/Land Acquisition Policy Framework, 
acceptable to the Bank, and then provide additional data regarding land requirements as 
they are identified during preparation of the final design.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
An increased amount of traffic (which is desirable from the economic perspective) is 
expected to result in higher emissions of exhaust gases and noise. The EA addresses and 
investigates the impact of this issue and for gaseous emissions concludes that the limits 
set by Kazakh standards will continue to be respected. Regarding noise the EA presents a 
number of mitigation and management measures, such as buffer zones, sound barriers, 
tree plantations and, most effectively, the re-routing of the alignment around settlements 
via bypasses.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The bulk of the project location is defined by the existing alignment, which will largely 
remain unchanged and will be rehabilitated and reconstructed.  New alignments sections, 
notable the bypasses around villages, were selected from a number of design options 
based on (i) minimizing negative impacts and nuisance for local population, (ii) avoiding 
any significant negative environmental impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Four main institutional entities were identified as relevant to country based 
environmental and social safeguards during a June 2007 identification mission.  Those 
entities are responsible for the following: (i) environment; (ii) water resources; (iii) 
forestry and hunting; and (iv) land management.  For each institution, the Bank mission 
assessed their roles, their responsibilities and capacity for the implementation of 
safeguards policies and regulations:  
 
Construction works are supervised by MoEP and its subordinate agencies.  Local units 
of the Ministry for Environmental Protection (MoEP), Environmental Expertise and 
Nature Use Regulation Department (EENUR) are structured into thematic groups, which 
at Oblast level include among others (i) environmental expertise, (ii) permitting, (iii) 
supervision and monitoring, (iv) environmental laboratories.  At the Rayon level each of 
these thematic units is represented by one inspector.  
 
Routine operations are usually inspected once per year and carried out by MoEP staff 
and/or Oblast and Rayon representatives. During construction works Oblast and Rayon 
level EPAs monitor the sites and play a key role in commissioning the finalized project, 
thereby checking environmental compliance with design and final implementation of all 
required environmental restoration and recultivation measures.  The EPAs usually liaise 
with the project developer
s, the contractor’s environmental staff and the unit on site, 
which is a mandatory requirement (called "production control" under the Kazakh 
legislation).  
Page  7
The EIA process in Kazakhstan is laid down in the environmental code and a set of 
detailed implementation instructions (Feb. 2004). It foresees 4 stages, which correlate 
with the respective design activities and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility 
level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and (iii) a detailed ("full") EIA for the detailed design stage 
and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the design documentation. In this respect the EA 
process is logical.  It is deemed compatible with international good practice. The 
borrower has prepared an EA for the whole alignment from the R  This was reviewed by 
the Bank team and found acceptable as EA/EMP for the present Project (as a category B 
project).  However, for the phases 2 and 3 of the APL  which have been classified as 
environmental category “A” the Bank team conducted a gap analysis of the existing EA, 
identified issues to be rectified and improved and assisted the Borrower in producing 
TOR for a Consultancy to address the identified gaps.  
 
For the issuance of a construction permit (CP) a "full" EIA is required (including field 
studies and site investigations), which needs to be based on the final design, and contain a 
section with a detailed EMP.  The EMP has to be part of the design documents and is 
reviewed by the local EPAs as well as by the expertise unit of the MoEP.  In the case of 
road projects it should specifically address river crossings, water courses, soil and 
vegetation conservation and re-cultivation, protected areas and natural habitats.  This EIA 
needs to be approved by the MoEP and forms the basis of the environmental permit for 
the construction or operation of a project.  This permit can be issued either by the 
Ministry or one of its local branches.  In Kazakhstan EIAs may only be elaborated and 
submitted for approval by companies or institutions with an official license by the MoEP.  
 
As project design progresses, under Kazakh legislation environmental documentation 
will be updated to meet the requirements for higher levels of detail in design and 
implementation arrangements.  This will include a detailed EMP which will become part 
of the tender / contract documents.  Such implementation-ready EMPs will include 
chance find procedures for physical cultural heritage items, although the project has not 
triggered this safeguards policy and the probability of encountering PCR chance finds is 
considered very low.  Public consultation is mandatory.  The final environmental 
approval on a large construction project (e.g. major infrastructure like the SW corridor 
project) is given by the Chief Environmental Expert of the MoEP's Expertise Department.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In compliance with national legislation an environment impact assessment with generic 
environmental management plans corresponding to the FS / preliminary design level was 
completed in December 2007 by the Client.  These documents will be disclosed by the 
borrower in the country and in the affected areas and in the World Bank InfoShop before 
appraisal.  
 
Additionally all IFIs involved in projects on the overall “Western-Europe-Western-
China” corridor have agreed to develop an environmental management framework,which 
ADB has undertaken to finance and prepare.  It contains a general overview of the 
Page  8
corridor, environmental baseline conditions, an overview of Kazakhstan’sand the IFI’s 
relevant safeguards policies and resulting consequences for project preparation and 
implementation, a framework approach for safeguards procedures and responsible entities 
and authorities.  This document will e disclosed domestically and in the InfoShop before 
appraisal.  
 
The Resettlement/Land Acquisition Policy Framework has been completed during the 
appraisal mission and been accepted by the borrower and disclosed.  Additional site-
specific data and Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plans will be submitted to the Bank 
as they become available during implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/24/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/10/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/23/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
06/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
06/23/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
06/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
07/17/2008 
Comments:   
Page  10
