Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2009 
Report No.:  47981
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P099270 
Project Name:  SOUTH-WEST ROADS:  WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR (CAREC 1B & 6B) 
Task Team Leader:  Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
2,125.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
375.00
375.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the Government’s Western Europe to Western China (WE-WC) 
Corridor development program is to improve transport efficiency and safety, and promote 
development along one of Kazakhstan’s main strategic road transport corridors. 
Transport and trade efficiency will be improved through provision of better infrastructure 
and services along the entire corridor to reduce transport costs, and through gradual 
reform of the entities responsible for all categories of roads. The Bank will finance the 
portion of the Corridor from Shymkent to Aktobe/Kyzylorda oblast border (1,065 km) as 
a
Specific Investment Loan, whereas other International Financial Institutions (ADB, 
EBRD and IDB) will finance other sections of the same corridor.  
 
The development objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency along the 
Corridor between Shymkent to Aktobe Oblast border, and initiate reforms to improve 
road management and traffic safety in Kazakhstan.  The aim is to support local and 
regional socio-economic development. Benefits will include transport efficiency gains 
and traffic safety improvement.  
 
Page  2
The main beneficiaries will be domestic and regional businesses and traders, as well as 
local populations living along the road corridor. Kazakhstan has a higher population 
density in the southern sections of the road, with traffic volumes which are relatively 
high, approximately 10,000 vehicles per day (vpd) close to Shymkent city, mainly due to 
local commuting. Traffic volumes decrease further north with the majority of traffic 
comprising trucks transporting goods (around 500 vpd North from Aral). The government 
expects ribbon development to be attracted along the corridor as a result of the project 
intervention. However, this will require incentives to attract private sector investments to 
be integrated within the overall WE-WC Corridor development program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance major upgrade of road infrastructure along one portion of the 
corridor, from Shymkent to the Aktobe/Kyzylorda oblast border. The project will 
improve road management capacity and assist the government to prepare and implement 
a
road safety and road service improvement action plan.   The project will serve local 
travel as well as international transportation of general cargo and other goods produced 
locally and in the region (Tajikistan, the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan).  Institutional 
measures include the introduction of an efficient road management system incorporating 
modern methods for planning and executing road maintenance, and strengthening the 
capacity of the Committee for Roads (the Committee) within the Ministry of Transport 
and Communication (MOTC) to efficiently implement all investments.  
 
The preliminary road design prepared by the MOTC envisaged the widening of some 
sections of the road and the construction of bypasses around some of the towns along the 
WE-WC Corridor.  The Feasibility Studies financed by the government, which included 
an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), based on the national laws of Kazakhstan, 
and a social analysis were completed in December 2007. A number of follow-up actions 
were identified during several joint meetings between the government and the IFIs 
leading to an overall agreement on shared responsibility for addressing gaps in the 
Feasibility Studies, especially regarding the EIA and land acquisition and resettlement 
issues. The Bank took responsibility for reviewing the economic analysis and supervised 
the preparation of a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that applies to the entire 
Corridor.  The ADB took responsibility for reviewing the Environmental Impact 
Assessment and supervised the preparation of an Environmental Assessment Review 
Framework (EARF) for the entire Corridor.  
 
The project has five components:  
 
Component 1:  Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections between Aktobe/Kyzylorda 
Oblast border to Turkestan (excluding the bypass of Kyzylorda).  This component will 
finance the upgrade and reconstruction of road sections in Kyzylorda oblast totaling 
about 834 km with a design oriented towards increased road safety, and includes the costs 
of consultant services for supervision. Preparation and design costs have been financed 
by the Borrower’s own funds.  The proposed reconstruction will improve ride quality 
leading to lower operating costs for road users, guarantee road structural soundness for a 
prolonged period, and prevent collapse, leading to lower life-cycle cost for the road asset.  
Page  3
Communities living along the Corridor would also benefit from improved access to 
markets.  
 
Component 2:  Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections between Turkestan to 
Shymkent, including bypasses at Kyzylorda and Shymkent cities.   It is proposed that the 
road sections between Turkestan to Shymkent will be upgraded from 2 lanes to 4 lanes. 
Preparation and design costs are being financed through the Borrower’s own funds.  
 
Component 3: Project Management Consultants.  The consultant services will assist the 
Committee with the management of all activities associated with the projects as part of a 
joint effort by all IFIs and the Government to ensure efficient and transparent 
implementation of the WE–WC Corridor program.  Monitoring of the implementation of 
safeguards instruments, especially EMPs and section-specific RAPs, will also be part of 
the responsibility of the Project Management Consultants.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Development.  The component comprises consulting 
services, technical studies, the provision of equipment, and training to strengthen the 
internal management and operations of the Committee, particularly to improve road 
sector planning, programming, budgeting, and implementation, and to improve the 
efficiency of road management and maintenance practices, including environmental 
management. This component also includes technical studies to prepare actions plans for 
road safety improvements, and implementation of an action plan to facilitate private 
sector investments in the provision of services to transporters along the corridor. 
 
Component 5: Supervision of Civil Works financed under Components 1 and 2. This 
includes review of detailed engineering designs and supervision of the implementation of 
Environment Management Plans prepared for each road section.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The salient points regarding social, land acquisition and environment can be summarized 
as follows:  
 
Environment:  
 
The environmental conditions for the project are characterized by arid climate, sparse 
vegetation, few year-round surface water courses and large areas with naturally hyper-
saline soils. Saksaul forests, which are adapted to dry, saline conditions with extreme 
temperature differences, play an important role in soil stabilization and erosion control.  
The landscape in the north is very arid, barren, hardly vegetated and prone to wind 
erosion, dust generation, moving sand dunes.  Surface drainage exists mainly seasonally, 
when flash floods can occur and draining waters can have a high erosion potential.  The 
landscape has a very soft relief with wide valleys and basins, separated by slightly 
elevated plateaus.  Land use is restricted to low density animal grazing in the natural 
environment (mainly camels, sheep, goats, some cattle).  Permanent settlements are 
extremely sparse.  South and east of Zhosaly, the climate is less severe and the 
settlements are more common, centered on former state farms and railroad facilities. The 
Page  4
steppe vegetation, dominated by grassland with small clusters of forest near rivers and in 
valleys, is interrupted by large tracts irrigated with water from the Syr Darya River.  The 
area between Turkestan and Shymkent is used extensively for agriculture and 
horticulture.  
 
The road section was constructed in 1970 and since 1990 there was no investment.  The 
condition of the pavement is poor.  The railway line runs parallel to the road in most of 
the locations and therefore it could be used for haulage of materials during the 
construction.  The issue of bringing suitable material on the construction site will be 
important.  Although there is evidence that the existing infrastructure was built using 
locally available materials, their use is questionable due to their saline content that makes 
them water-sensitive. The reconstruction financed through the project will use material 
from borrow pits for the upper portion of the embankments to avoid the degradation of 
the pavement structure.  At least thirty bridges need reconstruction; most are rather small 
(20 to 30 meters).  In some areas the road crosses moving sand dunes and the 
rehabilitation design will have to take this into consideration.  
 
The proposed alignments for the road sections, including the bypasses, were examined 
in detail by the Project team during a series of field missions that included environmental 
and social specialists. The majority of the construction works, except bypasses around 
settlements and notably around Kyzylorda city, will remain confined within the existing 
right-of-way. Thus, the Project is not expected to have unprecedented or significant 
adverse impacts on the environment that cannot be mitigated. Nevertheless, the Project 
was classified environmental screening Category A for the following reasons: (a) the 
standard approach of the Bank’s Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region is to classify 
road widening as Category A; (b) the unusually large physical dimensions of the Project 
and the corresponding scope of civil works; (c) the dimensions of induced impacts such 
as material sourcing and the production and transport of construction materials; and (d) 
the substantial cumulative length of bypasses in the project and the reconstruction of 
several large bridges. Furthermore, the Category A classification is warranted by the 
planned widening of the road between Shymkent and Kyzylorda from 2 to 4 lanes, and a 
20 km bypass around Kyzylorda, where a new road corridor and a new bridge over the 
Syr Darya River will be constructed.  
 
The main environmental impacts identified during the environmental and social studies 
carried out by Consultants hired for the borrower are extensively characterized in the 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report of February 2009.  Most 
impacts that cannot be avoided can be offset or mitigated with readily available 
environmental management measures.  The environment along the alignment is neither 
sensitive nor particularly valuable in terms of biodiversity and ecological significance.  
Most of the land is arid steppe to semi-desert landscapes with few river crossings, some 
wetlands (partly natural, partly irrigated lands) and no forests, sensitive natural habitats or 
protected areas directly impacted by road construction.  The key impacts on soil, air and 
vegetation are anticipated to include: (a) the conversion of land; (b) emissions in the form 
of noise, dust and exhaust gases; (c) associated impacts of borrow pits; (d) construction 
of temporary access roads, storage areas, and camps; (e) temporary impacts from civil 
Page  5
construction works, aggregate and asphalt plants; (f) transport and limitations for road 
use. Additional impacts from road operation are expected to be minor due to engineering 
measures to control noise and traffic safety for both people and livestock. Measures to 
address these impacts are comprehensively listed in the EMPs produced by the Borrower 
for each road section (both environment Category A and B).  There were sites of cultural 
significance identified near the road alignment at Turkestan and Sauran. However, these 
will not be affected by the planned civil works. The EMPs specify procedures and actions 
in case of archaeological “chance finds” during construction  
 
No sensitive natural habitats, rivers, wetlands, forests or protected areas are affected and 
the bulk of required land will be Government owned and is currently unoccupied and not 
used for economic purposes.  This was confirmed by the existing environmental 
documents, the latest of which is a comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) for the entire project, which was disclosed at the Bank and in 
Kazakhstan in February 2009.  
 
Land acquisition and Resettlement:  
 
Most of the reconstructed road sections will follow the existing alignment, staying 
within long-established rights of way that have not been subject to encroachment.  The 
exceptions are bypasses that will be constructed around populated areas.  The planned by-
passes will require land acquisition, although much of the land is government property.  
The feasibility study estimated that bypasses would require the demolition of 7 residences 
and 31 other structures in South Kazakhstan and Kyzylorda Oblasts, as well as requiring 
over 3,000 ha for permanent use, mostly for bypasses and future intersections. 
Preliminary data from the detailed designs indicate that displacement will be greater than 
anticipated in the feasibility study, with 152 structures in South Kazakhstan Oblast and 
20 structures in Kyzylorda Oblast earmarked for demolition.  Sixty-one are residences 
and 65 are commercial units.  The number will change depending on the alignment 
adopted for the last remaining section.  An estimated total of 105 landowners and users in 
Kyzylorda Oblast and 750 in South Kazakhstan Oblast will lose part or all of their 
holding due to widening the existing right of way establishing new bypasses, for which 
they will be compensated. Local governments allocate reserved land to substitute for 
actively used land, where possible.  This is consistent with the Land Code in Kazakhstan, 
which gives preference to land swapping and replacement of buildings, rather than cash 
compensation.  
 
Additional land will also be required for temporary use during construction.  The 
feasibility study estimated that around 3,600 ha along the entire Corridor would be need 
for temporary use (staging areas, borrow pits, construction bypasses, and the like), most 
of which is government land.  If private lands are used temporarily, the contractors will 
negotiate compensation with owners or users and will return the land to its original 
condition after use.  Illegal or temporary occupation or use of land along the roadway or 
within the right-of-way is uncommon and therefore the project will incur minimal 
removal of unauthorized structures from the right-of-way in carrying out the 
rehabilitation works.  The Roads Committee is committed to regularize ownership in 
Page  6
cases of informal use in order to compensate the currently informal users for their lost 
assets.  
 
The Borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prior to Appraisal 
providing detailed information about procedures and standards set in Kazakhstan for the 
acquisition of private land and rights-of-way.  The RPF also identifies any additional 
provisions that will be undertaken to assure compliance with OP 4.12. The RFP was 
disclosed in country in August 2008. In parallel to the environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA) consultants hired by the Borrower prepared an Expanded RPF, which 
will be transformed into a RAP once the final design is completed and additional socio-
economic analysis is carried out of project affected persons.  The Expanded RPF was 
disclosed both in-country and in InfoShop in March 2009. The overall RAP will be 
further developed and detailed as the design is finalized, and section-specific RAPS will 
be prepared acceptable to the Bank prior to the bidding for construction contracts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (QAG) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project was initially structured as an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) comprising 
three phases in order to sequence the financing and to allow sufficient time for the 
required environmental and social impact assessments to be carried out for later phases of 
the APL. Following the appraisal mission of July 2008, the Project was redesigned as a 
single Specific Investment Loan (SIL) instead of an APL in order to be responsive to a 
request from the Government. With the redesign of the proposed Project as a SIL, the 
previously planned phases of the APL program would be prepared and implemented at 
once under a single project.  Consistent with Bank policy, the proposed Project was 
reclassified as environmental screening Category A due to the nature of activities that 
were to be supported under what was originally phase 3 of the APL and is now 
Page  7
Component 2 of the SIL.  Under Bank operational policies OP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment) and OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), the Client is required prior to 
appraisal, to prepare a full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the 
project and a Resettlement Action Plan or a Resettlement Policy Framework for road 
sections where involuntary resettlement and significant private land acquisition are 
planned.  The Government hired independent consultants to prepare the ESIA and the 
section-specific RAPs.  The ESIA was completed and presented during public 
consultations in January 2009 as a final draft, was subsequently updated based on 
comments received from the affected stakeholders, and was disclosed in February 2009.  
Consultants also prepared a draft Resettlement Report, the substance of which was also 
presented during the same public consultations.  This document, which was based on the 
original RPF, contained many details regarding affected land holdings but can not be 
finalized as a Resettlement Action Plan until detailed designs are completed.  Therefore it 
was disclosed as an expanded Resettlement Policy Framework in March 2009.  In view 
of the above, presentation of the Project to the Board has been delayed until the ESIA and 
RFP were completed, disclosed and consulted upon to the satisfaction of the Bank.  OP 
4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) require that 
the preparation, disclosure and meaningful consultation on the ESIA and RPF be 
completed prior to appraisal.As those tasks were completed only after appraisal, the 
World Bank Board will be notified of this fact and their approval sought for a waiver on 
the application of the requirements under OP 4.01 and OP 4.12.  
 
Environmental Assessment: The major part of construction works under component 1 
will be confined to the existing right-of-way. The corridor of the ROW is generously 
dimensioned, thus no significant / major impact on local population's health, safety or 
quality of life is expected.  
 
The proposed bypasses will not affect sensitive habitats or protected areas.During two 
separate field visits with walk-over surveys conducted by the Bank safeguards specialists, 
it was verified that the impacts by the construction of the bypasses will be localized and 
manageable with readily available standard mitigation measures.  The impact of the 
works on soils and vegetation is expected to be minor, if managed diligently. 
Rehabilitated road sections show natural re-vegetation only 2-3 years after works, despite 
the arid climatic conditions.  The extraction of fill and aggregate materials will be 
restricted to non-river sources in the project area.  In some areas North from Kyzylorda, 
the core portion of the road embankment may have to be reinforced with geotextile or 
lime addition to prevent corrosion of the upper part of the pavement by saline material.  
Most of the time also, the upper portion of the embankment will have to be quarried from 
borrow pits to ensure that the pavement structure is not be in contact with the saline 
material that is underneath.  Extraction procedures are well regulated under Kazakh 
environmental laws, rehabilitation is compulsory and noncompliance is prosecuted.  
Nonetheless, the EIA will set the requirements for extraction of the material that will be 
used for the constructions financed under the project.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  Most of the road sections to be financed by the Bank will 
follow the existing alignment, staying within the long-established right-of-way, except 
Page  8
where bypasses will be constructed around populated areas. As it was already mentioned 
above, it is expected that a total of 105 land owners and users in Kzylorda Oblast and 750 
in South Kazakhstan will lose part or all of their holdings for the expanded right of way 
and bypasses.  Most of these will lose miniscule parts of their plots. They will be 
compensated in cash or given alternate lands. Local governments generally have reserve 
land and the Land Code in Kazakhstan gives preference to land swapping and 
replacement of buildings, rather than cash compensation. Nonetheless, private owners 
can select their preferred option. Discussions with local officials suggest that private 
landowners are increasingly aware of their rights and often do exercise them. For 
example, highway construction in the north of Kazakhstan was held up in 2007 when 
owners refused to agree to the government’s compensation offer and the government was 
reluctant to expropriate the land forcefully.  
 
Local consultations occur at two stages in the preparation of such road projects in 
Kazakhstan: during the feasibility study and the final design. At the feasibility stage for 
the WE-WC Corridor program, consultations were held primarily with local (Rayon) 
officials to discuss and reach agreement on preferred alignments and their implications. 
Based on the agreement, Rayon officials have frozen property transactions within the 
proposed alignments to deter speculation. This stage was completed in November 2007 in 
the Project area. Local officials were consulted again to participate in refining the 
alignment options, following which the design teams will obtain cadastral data. 
Consultations were held with local communities during the preparation of the project on 
the proposed designs and alignments, and were concluded in January 2009. The report on 
the consultations notes that for one road section of about 2.3 km at Temirlanovka village, 
the outcome of public consultations has recommended that designs for an alternative 
alignment should be prepared by the Committee for Roads. Alternative alignments have 
been sketched out and will be discussed in a public hearing early in April 2009, following 
which the final design work will be carried out.  This must fully comply with the 
Environmental Assessment Framework and the Resettlement Policy Framework that had 
earlier been prepared and disclosed for the Project. Once the section-specific RAPs are 
prepared, a further round of consultations will be carried out as the land acquisition 
process is initiated and officials start negotiating with private owners whose land is 
scheduled to be acquired permanently or used temporarily during construction.  
 
After the detailed designs have been completed, the PMC safeguards specialists will 
carry out a focused social assessment in the settlements affected by the bypasses to be 
financed under the Project, as well as a census of people who will lose structures or land 
(permanently or temporarily) due to the Project.  This will be completed within six 
months of project effectiveness. The results of the census will be incorporated in the 
overall RAP and section-specific RAPS.  The social assessment will establish a baseline 
for highway use (active users and passengers in buses, etc.) and the economic influence 
of the road on the settlements in general and on households from which land has been 
acquired in particular. The census will be repeated after the road works are completed to 
determine whether or not the incomes of those households affected by land acquisition 
and resettlement have been restored The data from the social assessments will be used to 
Page  9
anticipate and address unforeseen issues and to establish a baseline from which to 
monitor the impacts of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
An increased amount of traffic (which is desirable from the economic perspective) is 
expected to result in higher emissions of exhaust gases and noise. The EIA addresses and 
investigates the impact of this issue and for emissions concludes that the gaseous limit 
values set by Kazakh authorities will continue to be respected. Regarding noise the EIA 
presents a number of mitigation and management measures, such as buffer zones, sound 
barriers, tree plantations and, most effectively, the re-routing of the alignment around 
settlements via bypasses.  These measures will be incorporated in the design.  The 
possible development of new activities or the extensions of existing activities along the 
corridor is not considered to be a significant issue and will consist mainly of additional 
services to the road users.  Any induced and indirect impacts will take effect over a 
longer period and over a larger area than affected by the Project. These include increases 
in traffic volumes, economic activities, better connectivity and further development along 
the roads corridor. However, as the project deals with rehabilitation of a road, which 
during the Soviet Era used to be a technically sound, functioning transport corridor and 
still performs this function albeit impacted by the deteriorated physical state of the road, 
no radical, rapid development is likely to occur. Instead long term, gradual processes are 
expected, which will allow the synchronous development of appropriate institutional and 
regulatory instruments for monitoring and control.  
 
The construction of 4-lanes between Shymkent and Turkestan
–the most heavily 
trafficked road section–is expected to reduce the number of accidents very drastically.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The bulk of the Project location is defined by the existing alignment, which will largely 
remain unchanged and will be rehabilitated and reconstructed.  New alignment sections, 
notably the bypasses around villages, were selected from a number of design options 
based on: (i) assessments of negative impacts and nuisance for local populations, and (ii) 
the need to avoid any significant negative environmental impacts.  Incomplete data from 
the detailed designs indicate that displacement will relate to 152 structures in South 
Kazakhstan Oblast and 20 structures in Kyzylorda Oblast earmarked for demolition (most 
are non-residential structures); this number will change as the design of the final section 
is completed. The Bank is satisfied that the designers have made a concerted effort to 
minimize land acquisition and the demolition of structures.  Had the construction been 
contained entirely within the existing alignment, the result would be the demolition of 
425 residences and 96 other structures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In the course of project preparation the Borrower with assistance from the Bank and other 
IFIs prepared the following safeguards documents, covering environmental and social 
Page  10
issues along the road alignment: (a) a preliminary Environmental Assessment prepared 
for the Committee by a Kazakh Design Institute (2007); (b) an Environmental 
Assessment Review Framework (2008); (c) a Resettlement Policy Framework (2008); 
and (d) an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment report (2009) and an Expanded 
Resettlement Policy Framework (2009). All of these documents have been subject to 
public consultation and disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop and in Kazakhstan.  
 
The current capacity of the borrower to implement the described measures relies on four 
main entities currently in charge of country based environmental and social safeguards.  
Those entities are responsible for: (a) environment; (b) water resources; (c) forestry and 
hunting; and (d) land management.  
 
Construction works are supervised by the Ministry for Environmental Protection 
(MoEP) and its subordinate agencies.  Local units of the MoEP, Environmental Expertise 
and Nature Use Regulation Department (EENUR) are structured into thematic groups, 
which at Oblast level include among others (i) environmental expertise, (ii) permitting, 
(iii) supervision and monitoring, (iv) environmental laboratories.  At the Rayon level 
each of these thematic units is represented by one inspector.  
 
Routine operations are usually inspected once per year and carried out by MoEP staff 
and/or Oblast and Rayon representatives. During construction works Oblast and Rayon 
level the Ministry for Environmental Protection regional staff monitor the sites and play a 
key role in commissioning the finalized project, thereby checking environmental 
compliance with design and final implementation of all required environmental 
restoration and recultivation measures.  The Ministry for Environmental Protection 
regional staff usually contacts
 the project developers, the contractor’s environmental staff 
and the unit on site, which is a mandatoryrequirement (called "production control" under 
the Kazakh legislation).  
 
The EIA process in Kazakhstan is laid down in the environmental code and a set of 
detailed implementation instructions (Feb. 2004). It foresees 4 stages, which correlate 
with the respective design activities and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility 
level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and (iii) a detailed ("full") EIA for the detailed design stage 
and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the design documentation. In this respect the EIA 
process is logical.  It is deemed compatible with international good practice. The 
borrower has prepared an EA for the whole alignment.  This was reviewed by the Bank 
team who conducted a gap analysis, identified issues to be rectified and improved and 
assisted the Borrower in producing TOR for a Consultancy to address the identified gaps.  
The final EIA will be produced and reviewed by the Bank prior to the presentation of the 
project to the Board.  
 
For the issuance of a construction permit (CP) a "full" EIA is required (including field 
studies and site investigations), which needs to be based on the final design, and contain a 
section with a detailed EMP.  The EMP has to be part of the design documents and is 
reviewed by the local EPAs as well as by the expertise unit of the MoEP.  In the case of 
road projects it should specifically address river crossings, water courses, soil and 
Page  11
vegetation conservation and re-cultivation, protected areas and natural habitats.  This EIA 
needs to be approved by the MoEP and forms the basis of the environmental permit for 
the construction or operation of a project.  This permit can be issued either by the 
Ministry or one of its local branches.  In Kazakhstan EIAs may only be elaborated and 
submitted for approval by companies or institutions with an official license by the MoEP.  
 
The detailed EMPs, which will be part of the tender/contract documents, will include 
chance find procedures for physical cultural heritage items (although the project has not 
triggered this safeguards policy and the probability of encountering PCR chance finds is 
considered very low).  Public consultation is mandatory.  The final environmental 
approval on a large construction project (e.g. major infrastructure like the WE-WC 
corridor project) is given by the Chief Environmental Expert of the MoEP's Expertise 
Department.  
 
.
The borrower requested the Project Management Consultants 
–PMC, a firm that is 
being hired for the management of the project– to include in their team stafffamiliar with 
the Bank safeguards.  The PMC will provide two environment specialists (one 
international and one national) and two resettlement specialists (one international and one 
national) to help with the implementation of the measures agreed upon in the ESIA and 
RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In compliance with national legislation an environment impact assessment with generic 
environmental management plans corresponding to the feasibility study and preliminary 
design level was completed in December 2007 by the Client.  These documents have 
been disclosed by the borrower in the country and in the affected areas and in the World 
Bank InfoShop before appraisal.  The Client has prepared a full EIA following the new 
design for the project as a SIL, which was disclosed and meaningfully consulted upon 
prior to the presentation of the project to the Board. The Expanded Resettlement Policy 
Framework was discussed in principle in consultations and disclosed in country and in 
InfoShop, and will be subject to further consultations and disclosure as it is turned into a 
RAP that includes section-specific RAPS.  
 
Additionally all IFIs involved in financing the WE-WC Corridor agreed to assist with 
the production of an environmental management review framework.  This framework 
contains a general overview of the corridor, environmental baseline conditions, an 
overview of Kazakhstan’s and the IFI’s relevant safeguards policies andresulting 
consequences for project preparation and implementation, a framework approach for 
safeguards procedures and responsible entities and authorities.  This document was 
disclosed by the MOTC in Kazakhstan and at the Bank before appraisal.  
 
Under Kazak legislation, and for a project of this type, local consultation regarding the 
alignment and its implications for land acquisition and resettlement occur at two stages.  
(1) At the feasibility stage for the WE-WC Corridor program, consultations were held 
primarily with local (raion) officials to discuss and reach agreement on preferred 
Page  12
alignments and their implications.  This was completed in November, 2007.  Based on 
the agreement, raion officials were expected to freeze property transactions within the 
proposed alignments to deter speculation.  (2) During the final design stage, expected to 
be completed in June, 2009, local officials again participate in refining the alignment 
options, following which design teams obtain cadastral data and begin discussions with 
private landowners.  A Resettlement Policy Framework for the Corridor was completed 
prior to appraisal and was disclosed both in Kazakhstan and by the Bank.  
 
In accordance with the World Bank’s Operational Policies OP4.01, OP4.12 and 
BP17.50 two additional stages of public consultations were carried out under the 
Consultancy for the preparation of ESIA and RPF/RAP in communities along the 
alignment. In October 2008 consultations on the general project concept as well as the 
TOR for the environmental and social assessment were carried out in Turkestan and 
Kyzylorda and in January 2009 the draft EA report as well as the Resettlement Report 
(effectively the draft RPF) were presented in a series of consultations in about 8 
communities along the alignment. Two of the consultations were observed by the Bank 
team and found to be open, transparent and effective in fostering free and unencumbered 
expression of opinion by the affected stakeholders. There were significant concerns 
raised about some of the design features (e.g. Overpass in a village named Temirlanovka) 
and many constructive proposals received from the local population on the presented 
design and its environmental and social performance. Such proposals included solutions 
for traffic safety (especially pedestrian safety), animal crossings, noise protection and 
community cohesion. The proceedings and results were summarized in a Consultation 
outcome report (see Annex 12), which is the basis for communicating required design 
changes from the Committee for Roads to the design engineers responsible for individual 
lots. Regarding the overpass in Temirlanovka village, in view of the clear outcome of the 
consultations the Committee for Roads instructed the designers to prepare alternative 
alignments, which will be presented at a public hearing in early April 2009, after which 
the final alignment will be selected and final design work will be undertaken.  
 
Once the final alignment is approved, the Roads Committee and the PMC will conduct a 
series of seminars for oblast and raion officials to familiarize them land acquisition and 
expropriation policies and standards of Kazakhstan and the World Bank to ensure that 
uniform procedures are followed throughout the corridor that comply with OP 4.12.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/06/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/25/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  13
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/18/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/25/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  14
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
03/25/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
03/25/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
03/25/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/25/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
03/26/2009 
Comments:   
