Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/04/2009 
Report No.:  49830
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P114766 
Project Name:  Kazakhstan Moinak Electricity Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader:  Istvan Dobozi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
48.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
21.00
21.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary project objective is to increase and improve the supply of electricity to 
business enterprises and households in southern Kazakhstan in an economically and 
environmentally sustainable manner. This objective will be achieved by increasing the 
capacity of the power transmission system to allow the evacuation of clean 
hydroelectricity generated by the Moinak HPP to southern Kazakhstan.   
 
3. Project Description 
Key components:  
 
1. Construction of a 220 kV Overhead Transmission Line (OHTL) from Moinak 
Hydropower Plant (HPP) to Shelek Substation [SS] (about 97 km)  
 
2.
Construction of a 220 kV OHTL from Moinak HPP to Robot SS (about 225 km)  
 
3.
Construction of outdoor switchyard at Moinak HPP  
 
4.
Reconstruction of Shelek SS and Robot SS  
 
The above power line configuration differs from that provided at appraisal for legal 
reasons.  There has been publicly voiced concern that routing the power lines across the 
Charyn and Altyn-Emel national parks (the preferred routing option in the feasibility 
Page  2
study) would violate the law of the Republic of Kazakhstan (ROK) on Specially 
Protected Natural Areas (SPNAs).  The Bank has raised this matter with the Kazakhstan 
Electricity Grid Operating Company (KEGOC), the Borrower, and has sought legal 
clarifications from several competent agencies of the ROK.  KEGOC has been advised to 
seek a cost-effective solution that completely bypasses the national parks.  
 
In a letter dated June 17, 2009, KEGOC informed the Bank that the design company 
"Energostroyproyekt" is still working on the selection of the line routes connecting the 
Moinak HPP with two existing SSs, but based on previous instructions from KEGOC 
only corridors that bypass the above-mentioned national parks are being considered.  This 
is confirmed by the maps attached to the letter indicating the new line routes.  Therefore, 
these line corridors are acceptable to the Bank.  Nevertheless, as a legal safeguard, the 
Loan Agreement will include a provision prohibiting the borrower to route the lines, 
during construction, across any part of the national parks.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The route of the OHTL Moinak HPP - Shelek SS is 97 km long, passing through the 
territory of Enbekshikazakhsky raion of Almaty oblast used as grazing land.  
 
The route of the Moinak HPP - Robot SS is 225 km long, passing through the territory 
of Enbekshikazakhsky, Ilisky and Talgarsky raions of Almaty oblast used as grazing 
land.  
 
The routes of the OHTLs do not cross any part of the Charyn or Amtyl-Emel SPNAs 
(national parks) and this will be covenanted in the Loan Agreement.  Projected OHTL 
routes cross a number of rivers.  Long-span towers at river crossing will be erected 
outside of river water protection zone.  
 
Civil works at Shelek SS and Robot SS will be carried out within existing fence lines. 
Limited amount of land will need to be expropriated for the Moinak outdoor switchyard 
and the OHTL towers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECAVP) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSS4) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
The site of the switchyard at the Moinak HPP is in a remote rugged area near the 
Charyn River. There are no significant environmental issues during construction other 
than the normal issues of dust, noise and disposal of construction wastes as well as 
protection of the Charyn River water quality during construction.The Ministry of 
Environment's final feasibility study-level assessment concluded that the proposed 
project will have "no significant impact" on the environment.  Reconstruction works at 
the Shelek and Robot SSs will be confined to the boundaries of existing fence lines. 
During construction of the OHTLs there are no significant environmental issues other 
than the normal issues of dust, noise and disposal of construction wastes. The routes and 
rights-of-way to be selected will not cross any known structures or sites of cultural 
significance or areas of proven mineral reserves. Land use along these routes is typically 
for grazing or agricultural production. In addition, to protect surface water quality, 
special attention must be paid where transmission line routes cross rivers or streams and 
where worker construction camps are sited. The routes to be selected will not interfere 
with any migratory bird flight patterns or other ecologically sensitive areas. During 
operation, the chief issue is noise (corona discharge) and public health and safety from 
the high electric field strength. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared 
and disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop (January 16, 2009) and KEGOC's website 
(December 29, 2008).  An updated EMP, reflecting the new power line configuration, 
was prepared and disclosed on KEGOC's website and in InfoShop on June 26, 2009.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
Civil works at the Shelek SS and Robot SS will be carried out within existing fence 
lines, thus not requiring land acquisition. Limited amount of land will, however, need to 
be expropriated for the Moinak HPP switchyard (about 4 hectares) and the transmission 
towers (about 9.5 hectares). The exact area of the switchyard and the number of towers 
Page  4
that will be built are not known precisely at this point in time, but will follow from the 
detailed working designs for the power lines during the first year of implementation(after 
selection of the turn-key contractor in or around July 2010). Since the exact scope and 
incidence of all land acquisition requirements cannot be precisely assessed now, a Land 
Acquisition Policy Framework (LAPF) acceptable to the Bank was prepared by KEGOC 
and disclosed as a condition of appraisal. An updated LAPF, reflecting the new SS and 
new line configuration, will be disclosed shortly. Once the final working designs for the 
switchyard and the transmission lines are completed by the turnkey contractor and 
approved by the competent GOK agencies, KEGOC will prepare a specific Land 
Acquisition Plan (LAP) and submit it to the Bank for approval before proceeding with 
construction. No physical displacement of people will take place under the project.  Land 
will be acquired by KEGOC through a special government land fund with compensation 
to be provided to the affected private owners/users.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
The Moinak transmission component will evacuate power from the Moinak HPP that is 
currently under construction. Since the transmission lines and the outdoor switchgear are 
linked to the integrity of the Moinak HPP, this policy is triggered as it represents a 
potential reputational risk to the Bank. The safety of the dam is of particular importance. 
The Bank engaged an independent dam safety expert to perform a due diligence 
assessment of the Moinak dam#s compliance with OP/BP 4.37. The assessment 
concluded that the dam was designed by qualified engineers and an experienced firm. 
The drawings are of high quality with sufficient detail and the quantitative calculations 
were done in an appropriate manner. Several issues (Emergency Preparedness Plan, 
Operations & Maintenance Plan, Independent Panel of Experts) were raised as part of the 
due diligence assessment for which the Bank received satisfactory  clarifications from 
KazKuat JSC, sponsor of the Moinak HPP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As noted above, the originally proposed routing of the OHTLs has been adjusted to 
completely bypass the SPNAs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
KEGOC's institutional capacity for implementing requirements specified in the EMP and 
LAPF is satisfactory. The company has had a decade-long relationship with the Bank 
under two electricity transmission projects.  In both cases, KEGOC's environmental 
management performance has been found to be highly satisfactory and in full compliance 
with requirements specified in the project EMPs. A comprehensive EMP was prepared, 
which may need to be updated for the detailed working designs once these are approved.  
Page  5
Once the exact land areas are defined on the basis of detailed working designs, a 
specific LAP will be prepared and submitted to the Bank for approval.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
On November 14, 2008, in accordance with Kazakhstani environmental law 
(Environmental Code, Rules for Conducting Public Hearings), KEGOC conducted public 
hearings in Almaty with the participation of public interest groups, including ecological 
associations. The public hearings were announced in the widely read national newspaper 
"Kazakhstanskaya Pravda" (October 23, 2008) which included the date and venue of the 
hearings. KEGOC made special transportation arrangements for concerned local groups 
and NGOs to attend. Documentation of the planned OHTL construction was published in 
several newspaper articles (Kazakhstanskaya Pravda, December 22, 2007, Egemen 
Kazakhstan, February 13, 2008 and Kazakhstanskaya Pravda, February 13, 2008).  
 
In June 2009, a local design company has developed the preliminary line routing for the 
two transmission lines (pre-final design stage), Moinak HPP - Shelek SS and Moinak 
HPP - Robot SS. After formal approval by the competent GOK agencies of this new line 
routing, the survey, geological and hydrological works will be performed by a company 
to be engaged by KEGOC during the first year of project implementation.   Results of 
this work will be inputted into the detailed working designs for the OHTLs (developed by 
the turnkey contractor to be selected).  The detailed designs should have a section on 
EIA, which is subject to the state environmental expertise.  The detailed design stage 
includes the requirement of holding another public consultation for the project.  
 
As some further refinements of the EIA and EMP are expected with the completion of 
detailed design work, the revised documents will be redisclosed if and when significant 
changes have been made.  The EMP originally submitted on January 26, 2009, was 
deposited in InfoShop on June 26, 2009 with updated information.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/26/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2009 
 
Page  6
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  7
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Istvan Dobozi 
06/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
06/26/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
05/04/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/22/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
06/26/2009 
Comments:   
