Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/22/2008 
Report No.:  AC3604
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P099270 
Project Name:  SOUTH-WEST ROADS:  WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR (CAREC 1B & 6B) 
Task Team Leader:  Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
2,255.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
398.00
398.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the Government’s Western Europe to Western China (WE-WC) 
Corridor development program is to improve transport efficiency and safety, and promote 
development along one of Kazakhstan’s main strategic road transport corridors. 
Transport and trade efficiency will be improved through provision of better infrastructure 
and services along the entire corridor to reduce transport costs, and through gradual 
reform of the entities responsible for all categories of roads. The Bank will finance the 
portion of the Corridor from Shymkent to Aktobe/Kyzylorda oblast border (1,025 km) as 
a
Specific Investment Loan, whereas other International Financial Institutions (ADB, 
EBRD and IDB) will finance other sections of the same corridor.  
 
The development objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency along the 
Corridor between Shymkent to Aktobe Oblast border, and initiate reforms to improve 
road management and traffic safety in Kazakhstan.  The aim is to support local and 
regional socio-economic development. Benefits will include transport efficiency gains 
and traffic safety improvement.  
 
Page  2
The main beneficiaries will be domestic and regional businesses and traders, as well as 
local populations living along the road corridor. Kazakhstan has a higher population 
density in the southern sections of the road, with traffic volumes which are relatively 
high, approximately 10,000 vehicles per day (vpd) close to Shymkent city, mainly due to 
local commuting. Traffic volumes decrease further north with the majority of traffic 
comprising trucks transporting goods (around 500 vpd North from Aral). The government 
expects ribbon development to be attracted along the corridor as a result of the project 
intervention. However, this will require incentives to attract private sector investments to 
be integrated within the overall Western Europe-Western China Corridor (WE-WC 
Corridor) development program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance major upgrade of road infrastructure along one portion of the 
corridor, from Shymkent to the Aktobe/Kyzylorda oblast border. The project will also 
assist the government to prepare and implement a road safety and road service 
improvement action plan.   The project will serve local travel as well as international 
transportation of general cargo and other goods produced locally and in the region 
(Tajikistan, the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan).  Institutional measures include the 
introduction of an efficient road management system incorporating modern methods for 
planning and executing road maintenance, and strengthening the capacity of the 
Committee for Roads (the Committee) within the Ministry of Transport and 
Communication (MOTC) to efficiently implement all investments.  
 
The preliminary road design prepared by the MOTC envisaged the widening of the road 
and the construction of bypasses around some of the towns along the WE-WC Corridor.  
The Feasibility Studies financed by the government, which included an Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA), based on the national laws of Kazakhstan, and a social 
analysis were completed in December 2007. A number of follow-up actions were 
identified during several joint meetings between the government and the IFIs leading to 
an overall agreement on shared responsibility for addressing gaps in the Feasibility 
Studies, especially regarding the EIA and land acquisition and resettlement issues. The 
Bank took responsibility for reviewing the economic analysis and supervised the 
preparation of a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF) that 
applies to the entire Corridor.  The ADB took responsibility for reviewing the 
Environmental Impact Assessment and supervised the preparation of an Environmental 
Assessment Framework (EAF) for the entire Corridor.  
 
The project has five components:  
 
Component 1:  Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections between Aktobe/Kyzylorda 
Oblast border to Turkestan (excluding the bypass to Kyzylorda).  This component will 
finance the upgrade and reconstruction of road sections in Kyzylorda oblast totaling 
about 834 km with a design oriented towards increased road safety, and includes the costs 
of consultant services for supervision. Preparation and design costs have been financed 
by the Borrower’s own funds.  The proposed reconstruction will improve ride quality 
leading to lower operating costs for road users, guarantee road structural soundness for a 
Page  3
prolonged period, and prevent collapse, leading to lower life-cycle cost for the road asset.  
Communities living along the Corridor would also benefit from improved access to 
markets.  
 
Component 2:  Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections between Turkestan to 
Shymkent, including bypasses at Kyzylorda and Shymkent cities.   It is proposed that the 
road sections between Turkestan to Shymkent will be upgraded from 2 lanes to 4 lanes. 
Preparation and design costs are being financed through the Borrower’s own funds.  
 
Component 3: Project Management Consultants.  The consultant services will assist the 
Committee with the management of all activities associated with the projects as part of a 
joint effort by all IFIs and the Government to ensure efficient and transparent 
implementation of the WE – WC Corridor program.  Monitoring of EMPs and ARPs will 
be part of the responsibility of the Project Management Consultants.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Development.  The component comprises consulting 
services, technical studies, the provision of equipment, and training to strengthen the 
internal management and operations of the Committee, particularly to improve road 
sector planning, programming, budgeting, and implementation, and to improve the 
efficiency of road maintenance practices.  
 
Component 5: Improvements in road safety and road-side services along the corridor.  
The first part of this component will include technical studies and physical improvements 
targeted at specific road safety improvements.  The second part of this component will 
finance the preparation and implementation of an action plan to facilitate private sector 
investments in the provision of services to transporters along the corridor.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The salient points regarding social, land acquisition and environment can be summarized 
as follows:  
 
Environment:  
 
The environmental conditions for the project are characterized by arid climate, sparse 
vegetation, few year-round surface water courses and large areas with naturally hyper-
saline soils. Saksaul forests, which are adapted to dry, saline conditions with extreme 
temperature differences, play an important role in soil stabilization and erosion control.  
The landscape in the north is very arid, barren, hardly vegetated and prone to wind 
erosion, dust generation, moving sand dunes.  Surface drainage exists mainly seasonally, 
when flash floods can occur and draining waters can have a high erosion potential.  The 
landscape has a very soft relief with wide valleys and basins, separated by slightly 
elevated plateaus.  Land use is restricted to low density animal grazing in the natural 
environment (mainly camels, sheep, goats, some cattle).  Permanent settlements are 
extremely sparse.  South and east of Zhosaly, the climate is less severe and the 
settlements are more common, centered on former state farms and railroad facilities.  The 
steppe vegetation, dominated by grassland with small clusters of forest near rivers and in 
Page  4
valleys, is interrupted by large tracts irrigated from the Syr Darya River.  The area 
between Turkestan and Shymkent is used extensively for agriculture and horticulture.  
 
The road section was constructed in 1970 and since 1990 there was no investment.  The 
condition of the pavement is poor.  The railway line runs parallel to the road in most of 
the locations and therefore it could be used for haulage of materials during the 
construction.  The issue of bringing suitable material on the construction site will be 
critical.  Although there is evidence that the existing infrastructure was built using locally 
available materials, their use is questionable due to their saline content that makes them 
water-sensitive. The reconstruction financed through the project will use material from 
borrow pits for the upper portion of the embankments to avoid the degradation of the 
pavement structure.  At least thirty bridges need reconstruction; most are rather small (20 
to 30 meters).  In some areas the road crosses moving sand dunes and the rehabilitation 
design will have to take this into consideration.  
 
The proposed alignments for road segments, including the bypasses, were examined in 
detail by the Project team during a series of field missions that included environmental 
and social specialists.  The major part of construction works, except bypasses around 
settlements and Kyzylorda city, will remain confined within the existing right-of-way. 
Thus the Project is not expected to have unprecedented or significant adverse impacts on 
the environment that cannot be mitigated.  However, the Project has been classified as 
environment Category A for the following reasons: (i) the Europe and Central Asia 
region of the Bank has a standard policy to classify road widening as Category A; (ii) the 
unusually large physical dimensions of the Project and the scope of civil works; (iii) the 
dimensions of induced impacts such as material sourcing and the production and 
transport of aggregates and asphalt.  The overall category A classification results mainly 
from the identified environmental issues around road sections between Shymkent and 
Turkestan, where road widening and bridge reconstruction are planned, and the 
construction of the bypass around Kyzylorda, where a new road corridor longer than 20 
km, and a new bridge over the Syr Darya river will be constructed.  
 
Most impacts that cannot be avoided can be offset or mitigated with readily available 
environmental management measures. In the case of the road section between Shymkent 
and Turkestan, the key impacts are anticipated to include the conversion of land, impacts 
on soil and vegetation, emissions in form of noise, dust and exhaust gases, associated 
impacts of borrow pits, construction of haulage roads, storage areas, and camps, 
temporary impacts from civil construction works, aggregate and asphalt plants, transport 
and limitations for road use.  Measures to address these impacts will be incorporated in 
the EMP.  The environment along the alignment between Turkestan and the 
Kyzylorda/Aktobe Oblast border is not sensitive or particularly valuable in terms of 
biodiversity and ecological significance.  Most of the land is arid steppe to semi-desert 
landscapes with few river crossings and some wetlands (partly natural, partly irrigated 
lands).  There are no forests, sensitive natural habitats nor protected areas that are known 
that could be directly impacted by road construction.  Would such site be identified at 
proximity of the road during the preparation of the EIA, the potential impacts will be 
analysed and mitigation measures put in place.  There are no known sites or structures of 
Page  5
cultural significance affected by the planned civil works, although there is always a 
possibility of “chancefinds” during implementation.  
 
No sensitive natural habitats, rivers, wetlands, forests or protected areas are affected and 
that the bulk of required land will be Government owned and is currently unoccupied and 
not used for economic purposes.  This was confirmed by the existing environmental 
documents covering the whole Corridor developed by the Borrower’s design institute as 
part of the Feasibility Study, and by an Environmental Assessment Framework prepared 
by consultants supervised by ADB.  Both of these documents were disclosed at the Bank 
and in Kazakhstan.  
 
Land acquisition and Resettlement:  
 
Most of the reconstructed road sections will follow the existing alignment, staying 
within long-established rights of way that have not been subject to encroachment.  The 
exceptions are bypasses that will be constructed around populated areas.  The planned by-
passes will require land acquisition, although much of the land is likely to be government 
property (to be determined during preparation of the final design).  The feasibility study 
estimated that bypasses would require the demolition of as many as 7 residences and 31 
other structures in South Kazakhstan and Kzylorda Oblasts, as well as requiring over 
3,000 ha for permanent use, mostly for bypasses and future intersections.  Once the final 
design is completed, it will be possible to determine the actual number of structures and 
the amount of private land to be affected and the land acquisition process can begin.  
 
Additional land will also be required for temporary use during construction.  The 
feasibility study estimated that around 3,600 ha would be need for temporary use (staging 
areas, borrow pits, construction bypasses, and the like), for which private owners will be 
compensated and the land returned to its original condition after use.  There is no 
evidence of illegal or temporary occupation or use of land along the roadway or within 
the right-of-way and therefore the project does not envisage the removal of unauthorized 
structures from the right-of-way in carrying out the rehabilitation works, nor the 
compensation of temporary or illegal land users.   
 
The Client prepared a Resettlement/Land Acquisition Policy Framework prior to 
Appraisal that applies to all of the IFIs.  It was reviewed and accepted by the Bank.  It 
provides detailed information about procedures and standards set in Kazakhstan for the 
acquisition of private land and rights-of-way and identifies any additional provisions that 
will be undertaken to assure compliance with OP 4.12 and other IFI requirements.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (QAG) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project was initially structured as an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) comprising 
three phases in order to sequence the financing and to allow sufficient time for the 
required environmental and social impact assessments to be carried out for later phases of 
the APL. Following the appraisal mission of July 2008, the Project was redesigned as a 
single Specific Investment Loan (SIL) instead of an APL in order to be responsive to a 
request from the Government. With the redesign of the proposed Project as a SIL, the 
previously planned phases of the APL program would be prepared and implemented at 
once under a single project.  Consistent with Bank policy, the proposed Project is 
reclassified as environmental screening Category A due to the nature of activities that 
were to be supported under phase 3 of the APL.  Under Bank operational policies OP 
4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), the Client is 
required prior to appraisal, to prepare a full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and 
Abbreviated Resettlement Plans (ARPs) for road sections where involuntary resettlement 
and significant private land acquisition are planned.  The Government has hired 
independent consultants to prepare the EIA and ARPs, with disclosure and meaningful 
consultation on these to be completed by January 2009.  In view of the above, 
presentation of the Project to the Board will be delayed until the EIA and ARPs have 
been completed, disclosed and consulted upon to the satisfaction of the Bank.  
 
Environmental Assessment: The major part of construction works under component 1 
will be confined to the existing right-of-way. The corridor of the ROW is generously 
dimensioned, thus no significant / major impact on local population's health, safety or 
quality of life is expected.  
 
The proposed bypasses will not affect sensitive habitats or protected areas.  During two 
separate field visits with walk-over surveys conducted by the Bank safeguards specialists, 
it was verified that the impacts by the construction of the bypasses will be minor, 
localized, and manageable with readily available standard mitigation measures.  The 
impact of the works on soils and vegetation is expected to be minimal, if managed 
Page  7
diligently. Rehabilitated road sections show natural re-vegetation only 2-3 years after 
works, despite the arid climatic conditions.  The extraction of fill and aggregate materials 
will be restricted to non-river sources in the project area.  In some areas North from 
Kyzylorda, the core portion of the road embankment may have to be reinforced with 
geotextile or lime addition to prevent corrosion of the upper part of the pavement by 
saline material.  Most of the time also, the upper portion of the embankment will have to 
be quarried from borrow pits to ensure that the pavement structure is not be in contact 
with the saline material that is underneath.  Extraction procedures are well regulated 
under Kazakh environmental laws, rehabilitation is compulsory and noncompliance is 
prosecuted.  Nonetheless, the EIA will set the requirements for extraction of the material  
that will be used for the constructions financed under the project.  
 
As this project is placed in environment screening categoriy “A”, it requires the 
elaboration of a full EIA. This is being prepared by the borrower and will be available, 
consulted upon, and disclosed prior to presentation of the Project to the Board of 
Directors of the World Bank.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  The project will require the acquisition of around 3,000 ha of 
land, primarily for by-passes, new and future intersections and service centers.  The final 
design will indicate how much of the land is private, but most is expected to be State 
land.  As many as 7 residences will be demolished and 31 other structures, primarly at the 
start and end points of the bypasses.  The project does not envisage the need to remove 
unauthorized structures from the right-of-way or to redress encroachments, as the rights 
of way have remained intact.  Consistent with the Resettlement Policy Framework, once 
land requirements have been determined and ownership documented (part of the final 
design process), the client will prepare compliance documents according to OP 4.12 
(Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan, Land Acquisition Plan).  For coherence and 
implementation effectiveness, the documents will apply to a bypass area or the Raion 
level.  These documents will be reviewed and approved by the Bank prior to the 
presentation of the project to the Board of Directors.  
 
Once implementation begins, the Committee will carry out a focused social assessment 
in the settlements affected by the bypasses to be financed under the project, as well as a 
census of people who will lose structures or land (permanently or temporarily) due to the 
project.  The social assessment will establish a baseline for highway use (active users and 
as passengers in buses and the like) and the economic influence of the road in the 
settlement.  The census of affected people will determine their economic status and 
establish a monitoring baseline.  The census will be repeated after the local works are 
completed to determine whether or not the incomes of those households affected by land 
acquisition and resettlement have been restored  The data from the social assessments 
will be used to anticipate and address unforeseen issues and to establish a baseline from 
which to monitor the impacts of the project.   
 
Page  8
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
An increased amount of traffic (which is desirable from the economic perspective) is 
expected to result in higher emissions of exhaust gases and noise. The EIA addresses and 
investigates the impact of this issue and for gaseous emissions concludes that the gaseous 
emissions limits set by Kazakh will continue to be respected. Regarding noise the EIA 
presents a number of mitigation and management measures, such as buffer zones, sound 
barriers, tree plantations and, most effectively, the re-routing of the alignment around 
settlements via bypasses.  These measures will be incorporated in the design.  The 
possible development of new activities or the extensions of existing activities along the 
corridor is not considered to be a significant issue and will consist mainly of additional 
services to the road users.  Nonetheless, the EIA will provide generic recommendations 
for enhancing the environmental and social sustainability of such development, would 
such development be financed by the Government or by the private sector.  
 
The construction of 4-lanes between Shymkent and Turkestan
–the most heavily 
trafficked road section–is expected to reduce the number of accidents very drastically.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The bulk of the Project location is defined by the existing alignment, which will largely 
remain unchanged and will be rehabilitated and reconstructed.  New alignment sections, 
notably the bypasses around villages, were selected from a number of design options 
based on: (i) assessments of negative impacts and nuisance for local populations, and (ii) 
the need to avoid any significant negative environmental impacts.  The Feasibility Study 
prepared for the Committee estimated that the bypasses would require the demolition of 7 
residences and 31 other structures in South Kazakhstan and Kyzylorda Oblasts, as well as 
requiring over 3,000 ha for permanent use, mostly for the bypasses.  In contrast, if the 
existing alignment were to be followed, the result would be the demolition of 425 
residences and 96 other structures, and the acquisition of 2,400 ha, with a higher 
concentration of land acquisition in populated areas than currently anticipated.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Four main institutions were identified as relevant to country based environmental and 
social safeguards during a June 2007 identification mission.  Those entities are 
responsible for: (i) environment; (ii) water resources; (iii) forestry and hunting; and (iv) 
land management.  For each institution, the Bank assessed their roles, responsibilities and 
capacity for implementing safeguards policies and regulations.  
 
Construction works are supervised by the Ministry for Environmental Protection 
(MoEP) and its subordinate agencies.  Local units of the MoEP, Environmental Expertise 
and Nature Use Regulation Department (EENUR) are structured into thematic groups, 
which at Oblast level include among others (i) environmental expertise, (ii) permitting, 
(iii) supervision and monitoring, (iv) environmental laboratories.  At the Rayon level 
each of these thematic units is represented by one inspector.  
Page  9
Routine operations are usually inspected once per year and carried out by MoEP staff 
and/or Oblast and Rayon representatives. During construction works Oblast and Rayon 
level the Ministry for Environmental Protection regional staff monitor the sites and play a 
key role in commissioning the finalized project, thereby checking environmental 
compliance with design and final implementation of all required environmental 
restoration and recultivation measures.  The Ministry for Environmental Protection 
regional staff usually liaise w
ith the project developers, the contractor’s environmental 
staff and the unit on site, which is a mandatory requirement (called "production control" 
under the Kazakh legislation).  
 
The EIA process in Kazakhstan is laid down in the environmental code and a set of 
detailed implementation instructions (Feb. 2004). It foresees 4 stages, which correlate 
with the respective design activities and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility 
level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and (iii) a detailed ("full") EIA for the detailed design stage 
and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the design documentation. In this respect the EIA 
process is logical.  It is deemed compatible with international good practice. The 
borrower has prepared an EA for the whole alignment.  This was reviewed by the Bank 
team who conducted a gap analysis, identified issues to be rectified and improved and 
assisted the Borrower in producing TOR for a Consultancy to address the identified gaps.  
The final EIA will be produced and reviewed by the Bank prior to the presentation of the 
project to the Board.  
 
For the issuance of a construction permit (CP) a "full" EIA is required (including field 
studies and site investigations), which needs to be based on the final design, and contain a 
section with a detailed EMP.  The EMP has to be part of the design documents and is 
reviewed by the local EPAs as well as by the expertise unit of the MoEP.  In the case of 
road projects it should specifically address river crossings, water courses, soil and 
vegetation conservation and re-cultivation, protected areas and natural habitats.  This EIA 
needs to be approved by the MoEP and forms the basis of the environmental permit for 
the construction or operation of a project.  This permit can be issued either by the 
Ministry or one of its local branches.  In Kazakhstan EIAs may only be elaborated and 
submitted for approval by companies or institutions with an official license by the MoEP.  
 
The detailed EMP, which will be part of the tender/contract documents, will include 
chance find procedures for physical cultural heritage items (although the project has not 
triggered this safeguards policy and the probability of encountering PCR chance finds is 
considered very low).  Public consultation is mandatory.  The final environmental 
approval on a large construction project (e.g. major infrastructure like the WE-WC 
corridor project) is given by the Chief Environmental Expert of the MoEP's Expertise 
Department.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In compliance with national legislation an environment impact assessment with generic 
environmental management plans corresponding to the FS / preliminary design level was 
Page  10
completed in December 2007 by the Client.  These documents have been disclosed by the 
borrower in the country and in the affected areas and in the World Bank InfoShop before 
appraisal.  The Client is now working on the preparation of a full EIA and RAP following 
the new design for the project as a SIL.  Those documents will be disclosed and 
meaningfully consulted upon prior to the presentation of the project to the Board.  
 
Additionally all IFIs involved in financing the WE-WC Corridor have agreed to an 
environmental management framework.  This framework contains a general overview of 
the corridor, environmental baseline conditions, an overview of Kazakhstan’s and the 
IFI’s relevant safeguards policies and resulting consequences for project preparation and 
implementation, a framework approach for safeguards procedures and responsible entities 
and authorities.  This document was disclosed by the MOTC in Kazakhstan and at the 
Bank before appraisal.  
 
Under Kazak legislation, and for a project of this type, local consultation regarding the 
alignment and its implications for land acquisition and resettlement occur at two stages.  
(1) At the feasibility stage for the WE-WC Corridor program, consultations were held 
primarily with local (raion ) officials to discuss and reach agreement on preferred 
alignments and their implications.  This was completed in November, 2007.  Based on 
the agreement, raion officials froze property transactions within the proposed alignments 
to deter speculation.  (2) During the final design stage, expected to be completed by 
December 2008, local officials again participate in refiing the alignment options, 
following which design teams obtain cadastral data and begin discussions and 
negotiations with private landowners.  A Resettlement and Land Acquisition Policy 
Framework for the Corridor was completed prior to appraisal and has been disclosed both 
in Kazakhstan and by the Bank.  Additional site-specific Abbreviated Resettlement Plans 
are under preparation with local participation and will be disclosed locally and submitted 
to the Bank for concurrence prior to presentation of the Project to the Board of Directors.  
 
Within the ongoing EA process –started in response to the identified gap in theoriginal 
EIA produced by the borrower– a renewed consultation process will be prepared and 
conducted by the Consultant in charge of the EIA. A first consultation stage will be held 
in October 2008 covering the general project layout, the TOR for the EIA, and the 
intended measures to address environmental and social concerns. The second 
consultation stage required under WB OP 4.01 for category A projects will be conducted 
once the EIA is available as draft version. Consultations will be held in a meaningful way 
at multiple locations along the corridor as well as in the Capital city.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/31/2008 
 
Page  11
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/31/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/31/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Recieved disclosure waiver from MD for non-disclosure before appraisal. EA and 
Resettlement documents will be disclosed when the report will be available sometime in 
December 2008.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
No 
Page  12
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
09/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
09/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
09/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
09/23/2008 
Comments:   
