Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4095 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P109683 
Project Name: Kenya Agricultural Productivity and Agribusiness Project 
Task Team Leader: Andrew Mwihia Karanja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (97%);Renewable energy (3%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
82.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Local 
Communities 
1.30
11.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to empower stakeholders to transform smallholder 
agricultural production and marketing systems for increased productivity and incomes in the 
Project areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will be implemented over a five year period (2009-2014).  This is to enable up-
scaling and consolidation of KAPP Phase I activities, and to give sufficient time for 
implementation of the agribusiness development activities.  The indicative IDA allocation is 
US$80 million with the Government co-financing estimated at US$10 million.  At this stage, it is 
proposed that the Project be a follow-on phase to the Adaptable Program Loan (APL) in line 
with the original KAPP design.  
 
The Project will be multi-institutional requiring enhanced level of coordination.  The design of 
the Project will incorporate this sector-wide and bottom-up approach at district and national 
levels.  The Project will also be closely coordinated with other Government and donor supported 
projects.  The national and lower level Project implementation structures set up under KAPP 
Page  2
Phase I will be supported and enhanced.  These structures include the Inter-ministerial 
Coordination Committee, Project Steering Committee, Project Secretariat and mainstreamed 
district coordination structures.  
 
The proposed Project will support four components that complement one another.These are:  
 
(i)  Support for Policy, Institutional and Project Implementation  
 
(ii) Support to Agricultural Research  
 
(iii)Support to Agricultural Extension and Farmer/Stakeholder Empowerment  
 
(iv) Support to Agribusiness Development  
 
Component 1: Policy/Institutional and Project Implementation Support (About US$7 million - 
IDA)  
 
Strategically, this component will support activities that will lead to better coordination of the 
sector with an aim of creating the necessary impetus for sector-wide approach.  These activities 
will be undertaken both at the national and lower levels.  At the national level, the Project will 
support the development of the ASDS investment plan, its implementation, activities that will 
facilitate harmonization of both Government and donor supported programs, and activities to 
align them with ASDS.  At the district and lower levels, the proposed Project will support joint 
programming and create the necessary capacity and institutional framework for it.  It will also 
support policy reviews, design and implementation of sector-wide M&E and MIS systems and 
support the project implementation structures.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural Research Systems (About US$25 million- IDA)  
 
This component will focus on supporting the research system in the country and in the East 
African region.  It will have three sub-components, namely:  
 
Support to the National Agricultural Research System (NARS):  This sub-component will 
operationalize the NARS policy towards increased productivity and value addition, through 
pluralism, decentralization, efficiency, cost effectiveness and impact.  It will enhance the 
interplay of research, extension, education, agricultural and livestock producers and clients in all 
aspects of research problem identification, agenda setting, planning, and service delivery.  
 
Support to Kenya Agricultural Research Institute (KARI):  This sub-component will support 
strategic research programs of KARI, in order to implementation its Investment Plan.  It will 
focus on promoting an agricultural innovation approach, which is a clear shift from previous 
paradigms that focused more on capacity building and institutional strengthening.  The research 
will address client market needs, and focus more on value addition, and impact, as articulated in 
the NARS framework.  Research on Natural Resource Management (NRM) issues will also be 
supported with a special focus on climate change.  
 
Support for the East African Agricultural Productivity Program (EAAPP): This sub-component 
will support the proposed East African Agricultural Productivity Program (EAAPP), whose 
objective is to create centers of excellence in the COMESA region.  Kenya will be the centre of 
excellence for dairy.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Agricultural Extension and Farmer/Stakeholder Empowerment (About US$33 
million - IDA)  
 
This component will have two sub-components: (i) support to extension, and (ii) support to 
empowerment of farmers and service provider’s.  The overall objective of extension sub-
component is to support the Government to implement the NASEP, focusing on empowering the 
extension clientele through sharing of information, imparting knowledge, skills and changing 
attitudes, so that they can efficiently manage their resources for increased productivity, improved 
incomes and standard of living. The empowerment sub-component will support the empowering 
and organization of farmers/clients and service providers towards the transformation of 
subsistence farming to commercial agriculture trough their mobilization, and empowerment to 
form foras, and producer business groups.  
 
Component 4: Agribusiness and Market Development (about US$15 million – IDA)  
 
The objective of this component is to empower all public and private stakeholders along 
commodity chains to plan, design and deliver agribusiness services aimed at value-addition, and 
linking producers to input and output markets. The Project will promote agro-processing only by 
supporting the pre-feasibility studies to set up four Agro Food Parks in selected regions, develop 
legal structure to operate them, prepare the relevant Public Private Partnership (PPP) agreements, 
and lobby to attract the related agro industries within the premises of the parks. The Project will 
not finance the costs of processing facilities or infrastructure in the parks. However, the PPP 
entities will be facilitated to access loans from commercial banks. Building on existing 
experiences, the Project will promote further coordination within the sub-sector with the relevant 
ministries, the private sector, and involve development partners to enhance synergies with on-
going agribusiness activities.  
 
Implementation Arrangements: KAPAP will build upon the efficient and effective institutional 
and implementation structures adopted under KAPP I.  However, these institutional 
arrangements will be improved to make them consistent with a sector-wide approach envisaged 
under ASDS, and to mainstream them within the existing Government structures.  The 
memberships of the Project Steering Committee will be expanded to include strategic partners in 
the agribusiness.  Project implementation will be undertaken by the relevant ministries within the 
Agriculture sector and KARI.  Overall coordination of Project implementation will be assumed 
by the KAPAP Coordination Secretariat (KS).  The KS will work closely with ASCU and the 
implementation agencies, to ensure stronger linkages between the farmers/producers, extension, 
agribusiness and research for the achievement of Project.  
 
For the activities supported under extension and farmer empowerment, it is proposed that a 
phased approach will be adopted.  The first two years of the Project implementation will 
concentrate on up-scaling activities in all the divisions in the 20 districts covered by KAPP Phase 
I
(the original 20 districts have increased due to sub-division to around 48).  A review will be 
done during the mid-term review to recommend further geographical targeting.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National level and twenty districts covered under KAPP Phase I.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
The legal and institutional frameworks for the environmental management are in place.  
However, institutional capacity for the management of the safeguard policies, particularly at the 
district and constituency levels is low.  The capacity constraint is both in terms of technical 
ability to screen environmental and social impacts of the various subprojects, and staff shortages. 
The successful implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF), will largely depend on the ability of the District Environmental Officers (DEOs) and 
agricultural extension officers to support communities in the environmental screening process, in 
identifying the economic livestock diseases and pest thresholds, and in preparing the indigenous 
peoples plans.  The capacity building is also required at various levels for safe handling and 
disposing livestock pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and pesticides, including obsolete chemicals 
and containers or packaging materials.  
 
While importers of the agricultural and livestock chemicals have adequate capacity for safe 
handling and disposal of obsolete chemicals and containers, the local stockists and farmers will 
need more training in this area, in order to reduce health hazards. Consequently, the training of 
the DEOs, extension officers, local stockists, and farmers will be paramount to the successful 
implementation of the safeguard policies.  The Project will therefore set aside a budget for 
institutional capacity building in safeguards policies management, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Applicable because under Components 2 and 4 the Project will support investments in 
infrastructure, such as the construction and upgrading of building facilities at research and rural 
market centers.  Since sites are yet to be identified, an ESMF has been prepared and will be 
disclosed by the Borrower and in the InfoShop, prior to the appraisal mission.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Screening process is included in the ESMF.  The Project will not support any activities 
located in the natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Screening process is included in the ESMF.  The Project will not support any activities, 
which will lead to the destruction of the natural forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Applicable because under Components 2 and 3 the Project will finance the agricultural and 
laboratory chemicals, including pesticides, which will be used for the research purposes at the 
research centers.  In addition, it will support the adoption of new technologies by smallholders, 
through the provision of matching grants, part of which would be used for purchasing agro-
chemicals and pesticides.  An IPM has been prepared and will be disclosed by the Borrower and 
in the InfoShop, prior to the Appraisal mission.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Screening process is covered in the ESMF.  The Project will not support any activities in 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
areas with physical cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Applicable because there are Ongiek and Sengwer indigenous peoples living in the Nakuru 
and Trans Nzoia districts, which are located in the Project area.  An IPPF developed for the 
KAPSLMP, which is partially blended with KAPAP and implemented in the same area will be 
used.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Screening process is covered under the ESMF.  Investments supported under the matching 
grants will be implemented in the private or rented land only.  No communal or public land will 
be used.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The Project will not support any investments in dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Not applicable because although there are eight districts located in the shared waters of the 
Lake Victoria Basin, the water abstractions under KAPAP will be negligible, and with improved 
pesticide management, water quality is likely to be improved.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The Project will not support any investments in the disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/11/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/23/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
KAPP Phase I was an environmental Category C Project, since it had minimal or no adverse 
environmental impacts, thus was exempted from the EIA.  The KAPAP will both upscale the 
activities of the KAPP I, and intensify investments aimed at improving agricultural 
productivity and value-addition, which are likely to have some limited or site specific 
adverse environmental and social impacts.  
 
This Project has  therefore been assigned environmental Category B, because its potential 
adverse impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas, such as on 
wetlands, forests, grasslands, and other natural habitats are limited; and the impacts are site 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
specific, few if any are irreversible and specific mitigation measures can normally be 
designed.  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM), and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), will be 
prepared and disclosed prior to the project appraisal.  The ESMF will guide the screening and 
preparation of mitigation measures of the identified environmental and social impacts of the 
subprojects investment activities. The IPM will guide the monitoring of pests thresholds, 
screening of pesticides, and safe handling and disposal of agrochemicals and pesticides. The 
IPPF will guide the preparation of the indigenous people’s plans, in case the KAPAP 
supports subprojects investments in the areas inhabited by the indigenous people.  
 
All safeguard studies have been prepared and disclosed by March 31, 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Mwihia Karanja 
04/16/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
