Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/23/2008 
Report No.:  AC3504
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P106200 
Project Name:  KENYA NORTHERN CORRIDOR TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT 
ADDL FINANC 
Task Team Leader:  Anil S. Bhandari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (72%);Aviation (15%);Central government administration 
(10%);Health (2%);Other social services (1%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Regional integration (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
191.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
68.30 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
49.60
117.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The revised Project Development Objectives are to: (a) increase efficiency of road 
transport along the Northern Corridor to facilitate trade and regional integration (58% 
weight); (b) enhance aviation safety and security to meet international standards (30% 
weight);(c) promote private sector participation in the management, financing and 
maintenance of road assets (10% weight); and restore the provision of vital public 
infrastructure services disrupted during the 2007 post-election crisis (2% weight).   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will support the following components:  
 
Original Component A: Rehabilitation of Northern Corridor and Emergency Repair of 
Public Infrastructure Assets.  
Page  2
(i)  Improvement of about 168 km of the Northern Corridor (Mau Summit 
–
Kisumu).The works will include construction of major structures such as interchanges 
and bridges. The major items of work will comprise earthworks, provision and laying of 
cement improved gravel sub-base, Dense Bitumen Macadam (DBM) or crushed stone 
base as appropriate, asphalt wearing course, construction of culverts and other drainage 
structures, construction of facilities for socio-economic enhancement and roadside 
amenities along the corridor, service roads, and non-motorized traffic facilities along the 
Mau Summit – Kericho-Nyamasaria- Kisumu road. In addition, the Nyamasaria-Kisumu 
road section will involve pre-stressed concrete bridge works and reinforced earth 
structures; and  
 
(ii)  Repair and rehabilitation of roads and bridges damaged or destroyed by floods in 
late 2006 and early 2007 and other public infrastructure assets damaged by the violent 
protests following the general elections in December 2007. About 5 bridges and 3 public 
buildings are expected to be restored, along with several sections of national roads where 
trenches were dug across the pavement to prevent traffic flow. In addition, about 5 term 
contracts will be awarded on the basis of retainership in flood prone areas and bailey 
bridges will be procured and stocked in support of the disaster management sub-
component.  
 
Original Component C: Private Sector Participation in Road Management.  
 
(i)  The component involves financing the pilot output and performance based contract 
for maintenance and management of about 200-300 km of lower volume roads and 
financing of transaction advisory services (Transaction Adviser) for the proposed Nairobi 
Urban Toll Road concession.  
 
Original Component E:  Institutional Strengthening in Road Sector and Technical 
Assistance.  
 
(i)  Feasibility, engineering and design studies for Kibwezi-Isiolo road, Lakeside N. 
Tanzania – Narok road, Mombasa by-pass, Sudan Link Road, and Urban PublicTransport 
in Nairobi;  
 
(ii)  Strengthening governance in the road construction industry through: establishment 
of a disaster management and response unit in the Roads Department; establishment of a 
Contractors’ Registration Board; strengthening of the Engineers’Registration Board, 
Institution of Engineers, and the Association of Consulting Engineers; and provision of 
emergency bailey bridges.  
 
Original Component F:  Support to the Kenya Airports Authority (restructured).  
 
(i)  Restructuring of the civil works component by dropping the sub-components on 
construction of the terminal building and extension of the runway at Kisumu airport and 
the component for renovation of the terminal and upgrading of security at Wilson airport 
(to be fully financed by KAA) and consolidating the allocated funds with those of the 
earlier planned rehabilitation of the Old Embakasi Airport including external electrical 
works and renovation of the old terminal building into financing only two sub-
components, namely, (a) perimeter fencing of selected airports ($2.12 million); (b) 
reorganization and expansion of the JKIA passenger terminal ($14.0 million); and 
supervision of works at JKIA ($4.0 million). No additional financing is involved.  
Page  3
(ii)  Consolidation of the sub-components for security perimeter light, surveillance 
system, and support to emergency centers, into the sub-component for security and 
communication equipment and vehicles (totaling $ 6.64 million) and readjustment of 
allocated funds for feasibility and design study and supervision of Kisumu and Wilson 
airport reconfiguration ($1.44 million) and training ($0.86 million). No additional 
financing is involved.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The additional financing is intended to improve the Northern Corridor, the main artery 
from East to West in Kenya, which also connects Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Eastern 
DRC, Southern Sudan and Ethiopia to the Port of Mombasa. The road segments to be 
supported in the Corridor are: Improvement of about 168 km (Mau Summit-Kisumu); 
construction of facilities for socio-economic enhancement and roadside amenities along 
the corridor; repair and rehabilitation of roads and bridges damaged or destroyed by 
floods in late 2006 and early 2007 and other public assets damaged by the violent protests 
following the general elections in December 2007.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No new safeguards polices are triggered by the restructured component or new activities. 
However, the potential environmental and social impacts may include: soil erosion and 
disturbance of water flows, water pollution, traffic disruption, noise, gaseous and dust 
pollution disturbance of flora and fauna, permanent and/or temporary land acquisition 
and landscape disturbance.  There are no large scale significant and irreversible impacts. 
The emergency rehabilitation of public infrastructure assets component involves largely 
repair of damaged road sections, bridges and some public buildings, which already exist, 
Page  4
as a result of post-election protests. Hence for this component, no new construction is 
expected and neither land acquisition nor any project affected persons (PAPs) requiring 
resettlement or rehabilitation is involved. Should any unexpected PAPs be involved under 
this component, they will be dealt with in accordance with the agreed Resettlement 
Policy Framework which adequately covers all aspects of resettlement or rehabilitation of 
PAPs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No cumulative impacts are anticipated at this point.  However, the EAs give full details 
of the anticipated impacts and take into consideration appropriate mitigation measures, 
including those related to longer-term impacts   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alignment of the by-pass to Kisumu was chosen after full consideration of the social 
and environmental impacts and with a view to minimize the negative impacts and 
enhance the social benefits.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the restructured activity 
(Reconfiguration of Jomo Kenyatta Airport) has been prepared and submitted to the Bank 
for clearance and disclosure. Arrangements are underway to disclose the EIA in country 
as soon as comments from the Bank are received by the Borrower (expected before April 
14, 2008). The overall Resettlement Policy Framework for the project has been reviewed 
and cleared by the Bank and disclosed in country and in the InfoShop. No land 
acquisition is required for the Airport terminal improvement component, nor are there 
any PAPs since the entire terminal is within the land and air-side security boundary of 
property owned by KAA. However, should any unexpected PAPs  or land acquisition be 
involved in the perimeter fencing component of the project, they will be dealt with in 
accordance with the agreed Resettlement Policy Framework as in the case of the 
emergency repair and rehabilitation of public infrastructure assets described above. The 
EIAs, RPF and RAPS that have been reviewed and cleared by the Bank and disclosed to 
the public, adequately cover all the other remaining major construction works under the 
project, including the sections to be financed with the additional credit. Hence no 
revisions are deemed necessary.   
 
Specific EIAs and RAPs for all the five major road contracts including the Mau Summit 
–
Kisumu road section (to be financed under the Additional Financing project) have been 
reviewed and cleared by the Bank and disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop. One of 
the contracts, Maji ya Chumvi – Miritini (co-financed by NDF) has already been 
successfully completed. A sixth road section, namely, the North Airport Road, has been 
dropped from the project because of lack of funds, and is being considered for financing 
by other Development Partners (Japan, China and South Korea).  
 
Page  5
T
he
Supervision Engineer’s contracts for the four on-going road projects have provision 
for an Environmental Specialist to ensure that the contractor complies with the 
requirements as spelt out in the contract and the respective EIA report and RAP cleared 
by the Bank. Bank’s supervision missions have found the overallenvironmental 
management of the contracts generally satisfactory, but periodically identified gaps, 
specifically in the institutional capacity of the Borrower, and agreed with the Borrower 
action plans to rectify the shortcomings. Furthermore the contracts have adequate 
provisions in the contracts requiring the contractor to comply with measures spelt out in 
the environmental mitigation plans. This is monitored closely by the supervision 
consultants on behalf of the Borrower and by Bank's team during supervision missions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The road program in general and all of the EIAs have included stakeholder participation.  
The following groups have had input to the project: roads department, farmers, traders, 
transporters, vehicle owners, contractors, local administration, multilateral bodies and 
religious organizations.  So far, land acquisition and the number of project affected 
persons has been minimal because most of the rehabilitation work is being done within 
the Borrower’s right-of-way and no complaints or implementation controversies have 
been reported. Wherever applicable, the implementation of specific RAPs has been 
satisfactory and the local arrangements for consultations and dispute handling during 
implementation, assisted by the Supervision Consultant have proved satisfactory.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/26/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/26/2003 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Anil S. Bhandari 
03/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann 
03/21/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
03/21/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Colin Bruce 
03/21/2008 
Comments:  As per guidelines, if the additional financing request involves restructuring or scale up, 
the PAD state-ISDS, is to be cleared with and signed by the CD. 
