Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3955 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/21/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P111546 
Project Name: Kenya Youth Empowerment Program 
Task Team Leader: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTSP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (70%);Other social protection and risk management (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
85.00
85.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The key development objective is to enhance the effectiveness and impact of youth employment 
and training programs in Kenya.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be financed using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), for a total credit amount of 
US$50 million over an implementation period of four years. The indicative costs for the different 
components have not yet been agreed with the Government of Kenya (GoK). The PDO is 
proposed to be achieved through the following three components:  
 
(i) 
Youth employment, through labor intensive works and social services,  
 
(ii) 
Enhancing employability of youth, through training and attachments to the private sector; 
and  
 
(iii) 
Governance, policy development, institutional strengthening, and program coordination.  
 
The first component will enhance the performance of the Kazi Kwa Vijana (KKV), by 
providing technical assistance and additional funds for the implementation of innovative 
Page  2
projects. This technical assistance will aim to introduce improvements to the program, including: 
the development of an M&E system; the enhancement of community participation in project 
identification; clearer criteria for project selection; optimization of the labor intensity, and 
improvement of program targeting.  The overall objective of this component will be to enhance 
the performance of the KKV and make it more flexible to enable expansion and contraction as 
necessary. Priority is currently given to sub-projects that can be implemented rapidly using 
labor-intensive techniques such as road maintenance sub-projects, small-scale water supply and 
sanitation sub-projects, water harvesting sub-projects, afforestation sub-projects and waste 
collection. It is likely that the public works sub-projects to be implemented under the project will 
remain similar, though some additional social service activities may also be introduced.  
 
The second component will develop a pilot tripartite partnership model, including youth, 
training providers, and the private sector.  This partnership will aim to increase the employability 
of youth, by providing them with training and opportunities for attachments/internships to 
private sector entities.  The internships will be limited to a certain period with the provision of 
some subsidy from the Project.  Vocational, life skills and entrepreneurship training will be 
supported under this component. The objective is for youth to either be employed by these 
enterprises or to increase their employability with other enterprises or through self employment. 
This component will be linked to a number of Government and non government organizations in 
Kenya, like the Youth Enterprise Development Fund (YEDF), and the Kenya National 
Federation of Jua Kali Associations (KNFJA). If successful, such an approach could be scaled up 
with GoK resources.  
 
The third component will support overall youth policy issues, provide analysis to some labor 
market issues, and support the institutional capacity of key institutions, like the MoYAS. 
Training, will be provided to youth officers on the ground, especially in areas with high 
community participation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed Project will cover both urban and rural areas. Specific project locations are still 
under discussion.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The KKV program was launched with the objective to mainstream youth employment through 
line ministry implementation of labor intensive public works projects. The program is being 
coordinated in the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and includes sub-projects in sectors such 
as forestry, roads, water, sanitation and energy.  The GoK has established an inter-ministerial 
youth committee that includes key Ministries working on youth issues in Kenya.  The OPM 
works closely with the youth committee to ensure that project activities are well aligned in the 
work programs of different ministries and parastatals. Capacity to implement and monitor 
safeguard policies varies across ministries and agencies, and from province to province. It is 
therefore suggested to include one representative from the National Environmental Management 
Agency (NEMA) in the inter-ministerial youth committee. Environmental and social risks and 
mitigation measures will be incorporated into the KKVs Operational Manual (OM) which will 
include steps to be taken to screen environmental and social risks, measures to be taken to 
Page  3
mitigate them and the responsible entities for doing so. Training and technical assistance will be 
provided as necessary.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
Ms Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts on human populations or 
environmentally important areas. Measures required to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or 
compensate for adverse impacts and improve environmental performance will be incorporated 
into the operations manual for the KKV.  An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be prepared prior to appraisal. Provisions will be inserted into the ESMF requiring 
that project-specific EIAs be prepared by the Borrower prior to commencement of any activity 
with significant adverse environmental impacts. Sub-Project Environmental Management Plans 
will be developed to ensure the mitigation of identified adverse impacts, enhancement of positive 
ones, and as tools for ongoing community engagement and ownership, along with recommended 
institutional measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Natural habitats are not expected to be impacted by the project, as project target areas are 
expected to be in already environmentally degraded areas with high population density. Any 
development of greenfield areas (such as in forestry sub-projects) will be assessed through the 
ESMF screening of sub-projects, and appropriate compliance measures will be taken to limit 
impact. The ESMF and the KKV Manual will contain a screening mechanism to ensure that sub-
projects do not take place in natural habitats that are fragile, unique and/or limited in size. The 
project is therefore not expected to adversely impact wildlife or natural vegetation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Forests are not expected to be impacted by the project, as project target areas are expected to 
be in already environmentally degraded areas with high population density. All sub-projects will 
be assessed through the ESMF screening of sub-projects, and appropriate compliance measures 
will be taken to limit impact. The ESMF and the KKV Manual will contain a screening 
mechanism to ensure that sub-projects do not negatively affect forests. The project is therefore 
not expected to adversely impact forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The works to be undertaken under this project are not expected to trigger this safeguard.   
Nevertheless, as a precautionary measure, specific guidelines and procedures will be included in 
the environment annex to the KKV operational manual.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
This policy is triggered because of the likelihood that Indigenous Peoples are present in (or 
have collective attachment to) project lands and an IPPF will therefore be prepared. Once the 
presence of indigenous peoples in sub-project areas is confirmed, the project will carry out a 
social assessment of indigenous communities, a process of free, prior informed consultation 
leading to broad community support and an IPP, following policy requirements.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/26/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Bank will review and clear the revised Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), and the IPP Framework before they are disclosed in Kenya and at the 
Bank's Infoshop, prior to appraisal in February 2010.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Mills 
08/21/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
08/21/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
