Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4306
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P109683 
Project Name:  Kenya Agricultural Productivity and Agribusiness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Andrew Mwihia Karanja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (97%);Renewable energy (3%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
82.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.90 
 Local 
Communities 
2.30
16.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and 
incomes of participating smallholder farmers from agricultural and agribusiness activities 
in the Project area.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will be implemented over a five year period (2009-14).  This is to enable up-
scaling and consolidation of KAPP Phase I activities, and to give sufficient time for 
implementation of the agribusiness development activities.  The indicative IDA 
allocation is US$82 million with the Government co-financing estimated at US$14 
million.  The Project will be a follow-on phase to the Adaptable Program Loan (APL) in 
line with the original KAPP design.  
 
The Project will be multi-institutional requiring enhanced level of coordination.  The 
design of the Project will incorporate this sector-wide and bottom-up approach at district 
and national levels.  The Project will also be closely coordinated with other Government 
and donor supported projects.  The national and lower level Project implementation 
structures set up under KAPP Phase I will be supported and enhanced.  These structures 
Page  2
include the Inter-ministerial Coordination Committee, Project Steering Committee, 
Project Secretariat and mainstreamed district coordination structures.  
 
The Project will have four components three of which are continuation of the 
component supported in Phase I:  The three components continued from Phase I are 
support for: (i) Policy/Institutional and Project Implementation; (ii) Agricultural Research 
Systems; and (iii) Agricultural Extension and Farmer and other Stakeholders 
Empowerment.  A new component supporting Agribusiness and Market Development 
was added in this phase of the program.  
 
Component 1: Policy/Institutional and Project Implementation Support (About US$7 
million - IDA)  
 
Strategically, this component will support activities that will lead to better coordination 
of the sector with an aim of creating the necessary impetus for sector-wide approach.  
These activities will be undertaken both at the national and lower levels.  At the national 
level, the Project will support the development of the ASDS investment plan, its 
implementation, activities that will facilitate harmonization of both Government and 
donor supported programs, and activities to align them with ASDS.  At the district and 
lower levels, the proposed Project will support joint programming and create the 
necessary capacity and institutional framework for it.  It will also support policy reviews, 
design and implementation of sector-wide M&E and MIS systems and support the Project 
implementation structures.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural Research Systems (About US$25 million - IDA)  
 
This component will focus on supporting the research system in the country and in the 
East African region.  It will have three sub-components, namely:  
 
Support to the National Agricultural Research System (NARS):  This sub-component 
will operationalize the NARS policy towards increased productivity and value addition, 
through pluralism, decentralization, efficiency, cost effectiveness and impact.  It will 
enhance the interplay of research, extension, education, agricultural and livestock 
producers and clients in all aspects of research problem identification, agenda setting, 
planning, and service delivery.  
 
Support to Kenya Agricultural Research Institute (KARI):  This sub-component will 
support strategic research programs of KARI, in order to implement its Investment Plan.  
It will focus on promoting an agricultural innovation approach, which is a clear shift from 
previous paradigms that focused more on capacity building and institutional 
strengthening.  The research will address client market needs, and focus more on value 
addition, and impact, as articulated in the NARS framework.  Research on Natural 
Resource Management (NRM) issues will also be supported with a special focus on 
climate change.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Agricultural Extension and Farmer/Stakeholder Empowerment (About 
US$33 million - IDA)  
 
This component will have two sub-components: (i) support to extension, and (ii) support 
to empowerment of farmers and service provider’s.  The overall objective of extension 
sub-component is to support the Government to implement the NASEP, focusing on 
empowering the extension clientele through sharing of information, imparting 
knowledge, skills and changing attitudes, so that they can efficiently manage their 
resources for increased productivity, improved incomes and standard of living.  The 
empowerment sub-component will support the empowering and organization of 
farmers/clients and service providers towards the transformation of subsistence farming 
to commercial agriculture through their mobilization and empowerment, to form fora and 
producer business groups.  
 
Component 4: Agribusiness and Market Development (about US$ 20 million – IDA)  
 
The objective of this component is to empower all public and private stakeholders along 
commodity chains to plan, design and deliver agribusiness services aimed at value-
addition, and linking producers to input and output markets.  This component will 
support the following inter-related activities: (i) Creation of a network of Agri-Business 
Development Centers (ABDCs) to lead the VC structuring process while providing 
agribusiness and market development services; (ii) Design and set-up appropriate 
agribusiness funding instruments to be rolled out by financial institutions, and support the 
development of market based weather risk products to be rolled out to farmers by 
insurance companies; (iii) Support the creation of one Agro-Food Park in four selected 
regions; (iv) Enhance training in agribusiness management and food technologies to meet 
market demands; and (v) Piloting on linking agro-processing to renewable energy 
sources.  
 
Implementation Arrangements: KAPAP will build upon the efficient and effective 
institutional and implementation structures adopted under KAPP I.  However, these 
institutional arrangements will be improved to make them consistent with a sector-wide 
approach envisaged under ASDS, and to mainstream them within the existing 
Government structures.  The memberships of the Project Steering Committee will be 
expanded to include strategic partners in the agribusiness.  Project implementation will be 
undertaken by the relevant ministries within the agriculture sector and KARI, with the 
Ministry of Agriculture being the implementing agency. Overall coordination of Project 
implementation will be assumed by the KAPAP Secretariat (KS).  The KS will work 
closely with ASCU and the implementation agencies, to ensure stronger linkages between 
the farmers/producers, extension, agribusiness and research for the achievement of the 
Project.  
 
For the activities supported under extension and farmer empowerment, it is proposed 
that a phased approach will be adopted.  The first two years of the Project implementation 
will concentrate on up-scaling activities in all the divisions in the 20 districts covered by 
Page  4
KAPP Phase I (the original 20 districts have increased due to sub-division to around 48).  
A
review will be done during the MTR to recommend further geographical targeting.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
For the first two and half years, the Project will be implemented in 20 districts originally 
covered by KAPP Phase I.  Under Phase I, two divisions were covered in each of the 20 
districts.  Because the original 20 districts have since been sub-divided into 59 districts, 
KAPAP will initially focus on the original geographic area, to consolidate the gains 
achieved under Phase I.  Based on the implementation progress, the geographical 
coverage will be re-assessed during the mid-term review (MTR).  
 
Under Components 2 and 4 the Project will support investments in infrastructure, such 
as the construction and upgrading of building facilities at research and rural market 
centers.  In addition, under Components 2 and 3 the Project will finance the agricultural 
and laboratory chemicals, including pesticides, which will be used for the research 
purposes at the research centers.  In addition, it will support the adoption of new 
technologies by smallholders, through the provision of matching grants, part of which 
would be used for purchasing agro-chemicals and pesticides.  Finally, there are Ongiek 
and Sengwer indigenous peoples living in the Nakuru and Uasin Gishu districts 
respectively, which are located in the Project area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This Project has been assigned environmental Category B, because its potential adverse 
impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas, such as on wetlands, 
forests, grasslands, and other natural habitats are limited; and the impacts are site 
Page  5
specific, few if any are irreversible and specific mitigation measures can normally be 
designed and implemented under the Project.  
 
A
full Environmental Assessment (EA) has not been prepared because the research 
activities under Component 2 and the CDD-type subprojects under Components 3 and 4, 
and their exact locations have not been identified ex-ante.  As a result, the safeguard 
instrument used is the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  For 
relatively large infrastructure investments, such as the construction and upgrading of 
building facilities at research and rural market centers, specific EAs and Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared before funding is approved by the Bank.  
The ESMF will guide the screening and preparation of mitigation measures of the 
identified environmental and social impacts of the subprojects investment activities.  
 
The Bank’s pest management policy supports safe, effective, and environmentallysound 
pest management interventions.  In addition, the policy emphasizes on the safe handling 
and disposal of pesticides.  It also promotes the use of biological and environmental pests 
control methods, which are also cost effective.  To comply with this policy, an Integrated 
Pest Management Framework (IPMF) has been prepared by the Borrower.  The IPMF 
will guide the monitoring of pests thresholds, screening of pesticides, and safe handling 
and disposal of livestock pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and pesticides.  
 
With regards to the Bank’s Indigenous Peoples policy, an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) prepared for the GEF-supported Kenya Agricultural Productivity and 
Sustainable Land Management Project (KAPSLMP), was adopted and revised to suit the 
needs of KAPAP, and will be used to address this policy issues.  For any subproject that 
will trigger an indigenous people’s policy, an Indigenous People Plan (IPP) will be 
prepared in consultation with the affected indigenous peoples and implemented.  
 
The ESMF, IPMF, and IPPF documents prepared were disclosed in Kenya on April 1, 
2009, and at the Bank’s InfoShop on April 6, 2009.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
KAPP Phase I was an environmental Category C Project, since it had minimal or no 
adverse environmental impacts, thus was exempted from the environmental impact 
assessment (EIA).  KAPAP will both upscale the activities of the KAPP I, and intensify 
investments aimed at improving agricultural productivity and value-addition, which are 
likely to have some limited or site specific adverse environmental and social impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
quick-disbursing component to support the Borrower to procure farm inputs was 
considered and rejected because it may complicate the Project design, and overwhelm the 
capacity of the Borrower to screen for environmental and social impacts.  It was also felt 
not to be in line with longer term objectives of the Project, which is to gradually increase 
agricultural productivity, by adopting environmentally sustainable new technologies.   
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The legal and institutional frameworks for the environmental management are in place.  
However, institutional capacity for the management of the safeguard policies, particularly 
at the district and constituency levels is low.  The capacity constraint is both in terms of 
technical ability to screen environmental and social impacts of the various subprojects, 
and staff shortages.  The successful implementation of the ESMF, IPMF and IPPF, will 
largely depend on the ability of the District Environmental Officers (DEOs) and 
agricultural extension officers to support communities in the environmental screening 
process, in identifying the economic livestock diseases and pest thresholds, and in 
preparing the indigenous peoples plans.  The capacity building is also required at various 
levels for safe handling and disposing livestock pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and 
pesticides, including obsolete chemicals and containers or packaging materials.  
 
The IPMF document has assessed the Borrowers capacity to implement the pest 
management policy.  While importers of the agricultural and livestock chemicals have 
adequate capacity for safe handling and disposal of obsolete chemicals and containers, 
the local stockists and farmers will need more training in this area, in order to reduce 
health hazards.  As a result, training of the DEOs, extension officers, local stockists, and 
farmers will be paramount to the successful implementation of the safeguard policies.  
The Project has therefore set aside a budget for institutional capacity building in 
safeguards policies management, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for KAPAP include the agricultural sector ministries (Agriculture, 
Livestock, Fisheries, and Forest), Ministry responsible for the Local Government, Kenya 
Agricultural Research Institute, National Environmental Management Authority, District 
Authorities, agricultural and livestock inputs stockists, farming community, CBOs, 
NGOs, and other Development Partners supporting the agricultural sector.  During 
preparation, the ESMF, IPMF and IPPF, consultations took place at the national, district, 
and community levels, involving all stakeholders.  Consultations were in the form of 
meetings and workshops, including with farmers in the sample villages visited.  The 
disclosure of these instruments was in a form or stakeholders workshops held in Embu 
(Central Province), Nakuru (Rift Valley Province), and Mombasa (Coast Province); 
posting of the documents on the website of the Ministry of Agriculture; publishing the 
summary and table of content of the documents in major newspapers; and placing hard 
copies in the national and provincial libraries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/21/2009 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/21/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/21/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  8
Manager review the plan? 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Mwihia Karanja 
04/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula 
04/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab 
04/22/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/22/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/22/2009 
Comments:   
