Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2009 
Report No.:  AC3958
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P111545 
Project Name:  Kenya Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Mills 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  34.00 
 UN 
Children's 
Fund 
12.00
76.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase social safety net access for 
extremely poor OVC, through an effective and efficient expansion of the CT-OVC 
Program.  The project would: (i) increase the capacity of the DCS to manage the CT-
OVC program; and (ii) support effective program implementation in selected districts, by 
providing timely and predictable transfers to eligible OVC households, and by 
contributing to improved human capital for OVC in those households.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed IDA Credit would support the implementation of the scale-up of the 
Program for a period of 4 years (from FY2010-FY2013).  The scale-up would be done in 
conjunction with the GOK, DfID and UNICEF.  The Project comprises the following two 
components:  
 
Component 1:  Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$10 million 
equivalent, including contingencies)  
Page  2
-
Sub-component 1.1 Strengthening of the capacity of the MGCSD to coordinate 
social protection interventions in Kenya (US$ 1 million equivalent, including 
contingencies).  This sub-component would support the development of a policy 
framework to better coordinate existing social protection programs and support the 
overall planning and coordination of social protection interventions in the country, 
mainly through technical assistance, consultations and the training of key staff in relevant 
areas.  
 
-
Sub-component 1.2  Strengthening of the capacity of the DCS to more efficiently 
manage the Program (US$ 4 million equivalent, including contingencies).  The CPU and 
the District Children Offices would be strengthened to cope effectively with the new 
demands of a considerably expanded Program and the potential risks of its expansion.  
This support would focus on strengthening the capacity of a four level organizational 
structure - central, provincial, district and local levels.  
 
-
Sub-component 1.3 Governance and Accountability (US$ 2 million equivalent, 
including contingencies).  The Program already has some strong governance features, but 
these need to be extended as it is scaled-up further.  This sub-component would therefore 
support a range of activities to strengthen further the governance of the Program.  In 
particular, it would fund the provision of information to beneficiary households and the 
population as a whole, regarding the program goals and benefits.  It would also finance 
the implementation of the communication strategy and an independent monitoring and 
evaluation function.  
 
-
Sub-component 1.4 Management Information, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 3 
million equivalent, including contingencies).  As the Program scales up, the MIS would 
require refinements (such as improvement of targeting variables and a financial 
management module) and this component would finance the costs of such changes.  In 
addition this sub-component would focus on further strengthening the M&E of the 
Program to ensure systematic and efficient implementation of the Program.  
 
Component 2:  Program Implementation in Selected Districts (US$40 million 
equivalent, including US$2 million contingencies)  
 
-
Sub-component 2.1 Cash benefits for OVC households in selected districts 
(US$36 million equivalent, excluding contingencies). This sub-component would provide 
funding for cash transfers of K.Sh. 1,500 per month per household for the selected 
beneficiaries. Together with the GOK and DP-supported households, the target of 
reaching at least 100,000 households by the end of 2012 would be reached, with IDA 
supporting around 56,000 OVC households, DfID and UNICEF supporting about 37,000 
OVC households and the GOK supporting about 30,000 OVC households.  
 
-
Sub-component 2.2 Transaction Costs for Cash Transfers (US$ 2 million 
equivalent, excluding contingencies).  This sub-component would finance the transaction 
costs related to the transfer of the cash from the GOK to the beneficiary households.   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will support four years of the
 Government’s scale-up CT-OVC 
program(FY10-FY13). The first year IDA funds would support Makueni, Kitui, Gucha, 
Thika, Samburu, Vihiga and Kakamega. Additional districts to be supported will be 
based on the ranking prepared with the KIHBS data.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The two Project components will not trigger any safeguard issues as: (i) the first 
component will support capacity building at the national, provincial, district and local 
levels, with emphasis on the Department of Children Services in the Ministry of Gender, 
Children and Social Development to enable it to implement the scale-up of the CT-OVC 
program, and (ii) the second component will finance cash transfers in various districts.  
The cash transfers (currently Ksh 1,500, around US$20 per month) will be paid to the 
heads of the beneficiary households.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Two Project components will not trigger any safeguard issues.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Mills 
01/29/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
12/17/2008 
Comments:   
