Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3373 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P094692 
Project Name: Kenya Coastal Development Project 
Task Team Leader: William Leeds Lane 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P108845 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 1, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 11, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Rural non-farm income generation 
(S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00 
 
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
3.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The people living in the coastal area are amongst the poorest in the country, are culturally 
unique, and largely of the Islamic faith which has resulted in development conflicts within the 
community and tensions between the coast and the rest of Kenya.  
 
The coastal region of the country has a population of 2.5 million people, with 62% of the 
people living below the poverty line, and the coast is the second poorest of Kenya’s eight 
provinces.  About 34 percent of the population resides in urban areas along the coastline.  
Additionally, immigration from rural to urban areas of the coast is increasing with many new 
immigrants becoming involved in livelihoods that make illegal and unsustainable use of natural 
resources.  Increased human concentration coastward also heavily impacts the marine resources 
and environment. The resulting deterioration of the natural resource base further aggravates the 
vicious cycle of poverty and associated decline in environmental quality.  
Page  2
The coastal area of Kenya is characterized by unique natural resources, which form the 
economic basis of various activities, especially those based on tourism, fisheries and maritime 
transport.  These activities are vital to growth and development in the region. For example, 
coastal tourism represents 60 percent of total national tourism. But too many tourist hotels, over 
use of fragile coral reefs by local residents and tourists, too much fishing pressure in inshore 
areas, inappropriate land use in coastal districts, and poor management of development over a 
long period has severely degraded the value of coastal resources. Also, organic pollution from 
human and solid waste sourced from the major urban areas and tourist hotels also impact on the 
natural resources upon which the coastal economy is based.  
 
The lack of proper management also means that valuable existing resources are exploited 
without full benefit accruing to coastal residents or the national economy.  Little domestic 
fishing occurs in the area outside fringing coral reefs up to the outer boundary of the 200 nautical 
mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  Kenya does license some foreign vessels to fish in these 
offshore waters, with most seeking tuna and other commercially valuable large pelagic species.  
But there is high prevalence of illegal, unlicensed and unregulated (IUU) fishing due to 
inadequate Government capacity to monitoring and control fishing effort.  As a result, the 
offshore fishery resources currently contribute little to national growth.  
 
To reverse the degradation of natural resources and to shift resource use to a more sustainable 
pattern will require re-development of the coastal areas.  This re-development will require that 
issues in the three areas described above be addressed through a holistic approach that takes into 
account development in both the terrestrial and aquatic environments, and the interactions 
between these two areas. For example, unless significant increases in capture fisheries can be 
realized in the deeper near shore areas, and increases realized in mariculture production, fish 
supply per capita could decline by approximately 50%, and export potential of fish and fish 
products will not be realized. The Government also recognizes that the EEZ is inadequately 
managed and that illegal fishing is presumed to result in a major loss of potential resource 
revenue to the country.  
 
A
better understanding of land capability in coastal districts and how land use impacts on near 
shore aquatic resources is needed. This, combined with assessment of markets for agricultural 
and fish products, will help link preservation of soil fertility and appropriate land use with 
minimization of erosion and runoff impacts on near shore mangroves and coral reefs  
 
Project Development Objective: To achieve greater value and improved livelihood from 
sustainable management of marine and coastal resources through:  (i)  increasing fisheries 
revenue earning potential of the Government of Kenya (GoK) through licensing of foreign 
vessels;  (ii) to improve sustainable management/regeneration of the fisheries resources and near-
shore ecosystem with the participation of communities;  and (iii) support for alternative 
livelihoods that make more sustainable and profitable use of coastal natural resources.  
 
Global Environment Objective: To strengthen conservation and sustainable use of marine and 
coastal biodiversity.  
 
Page  3
The Project would target the following three geographic areas of the coastal and marine 
environment:  
 
•
Offshore resources of the 200 nautical Miles EEZ  
 
•
Inshore resources including coral reefs, fish, mangroves, mariculture  
 
•
Land-based resources of the coastal districts, particularly use of terrestrial resources that 
impact on near and offshore marine resources   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
There will be a single project that is to be funded by IDA and cofinanced by the GEF.  As such, 
environmental, social and cultural safeguards, and economic development objectives of the 
KCDP, are integrated and indivisible.  The Project aims to create a rural development process 
that has environmental and social sustainability at its core, rather than as just a safeguard 
process.  
 
The project would be designed to provide inputs into the three coastal ecosystems, described 
above and be implemented through the following components.  
 
Component 1: Sustainable management of offshore fisheries resources  
 
The objective of this component is to increase fisheries revenue potential to the GoK through 
improved licensing of foreign vessels by more adequately valuing the right of resource use and 
responsibilities of the licensees to monitor and report catch. Emphasis would also be placed on 
building government capacity to monitor and carry out surveillance of the fishery resources of 
the EEZ. The component will link with the regional Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Project 
(SWIOFP), which will provide basic research information on demersal, crustacean and small 
pelagic fisheries in the 200 mile EEZ.  The three main activities of this component will be:  
 
•
Activity 1:  Capacity building for the Fisheries Department to effectively manage the 
fishery of the 200 mile EEZ.  
 
•
Activity 2:  Purchasing, setting up, operating a Vessel Monitoring System (VMS); and 
monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) program, including regional linkages with Tanzania, 
Seychelles and other neighboring VMS/MCS programs.  
 
•
Activity 3:  Establishing a legal basis for fisheries management over the 200mile EEZ, 
and harmonizing this with similar legislation in neighboring countries.  
 
Component 2: Sound Management of the Near-Shore and Coastal Marine Environment  
 
The objective of this component is to improve sustainable management/regeneration of the 
fisheries resources and near-shore ecosystem with the participation of communities. There would 
be three main activities under this component:  
 
•
Activity 1:  Development of a co-management regime of near shore areas through an 
Integrated Coastal Area Management (ICAM) approach.  
 
•
Activity 2:  Identification and support for development of mariculture and more 
sustainable inshore fishing techniques that directly benefit fishing communities.  
 
•
Activity 3:  Rationalization of the existing, and subsequent development of anew and 
stronger, network of Marine Protected, Marine Management, and Community Managed Areas 
along the near-shore coastal zone.  
Page  4
Component 3:  Support for alternative livelihoods in the Coastal Zone  
 
Land-based impacts on the near and offshore marine environment are known to be substantial.  
Most often, these impacts are associated with unsustainable land use practices and poorly 
controlled urban runoff and urban-sourced solid and liquid wastes. Poverty is a major driver of 
these issues, thus this component will support improved and more sustainable resource use.  It 
would support development of alternative livelihoods that reduce impact on the aquatic 
environment, thus generating a compounding benefit. The four main activities will be:  
 
•
Activity 1:  Development of a locally based, participatory, spatial planning process.  
 
•
Activity 2:  Support to establishment of MSME’s and to help MSME’s take advantage of 
alternative livelihood opportunities.  
 
•
Activity 3:  Establishment of a Coastal Community Action Fund (CCAF).  
 
•
Activity 4:  Improve availability and affordability of finance available tocoastal Micro, 
small and medium size enterprises (MSME’s).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will focus investment, in a phased manner, in all areas in all coastal districts.  This 
includes both the coastal strip and the interior areas of each district. However, the 
implementation will be tranched with a pilot area being implemented first before rolling the 
Project out to the other coastal districts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project implementation will involve the following Government institutions:  
 
Component 1:  Fisheries & EEZ Resources Management and Development...  The Fisheries 
Department (with assistance of the Kenya Marine and Fisheries Research Institute- KMFRI)  
 
Component 2:  Biodiversity Conservation and Tourism Development.... the Kenya Wildlife 
Service with the Kenya Forestry Research Institute  
 
Component 3:  Coast Development Authority as lead, but including Town Councils, Ministry of 
Local Government,  
 
These agencies are the key natural resource and environmental agencies in Kenya.  However, 
their capacities for safeguard policies will be enhanced through training.  Environmental 
assessment will be overseen by the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS) 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
full EA would not be required as the Project will be designed to institute a participatory 
policy and planning framework at the local government level to develop and oversee local 
development planning.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The KCDP does support rural economic development though assistance to micro and small 
enterprises and a community driven development (CDD) program to respond to basic needs of 
coastal communities.  There could, therefore, be a cumulative impact if this is not managed 
properly.  These potential impacts could reduce the overall benefits of the investment and will 
therefore be managed through project design and implementation.  The Project will therefore 
include support for district development planning (at 1:20,000 or better) that is participatory and 
environmentally and socially-based. During preparation, and as the major part of the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), a province-level land capability mapping exercise (to 
include use and non-use associated with environmental, social and cultural values) will be 
prepared and disclosed before Appraisal.  
 
The CDD activities of the KCDP will be handled through the existing processes as currently 
implemented by the “Arid Lands Project” district groups currently implementing CDD 
operations for that project in the coast.  The Arid Lands Project is ongoing and has an established 
record of efficiently including evaluation of social, cultural and environmental issues in selection 
of proposals submitted for CDD funding under Bank operations.  This minimizes the risk that a 
new and separate evaluation system might have.  Conditionality in the KCDP legal agreements 
will include how CDD operations will be implemented in the unlikely event that the Arid Lands 
Project closes before the KCDP. Legal agreements for the KCDP will also cross reference 
relevant sections of agreements between the Bank and the Government of Kenya, and include a 
Memorandum of Understanding between the two projects that address transfer of funds to cover 
any additional costs and responsibilities incurred by Arid Lands.  
 
The KCDP can be seen as an environmental management project as it sets out to pilot a 
process that encourages environmentally and socially sustainable rural development.  The draft 
PAD will be disclosed for public comments and consultations, and its summary, along with the 
1:150,000 land capability map, will serve as an EMP.  The spatial planning process, during 
implementation, will start in the pilot districts and move to the other districts in the Coast 
Province after assessment of success is undertaken of the Spatial Plans in the pilot areas.  
 
Spatial Planning will be GIS-based and consists of "technical layers" over a base map 
(based on existing 1:50,000 topographical maps).  Land capability is one of these layers and will 
define what is possible given the FAO capability rating for the specific land area.  There will be 
other overlays including cultural, social, infrastructure, MSME location/density/type, protected 
and environmentally sensitive sites, to mention a few.  Spatial Planning takes what is present and 
makes a decision regarding "restrictions on use" through a process of local stakeholder 
involvement, awareness and feedback.  This is a process that moves from what can be done in a 
particular area to what stakeholder consensus says should be done in that area.  Rehabilitation, 
legal/physical protection, and improved management of important cultural and social sites (such 
as “social forests”) willbe supported under the KCDP.  
 
A
feedback mechanism to judge effectiveness of the project at generating rural economic 
growth, and managing the cumulative impact of that growth, will be developed as part of project 
preparation.  This will involve use of NGO’s that access l
ocal stakeholders on a weekly or 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
monthly basis to obtain direct feedback from coastal villagers, compiling that input and reporting 
to the Project monitoring and evaluation unit.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
About 50% of the marine coastal area is classified with some form of protection.  There are 
also national parks within coastal districts. Very few of the marine protected areas are under any 
form of active management or monitoring, and many of these protected areas are severely 
degraded.  The Project will undertake a review of these gazetted areas to determine whether the 
current status should be maintained.  Where continued protection is needed, the Project will 
facilitate a sustainable and participatory approach to their management. The assessment of 
current status of marine protected areas will consist of collection of existing data for a data gap 
analysis under preparation grant support.  The indicated gaps in data (coral reef quality, no fish 
zones and their justification, etc.) would then help in the design of studies and management 
effort in a rationalized protected area program funded during implementation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The Project is very unlikely to impact on any existing primary or mature secondary forest 
areas.  There is a possibility that, based on land use planning, degraded or poorly producing 
agricultural land may be converted to forest crops (along with intercropping).  Any such area will 
need to conform to the participatory spatial planning process to be instituted under the Project at 
the local government level (including offsite environmental and social impact).   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since the Project is a largely rural focus, it is unlikely that cultural resources will be 
impacted.  However, almost nothing is known about cultural property in these rural areas.  The 
land capability study will attempt to address this by collecting existing knowledge.  If it appears 
that cultural heritage sites of importance exist, but are not protected, or are deteriorating and 
need to be rehabilitated or additional protection provided, the Project will provide the needed 
support (legal and physical in terms of works and services).  Antiquities and cultural heritage 
protection and rehabilitation are now a part of the KCDP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Indigenous peoples OP is NOT triggered.  However, religion is a development issue in the 
Project because of historical tensions between religions in the coast province.  To address this, an 
NGO (the Coastal Interfaith Council of Clerics) has been involved in preparation with the 
objective of making it a major interlocutor between the Project and coastal stakeholders.  This 
relationship helps create a “real-time” feedback mechanism between the Project and local 
residents (almost all of whom will attend a church, mosque or temple on a weekly basis).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Involuntary resettlement is not expected to be an issue in the project.  Still, the project does 
propose to regulate the use of protected areas on both land and in marine areas.  No new 
protected areas are expected to be created as a result of the KCDP.  But to ensure that more 
stringent enforcement of regulations for existing marine and terrestrial protected areas do not 
inadvertently impact on local residents (even informal ones), a process framework will be 
developed during preparation to govern how resource use restrictions and livelihoods are 
balanced in protected areas.   
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
There are some issues related to management of migrating and transboundary fish stocks 
between Kenya and Tanzania.  Also there may be opportunities for transfrontier terrestrial 
conservation areas between Tanzania and Kenya.  There will be links between the Project and 
the Tanzania Marine and Coastal Environmental Management Project.  
 
A
formal Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Kenya and the 
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania is planned to cover cooperation regarding 
assessment and management of transboundary issues related to coastal terrestrial, near and 
offshore resource use (including "non-use") and protection.  
 
The Government of Tan
zania, as riparian to Kenya’s 200 mile EEZ, will be officially 
notified of Kenya’s intentions regarding management of its fish stocks in the EEZ by October 
2009 (Appraisal is planned for late November 2009).   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/07/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Funds for the land capability/land planning exercise are already in place through GEF and 
PHRD Grants.  This assessment is fundamental to both designs of all project components and 
for the PAD-stage ISDS.  All safeguard documents will be drafted and disclosed before start 
of Appraisal (which is currently expected in December 2009).  The preparation schedule is 
very tight and very ambitious.  If all documentation, including any related to the ISDS, is not 
available to the Appraisal Team in November 2009, the Appraisal Mission will be 
downgraded.  
 
Transfer: The Sector Management Unit has agreed to accept transfer of the Safeguard 
responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Leeds Lane 
01/29/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
