Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3956 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P111545 
Project Name: Kenya Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children 
Task Team Leader: Michael Mills 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  34.00 
 UN 
Children's 
Fund 
12.00
76.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective of the IDA funds is to support the development of a 
national social protection system for OVC, through the effective and efficient scaling-up of the 
OVC-CT program. This will focus on ensuring: (i) timely and predictable transfers to 
beneficiaries; (ii) targeting of program resources to the neediest OVC; and (iii) a robust system 
for monitoring and evaluation and overall program governance.  
 
This objective will
 feed into the Government’s overall objective of the program: To provide a 
social protection system through regular and predictable cash transfers to families living with 
OVC, in order to encourage fostering and retention of OVC within their families and 
communities and to promote their human capital development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Program would have the following components: Component 1: Institutional 
Support for the Department of Children Services in the Ministry of Home Affairs (US$5 million) 
to strengthen their capacity to manage the implementation of the program. This component 
Page  2
would include: (i) the development and implementation of a comprehensive capacity building 
strategy and scale-up plan; (ii) system strengthening within the program, focusing on the M&E 
and the MIS systems; and (iii) assuring an efficient governance framework through the 
development of a comprehensive communication strategy as well as other initiatives to 
strengthen transparency and accountability.  
 
Component 2: Cash Transfer Program for Orphans and Vulnerable Children (US$9 million), 
using cash transfers to strengthen the ability of vulnerable households to protect and care for 
OVC and to promote investments in human development for this vulnerable group. The current 
amount of the cash transfers is Ksh 1,500 approximately US$23) per household per month, 
independent of the number of OVC. Based on evidence from the pre-pilot, the amount of the 
transfers has been adjusted and will be linked with co-responsibilities (conditionalities). The 
transfer amount will be re-evaluated and possible readjustments will be made during the 
program. There are no restrictions on the use of the transfer, but evidence from the pre-pilot 
suggest that some of the main expenditure covered by the transfer were items such as school 
uniforms, textbooks, food, and cooking oil. The amount of the transfer will be revised once the 
operational and impact evaluation has been completed in FY09. The transfer will most likely 
stay within the range of Ksh 1500- Ksh 2,000(US$23-US$30) for the program to reach its overall 
objective and at the same time be affordable.  
 
IDA financing would be used for a four year SIL that would support a scale-up of the CT-OVC 
program.  Although the MOHA has successfully implemented the pre-pilot of the program, it 
requires support to be able to manage the planned expansion.  Technical support has already 
been provided by some development partners (UNICEF, DfID and WB), but the program 
requires a large amount of additional support both in terms of capacity development of staff 
working with the program and in terms of strengthening of program systems.  During the first 
two years, IDA support will focus on the institutional strengthening and capacity development 
requirements for the later scale-up.  Funds for cash transfers will also be provided to allow a 
sequenced expansion of the program. For the third and the fourth years, IDA funds will support 
the standardization of program procedures based on the results from the pilot, which ends during 
the second year, and will include cash payments as well as further capacity strengthening 
activities.  As part of the program MOHA aims to establish a pooled financing arrangement 
between financing partners and the Government, which will (i) allow effective channeling of 
donor resources, and (ii) ensure that, at scale, transfers can still reach beneficiaries in a timely 
manner.  
 
The design of the program has already drawn upon lessons learned from the pre-pilot of the 
program and will further draw upon lessons learned from the ongoing pilot (ending the second 
year of IDA support).  There has been a significant system strengthening within the program 
from the pre-pilot, through the development of a Management Information System (MIS).  The 
MIS system is able to produce information for the monitoring and evaluation of the program, and 
allows for a transparent and accountable registration of beneficiary information.  A more 
systematic approach of the administration of the program has been adapted, and a detailed 
operational manual with instruments and guidelines has been developed to guide all operational 
and organizational activities related to the program.  Roles and responsibilities throughout the 
program are clearly spelled out in the operational manual. Other important adjustments from the 
Page  3
pre-pilot are: (i) the value of the transfer; (ii) clearer guidance on program procedures and 
objectives to beneficiary households; and (iii) provision of awareness sessions to train caregivers 
on how to better care for the OVC.  The use of the post offices has so far been successful, but the 
program plans to test further innovative payment providers such as the Safaricom/Vodafone M-
Pesa (a new mobile payment solution).  
 
The key program guiding principles will be the following:  
 
(i) multi-stakeholder 
approach
–
through workshops and consultations on issues related to the 
program with participants from other Ministries, development partners, private sector and civil 
society, as well as foundations and philanthropists;  
 
(ii) 
work with existing institutions– support will be given to the ongoing program through 
capacity building activities for implementing agencies, and through continuing to work closely 
with other development partners;  
 
(iii) 
community participation in the decision making process– through direct involvement and 
regular consultation with the main stakeholders to ensure adequate engagement on issues that 
directly affect them;  
 
(iv) 
transparency and accountability at all stages– through the application of clear rules of 
access coupled with a strengthened appeals and complaints mechanism, through the roll-out of a 
comprehensive MIS; and through implementation of a communication strategy that will spell out 
program objectives and guidelines to all key stakeholders; and  
 
(v) 
rigorous monitoring and evaluation– there is an ongoing independent operational and 
impact evaluation, and a comprehensive M&E system will be implemented.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project aims to be nation wide in coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project is category C. Any institutional strengthening needs will be reviewed as part of 
Project design work.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/16/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Mills 
07/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/31/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if Project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
Project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
