Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3417 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P110173 
Project Name: Kenya - Energy Sector Recovery Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Paivi Koljonen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing Operation is designed to help meet a financing gap that will 
enable the project to meet its original Project Development Objectives (PDOs) and to scale-up 
the project’s energy access program to enhance theproject’s impact.  
 
The objectives of this Additional Financing Operation are consistent with those of the original 
Project, namely to, (a) enhance the policy, institutional and regulatory environment for private 
sector participation and sector development; (b) support efficient expansion of power generation 
capacity to meet demand; and (c) increase access to electricity in urban and peri-urban areas 
while improving the efficiency, reliability and quality of service to existing customers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing Operation will meet the following needs:  
 
Institutional and Capacity Building (US$0.95 million)  
 
Page  2
The Additional Financing would provide technical assistance and training required to improve 
the Ministry of Energy’s, KPLC's, and KenGen’s capacity to design and implement the 
Government’s proposed electricity access scale-up program, including strengthening the 
environmental and social impact management skills of KPLC staff.  
 
Studies and Engineering Services (US$13.3 million)  
 
The additional financing would support feasibility and design studies and the Energy Sectoral 
Environmental Assessment required to define the Government’s proposed electricity access 
scale-up program and to cover cost overruns of ongoing studies and engineering services under 
the project.  
 
Generation (US$5 million)  
 
The additional financing would help cover international price escalation for the Olkaria II 
geothermal generating unit.  The original financing plan for the Olkaria II geothermal generating 
unit committed by the EIB (US$40.8 million), the IDA (US$24.1 million) and KenGen fell short 
to cover the negotiated base contract amount of US$87.5 million.  Fortunately, AFD is 
considering covering the shortfall in the base price.  The proposed additional financing would 
cover the rising escalation for steel and related electrical materials required for the generating 
plant, i.e. the contingency amount of US$5 million.  
 
Distribution (US$30 million)  
 
Financing of Excluded Items.  A number of goods such as conductor materials for re-
conductoring and replacement of switchgear equipment that were originally included in the 
design were not procured due to shortage of funds.  The proposal is to include the cost of these 
items, estimated at US$13.5 million, in the additional financing package.  
 
Scale-up – Electrification Schemes.  The additional credit would provide about US$16.5 
million for electrifying peri-urban areas in the regions of Nairobi, West, Mt. Kenya and Coast.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Power Components: the generation component involves the construction of the third generating 
units at the Olkaria II geothermal power while the distribution component comprises: (a) 
upgrading and reinforcement of existing substations mainly in Nairobi and Mombassa; (b) 
installation of a few substations; and (c) construction of high/medium and low voltage 
distribution lines.  The Mombasa-Nairobi Transmission line will not be part of the project.  It 
will be financed by AfDB, EIB, and AFD under a separate project. 
 
The additional financing operation will be implemented in the same areas as those of the 
original project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
KPLC and KenGen have the institutional structures for managing environmental and social 
issues and a track record for doing so under several Bank-financed projects, including the 
Page  3
ongoing Energy Sector Recovery Project. They regularly carry out environmental audits as 
required by Kenyan law and implement the recommendations, and provide environmental 
training to their employees; KenGen is in the process of obtaining its ISO 14001 Certification for 
Environmental Management. Thus, KenGen and KPLC will be able to deal with any potential 
adverse environmental and social impacts of the additional financing operation in the context of 
the updated Environmental and Social Management Plan (EMP) and the original EA report 
which will be implemented by their qualified personnel.  
 
To clarify, the proposed scaling-up activities discussed above will be consistent with those 
funded so far under the electricity access component of the ongoing project - merely the number 
of connections is to be increased. The expansion of geothermal activities will take place in the 
context of current efforts under the ongoing project to add a third unit to the existing Olkaria 
facility and drilling activities that have been carried out at the Olkaria facility independently of 
the ongoing project. It should be noted that geological and geophysical surveys have been carried 
out in 1967, and studies identified Olkaria as the most prospective area leading to the 
construction of the first geothermal station in the area between 1981 and 1984.  
 
As regards the implementation of the Resettlement Policy Framework, which was prepared for 
the original project and will be updated for this new operation, the Borrower has employed the 
requisite specialists to carry out/complete the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the ongoing 
project as well as those likely to be prepared for the additional financing operation.  
 
Potential adverse environmental and social impacts that could occur include construction 
disturbance (noise, dust)associated with the installation of the generating unit in the Olkaria area 
and with the distribution extension in Nairobi, West, Mt. Kenya and Coast.  The distribution 
activity could also result in some involuntary resettlement.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The activities under the existing project will be expanded; therefore the impacts on the 
increased areas need to be assessed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project activities will be expanded in areas already identified under the initial project, so 
additional in involuntary resettlement is expected to be very minimal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/31/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The revised Environmental and Social Management Plan (EMP), the updated Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) and the requisite Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be 
reviewed, cleared and disclosed in Kenya and at the Bank’s Infoshop priorto appraisal March 
31, 2008. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paivi Koljonen 
02/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
