Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3016 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/30/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P105269 
Project Name: Judicial Performance Improvement 
Task Team Leader: Christina Biebesheimer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 19, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (70%);General public administration sector (30%) 
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (67%);Other 
accountability/anti-corruption (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the proposed Judicial Performance Improvement Project is to improve the 
performance of the Judiciary in areas that are key for public accountability and user satisfaction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Court Administration and Case Management.  In order to enhance accountability 
and judicial transparency, this component will address the ability of the Judiciary to monitor its 
performance and ensure that it meets standards the Judiciary sets for itself.  The component will 
assess the existing court administration system and its ability to promote the transparent and 
effective administration of justice, and recommend and implement an appropriate system which 
allows for more effective budget management, case management and performance evaluation 
and monitoring. This component will also address the transparency and effectiveness of case 
management.  Focus areas will be automating and rationalizing procedures; the introduction of 
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)and implementing court-supervised ADR in order to speed 
up dispute resolution; automating recording of court proceedings, currently a manual process; 
automating registries and digitizing court files; and clearing the backlog of cases. The project 
Page  2
will work with the Expeditious Disposal of Cases Committee which plans a survey to generate 
dta on the backlog of cases to devise remedial measures under the Financial Legal and Technical 
Assistance Project (FLSTAP).  The component will build on work undertaken under the 
FLSTAP to address the backlog.  
 
Component 2: Judicial Training. This component will (a) carry out a comprehensive assessment 
of the training needs of the different categories of personnel within the Judiciary, e. g. paralegal 
staff, court administrators, magistrates and judges. It will (b) develop and implement a plan to set 
up a Judicial Training Institute. The modalities of conducting judicial training will be reviewed 
with
 the Judiciary’s Implementation Committee created to assist with project implementation, 
and will include the possibility of outsourcing training services or developing partnerships with 
universities and law schools. The training will not only provide general opportunities for 
professional development for judicial officers, but also introduce them to tools and concepts 
particularly relevant to the judiciary’s performance goals (and thus the goals of this Project), 
such as effective planning and management as well as methods for measuring judicial 
performance.  Indicative elements of such training would be equipping the Judiciary’s Central 
Planning Unit with the knowledge and skills to do better budget preparation and expenditure 
management.  In order to strengthen the technical capacity for research, interpretation and 
analysis by judges and magistrates, the Project will also (c) design and implement a support 
program for court clerks and researchers.  
 
Component 3: Access to Justice. The proportion of the population using the Court system 
remains small. This component of the Project will (a) assess the reasons why those seeking 
justice do not resort to courts, e.g. geographic obstacles, cost, etc., (b) assess existing programs 
and support additional activities for bringing justice to people in remote parts of the country such 
as Kakuma, Dadaab, Archer’s Post, and Karaba, (c) support an assessment of needs relating to 
demand for court houses in high population areas such as Westlands, Ngong, Kasarani and 
Thika, (d) assess the need for and construct new courts where appropriate; (e) renovate and 
refurbish old courts and (f) evaluate the existing legal aid schemes administered by the Judiciary 
and recommend and implement appropriate improvements as may be required.  This component 
will be able to take advantage of research being carried out in the Bank’s Justice for the Poor 
project which examines the way in which the poor navigate through local justice systems, as well 
as work undertaken on the use of informal justice systems to determine why and in what 
numbers people do not use the courts.  
 
Component 4: Transparency, Public Communication and Outreach.  Diagnostic work carried 
out by the Judiciary indicates declining judicial corruption, but public opinion polls show 
persistent concerns about corruption in the Judiciary.  The Judiciary is thus interested in 
continuing to address corruption and increase accountability, and in increasing outreach to and 
feedback from the public.  Automation of court proceedings, and provision of timely and user-
friendly public access to records of proceedings is underway (and will be supported by the 
Project), all of which constitutes an important step toward greater transparency. Similarly, the 
recent Open Day that the Judiciary held on February 16 – 17, 2007 was an important first step in 
communicating with the public, and the establishment of a structured Public Complaints 
mechanism is a key step to ensuring that public opinion becomes part of the input to the 
Judiciary in monitoring its performance. This component will build on these reforms, providing 
technical support for the Judiciary’s Peer Review Mechanism, formalization of the Biennial 
Integrity and Governance Review, enforcement of the Judicial Code of Conduct, and 
establishment of a structured public complaints mechanism.  The component will also improve 
Page  3
communication with the public through Public Information Desks in the courts, and create more 
opportunities for the public to interact with the Judiciary such as a continuation of Judiciary 
Open Days, appropriate TV and radio programs, and the launch of the Litigants’ Charter, a 
charter resulting from the Ethics and Integrity Committee’s Report which describes the rights of 
litigants and the duties of courts toward litigants. Building on lessons learned from the Open 
Day, the Project will support outreach and educational campaigns to inform the public about 
their rights and the functioning of the Judiciary.  These programs will seek to promote the rule of 
law, evaluate the experience of end users of judicial services under new systems financed by the 
Project, and replicate innovative approaches such as school-to-court and court-to-school visits.  
 
Component 5: Project Management.  Since the Judiciary will be responsible for Project 
implementation, including procurement and financial management, a small Project Technical 
Unit (PTU) will work with staff of the Judiciary’s CentralPlanning Unit. It will coordinate with 
the Judiciary’s auditing, accounting andprocurement divisions, providing them with specialized 
expertise regarding Bank project implementation processes, and it will be in charge of Project 
monitoring and evaluation.  The PTU -- together with, as necessary for project implementation, 
staff of the Central Planning Unit and the auditing, accounting and procurement divisions -- will 
receive technical assistance, equipment and training from Project funds to enable them to 
undertake professional project implementation.  Responsibility for Project oversight and policy 
direction will vest in the Implementation Committee set up and chaired by the Chief Justice. It 
includes the Chairman of the Rules Committee and the Expeditious Disposal of Cases 
committee, the Presiding Judge of the Court of Appeal, two judges of the High Court as well as 
the Registrar of the High Court.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Republic of Kenya.  This is a national project that will focus on the development of the country's 
judicial structure. Geographical and physical access to justice will be addressed through the 
construction of new courts, the refurbishment of existing ones, and the establishment of mobile 
courts, throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
suitable legal framework for the management of the environment exists in Kenya:  the 
National Environment Management and Coordination Act (1999) (EMCA).  The EMCA 
provides that the Minister of Environment and Natural Resources appoint local Committees 
chaired by the Provincial Commissioners and District Commissioners, which decide on 
management of the environment within their respective provinces or districts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS) 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Applicable because the project will support the construction and rehabilitation of courts, 
investments which are likely to have site-specific environmental and social impacts.  An S-ESIA 
will be developed and the Guidelines for ESM screening will be prepared.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not support investments which will destroy natural 
habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not support construction of courts in natural forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Not applicable because there are not activities supported by the project that will use 
pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not support investments located on cultural 
properties.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not construct courts in areas inhabited by the 
indigenous peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Applicable because court construction/rehabilitation may involve acquisition of land or limit 
access to land leading to lost livelihoods or economic activities.  A RPF will be developed and 
when the policy is triggered, a specific RAP will be prepared and compensation (by the 
Government) made prior to the works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not support dams or investments downstream any 
existing dam.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not support investments that withdraw from, or 
pollute international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Not applicable because the project will not support investments in disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The Strategic Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Management (S-ESIA), 
Guidelines for the Environmental and Social Screening and Resettlement Policy Framework 
will be completed prior to Appraisal, currently estimated for May 7-14, 2009.  All 3 
documents will be disclosed both in-country and to the World Bank's InfoShop prior to 
Appraisal.  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christina Biebesheimer 
03/30/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
03/30/2009 
Comments:   
