                                                                                      49358


                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 30, 2009

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya                                    Project ill: PI07798
                                                  Additional Project In (ifany):
Project Name: Kenya Agricultural Carbon Project
Task Team Leader: Johannes Woelcke
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2009         Estimated Date for signing Carbon
                                                  Emission Reduction Purchase
                                                  Agreement: September 30,2009
Managing Unit: AFTAR                              Lending Instrument: Funds from
                                                  BioCarbon Fund will purchase carbon as
                                                  it is generated through adoption of
                                                  sustainable agricultural land management
                                                  practices
Sector: Agriculture (100%)
Theme: Climate Change (P), Other Rural Development (S)
IBRD Amount(US$m.): 0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.): 0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0.00
BioCF Amount (US$m.): 1.00
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                  Simple []                  Repeater []
Is this a transferred project         Yes []       No [X]



B. Project Objectives

The overall goal ofthis CarbonFinance project is carbon sequestration through the adoption of
sustainable agricultural land management (SALM) practices in Western Kenya. The project
developer - the NGO Swedish Cooperative Center-Vi Agroforestry (SCC-ViA) - will promote
the adoption of SALM practices on approximately 60,000 ha in Nyanza and Western Province.
Expected outcomes include that smallholder farmers in Kenya will be able to access the carbon
market l'll1d receive additional carbon revenue streams through the adoption ofproductivity
enhancing practices and technologies. Hence, economic benefits will be based on: (i) increased
yields and productivity; and (ii) additional income sources due to payment for environmental

services. An important co-benefit will be enhanced resilience to climate variability and change.
As an outcome indicator it is estimated that the project will generate about 200,000 tons of C02
equivalents per year


c. Project Description:

Proposed project activities would include:


1. Demand-driven promotion ofsustainable agricultural land management (SALM) practices:
The project developer will promote sustainable agricultural land management practices for
smallholder farmers in Western Kenya, on a demand driven basis. It is expected that a wide
range of SALM practices will be adopted, including practices related to cropland management
(e.g. cover crops, crops rotation, mulching, improved fallows, compost management, green
manure, agroforestry, organic fertilizer, residue management) and rehabilitation of degraded
land. The project is targeting smallholder farmers and small-scale business entrepreneurs
organized in common interest groups, primary level cooperatives, farmer groups and informal
organizations.

SCC-ViA applies a participatory extension approach focusing on community empowerment,
using tools and methods such as participatory rural appraisals (PRA), farmer field schools,
agricultural training centers and farmer-to-fanner study tours. SCC-ViA extension staffwill
provide demand-driven advice and training on all issues related to sustainable agricultural
production and marketing. The extension staffwill work closely with other institutions such as
the Ministry ofAgriculture and the Kenya Forestry Service. SCC-ViA advice is also focusing on
farm enterprise development. Farmer groups and organizations are strengthened through capacity
building and development of entrepreneurial skills. Extension staffwill work with smallholders
to organize farming activities as a business, react on market demands and integrate them into the
value chain.

2. Development ofcarbon accounting methodology:
The project will also develop a robust, but cost effective carbon accounting methodology
outlining how to quantify emission reductions. The cost of quantification will be reduced by
using a farmer selfassessment approach for reporting the adoption and maintenance of
management practices, as well as through independent third party verification. The amount of
carbon sequestered by different managementpractices will be estimated by using a biophysical
simulation model. It is planned that these values will be modified and fine-tuned based on actual
measurement of soil carbon sequestration rates ofvarious practice and technologies. Once the
methodology has been developed it will be submitted to the Voluntary Carbon Standard (YCS).
After approval, the methodology will be in the public domain and can be used by any other
institution interested in planning and implementing similar carbon [mance projects.




                                                  2

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):


The proposed project will be implemented in Western and Nyanza Provinces in Kenya. In
Western Province the total project area is about 55,000 ha. The targeted District is Bungo, and
Bumula, Malakisi and Sirisia are the targeted Divisions. In Nyanza Province the project covers
about 61,000 ha in Bondo, Kisumu and Siaya Districts; and the targeted Divisions are Madiany,
Kombew, and Wagai. The total proje~t area is 116,000 ha and covers mainly agricultural land
(86,000 ha), dense vegetation/forest (20,000 ha), houses and compounds (7,500 ha), rivers (2000
ha) and infrastructure/roads (1,300 ha).


In general, agro-ecological conditions in the project area are favorable to agricultural production.
The ecological zones range from upper midland zone to low midland zone with mean annual
temperatures of 18-21 degrees Celsius and 21-24 degrees Celsius respectively. Rainfall amounts
to 1,200-1,600 rom per year. Loamy and clayey soils are predominant.

The primary livelihood strategy is subsistence farming. Maize and beans are the dominant crops.
High population density (of 150 to more than 350 persons per square kilometer) is putting
pressure on natural resources. Severe land degradation is contributing to declining soil fertility
and land productivity. This combination offactors leads to cultivation ofmarginal lands and
degradation ofthe remaining natural forests.

Four major ethnic groups inhabit the districts falling within the project area: Luo, Luhya, Teso,
Sabaot, and the Marakwet. There may well be Dorobos, Ogiek and Sep.gwer in the targeted
areas. Local cultural norms and groupings affect livelihood strategies and access to resources.
Such differences, in combination with agro-ecological circumstances, affect the mix of
agriculture, livestock, petty business and other non farm activities households rely on for income.
Enterprise management and crop production is also gender specific in many cases. The main
land tenure type in the project areas is freehold, adjacent is some Government land. HIV/AIDS
rates in Western Kenya are also among the highest in the country and have left a growing
number ofrural households widowed or orphaned. Cultural, economic and other factors are
responsible for the widespread HIV/AIDS pandemic. Women headed households represent up to
35 percent ofhouseholds in some project areas.

The projects sites are bordering the Mt. Elgon National Park. The major rivers in the project area
are: Nzoia River, Sio River, Yala River, and Seme Awach. Western Kenya is also part ofthe
larger Lake Victoria Basin, whose products and services support some 25 million people in
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. Environmental degradation in the uplands inevitably affects the
lake, resulting in declining fisheries and increased infestation by the exotic aquatic weed, water
hyacinth.




                                                   3

  E. Government's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

. The project developer SCC-ViA recently conducted a comprehensive Environmental Assessment
 (EA) ofits Lake Victoria Development Program (LVDP). The types of interventions ofLVDP
  are comparable to those of this project. The project area of LVDP covers districts neighboring
 the districts ofthe Kenya Agricultural Carbon project. The EA was approved by the National
 Environment Management Authority (NEf'vIA) on March 3, 2008. NEMA also provided a letter
 ofno objection for thisproject to proceed to the validation and negotiation stepsrequired subject
 to undertaking an Environmental Assessment prior to the commencement ofthe project. The
  World Bank-supported Westem Kenya CDDIFM project is also operational in the area and
 working in the Nzoia Basin. In order to further strengthen the project developer's capacity for
 safeguards policies', SCC-ViA will participate in training on implementation of safeguards
 frameworks provided by the Westem Kenya CDD project.

 The Govemment established NEMA as oversight and policy making body to address
 environmental issues. NEIvIA has the skills and competence to carry out independent reviews in
 a competent manner. The Environmental Management and Coordination Act, 1999, provides for
 the establishment of an appropriate legal and institutional framework for the management ofthe
 environment in Kenya. Part VI (S.58) ofthe Act makes itmandatory for environmental impact
  assessments (EIAs) to be conducted before the commencement ofprojects involving amongst
 others agriculture and forestry related activities. The Act as well as the Environmental (Impact
 Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, and Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 56 of 13th June
 2003, requires that project proponent submit a project report to NEMA and obtain an EV\
  License from NEMAbefore the implementation ofa project.



  F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialists on the Team:

  Environmental Safeguards Specialist: Banu Setlur (MNSSD)
  Social Safeguards Specialist: Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)




                                                    4

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain wily)              Yes         No   TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             x
An environmental assessment will be carried out during project preparation.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               x
It is one ofthe objectives ofthe project to protect
biodiversity and reduce the pressure on natural habitats.
This will be achieved by facilitating the adoption of
productivity-enhancing SALM practices and awareness
building.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        x
Through the promotion of sustainable and productivity
enhancing practices, the project is expected to reduce
pressure on natural resources, including forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                         x
Pesticide use among beneficiary communities is very low to
non-existent and the project will promote SALM practices.
The project will not support the purchase or use of
pesticides. The Integrated Pest Management Framework
(IPMF) ofthe Kenya Agricultural Productivity and
Agribusiness Project (KAPAP) will be adapted and
disclosed. Training on pest management will be provided
through KAPAP, while the implementation ofthe IPMF
will be facilitated through SCC-ViA resources.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                   x
An EA will be carried out that will capture the potential
impacts ofthe project on marginal groups. This EA will be
complemented by the adapted Indigenous People
Management Framework (IPMF) ofthe Western Kenya
CDD/FM project, which will be utilized for this project to
arrive a(a specific action plans for this project ifnecessary.
Training on implementation ofthe IPMF will be provided
through the Western Kenya CDD project, while the actual
implementation will be financed through SCC~ViA
resources.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       x
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                     x




                                                   5

Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A.       The target date for preparing the ISDS for a BioCarbon PAD-stage equivalent: August
2009, i.e. before the Carbon Finance equivalent of an appraisal is undertaken.

B.       For simpleprbjects that will not require a Quality Enhancement Review(QER), thetarget '
date for preparing PAD-stage ISDS: N/A.


C.       Timefranle for launching and completing safeguards-related studies that may be needed:
It is planned that the Environmental Assessment will be completed in July 2009. TheEA will
include an assessment of interests and concerns related to carbon payments and strategies
outlining how to address those concerns during project implementation. Giventhat this project is
operating in the same area as the Western Kenya Community-Driven Development I Flood
Management Project, it will utilize and adapt the IP Frameworkthat exists for this World Bank
funded project. With regard to pest management, the project will adapt and utilize the IPMF
prepared by the KAPAP. Both IPMF and IPPF will be completed in July 2009. Potential impacts
and mitigation measures will be specified in the PAD-equivalent for Carbon Finance Operations
- the Carbon Finance Assessment Memorandum (CFAM). This information will be disclosed as
appropriate and according to World Bank guidelines and procedures. Resources for preparation
and implementation of Safeguard related activities are availablein this project.

IV. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:                                                         Date
  Task Team Leader:                                /7                '&          07/07/2009
                                                   !
                                                      -  'i~»//"/J/{v'
                                                         /?/  // /


                                              ...,i
                                           ,"
                                          t,.'
                                                  Johannes Woelcke
 Approved by:                                                  1
                                                              ,I

  Acting Regional Safeguards                                                     07/07/2009
  Coordinator:                                ~ liLt,'
                                                    . ·Vt...Vv~~
                                                  Harv~D. Van Veldhuizen
  Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                                                07/07/2009
                                                  IV:'              (-


                                                  <'I-C<-AvDVl
                                                           ?        (~(;2,:~/6
                                                  Karen Mcconnell Brooks
  Comments:




                                                        o
                                                        /'

