Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3715 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P110437 
Project Name: Kenya Secondary Schools Bursaries Reform Project 
Task Team Leader: Shobhana Sosale 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Additional Financing through Kenya Education Sector Support Project is to 
reform the Government’s ongoing bursary scheme and it will contribute towards: (i) increasing 
access for poor students to secondary education; (ii) ensuring the retention of those who enter 
secondary school; and (iii) enhancing their chances of completing secondary school.  The 
approach would be to improve the efficiency and equity of the secondary school bursary scheme, 
and to contribute to raising the transition rates from primary to secondary education in keeping 
with the Government’s stated goals in Sessional Paper I of 2005.  This would be achieved 
through two activities: (i) a pro-poor secondary school bursaries grants scheme; and (ii) a 
governance and accountability system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Activity 1: A pilot pro-poor secondary school bursary scheme that would demonstrate support 
for reforms in the Ministry of Education (MoE) secondary schools bursary scheme, and more 
full-fledged support based on sequencing reforms which would signal Government’s 
commitment to this pro-poor investment.  Provision of secondary school bursaries in the form of 
grants would be based on reforms based on the following principles: (i) Targeting: Ensuring that 
Page  2
only students in genuine need actually benefit and that they have sufficient funds to complete the 
four years of secondary education; (ii) Predictability: (a) re-orienting the existing/ongoing MoE 
scheme to award bursaries to students before they enroll in secondary school; and (b) advancing 
disbursement of bursary funds to constituency and school bank accounts early in the school year; 
(iii) Consistency: Establishing funding allocation guidelines to ensure greater consistency for the 
duration of secondary schooling and of the amounts received; (iv) Accountability and 
transparency: Designing a monitoring and evaluation system to follow the allocation of funds 
and the performance of beneficiaries; and (v) Governance and incentives: Ensuring national 
recognition for best performance for award of bursaries, utilizing IEC channels to disseminate 
good practices, and providing avenues for sharing good practice examples of bursary awards 
management.  
 
Activity 2.  Governance and Accountability  
 
Sub-activity 2.1.  Bursary Management Information System (BMIS).  A bursary management 
information system (BMIS) will be developed to capture critical data on number of students 
receiving secondary school bursaries, the consistency with which they are receiving bursaries, 
and their overall performance.  
 
Sub-activity 2.2.  Institutional Capacity Development.  The envisaged capacity development 
activities of the Kenya Secondary Schools Bursaries Reform Project (SSBR) would go beyond 
traditional approaches of the supply of training and technical cooperation towards a focus on 
demand, and incentives for retaining and effective use of capacity. A public expenditure 
accountability approach for frontline service delivery aimed at tracking concrete results at 
beneficiary level will be instituted to improve the responsiveness, efficiency, and efficacy of the 
MoE’s current subsidy scheme.  
 
Sub-activity 2.3.  Monitoring and Evaluation.  The SSBR will include a full-fledged impact 
evaluation assessment, including an upstream impact evaluation to inform the targeting of 
secondary school bursaries.  Baseline data collection has already commenced, and it is envisaged 
that the first report will inform the targeting of bursaries for Cohort 1 in academic year 2009 
commencing in January.  Risk mitigation and monitoring will include the layering of audits from 
central to local levels, and will include social audit at community level through the use of 
Citizens’ Report Cards. In addition, a grievance mechanism will be set up for households and/or 
students to file complaints.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national program that will focus on the secondary school system in Kenya.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no safeguards policies triggered by the Project, therefore, this question is not 
applicable.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/25/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shobhana Sosale 
08/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/21/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher D. Walker 
08/19/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
