Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC3686
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P101214 
Project Name:  Real Estate Cadastre and Registration 
Task Team Leader:  Cora Melania Shaw 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 5, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (40%);Sub-national government 
administration (40%);Law and justice (20%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.25 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.24 
 
Municipalities of Borrowing Country 
1.10
2.34 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective would be to improve land property records 
and their updating to enhance tenure security and facilitate the development of land and 
property markets.  This would be achieved through: (i) improvement in service delivery 
by the municipal cadastre services; (ii) strengthening the KCA institutional capacity and 
(iii) Project management including donor coordination, Training and Public Outreach.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will include the following three components:  
 
Component A: Municipal Land Administration, supports improving the capacity of 
MCOs to deliver services, with two subcomponents: A1: Detailed design and 
rehabilitation of the MCOs; and A2: Systematic registration in the KCLIS. This effort 
will improve MCO#s working conditions and standardize workflow, and enable them to 
register apartments and buildings as well as new transactions, into the KCLIS.  
 
Subcomponent A1 addresses the MCOs# capacity to maintain and update their legal and 
cadastral data for real estate and also improve their capacity to deliver services. 
Subcomponent A2 supports MCOs in updating and completing their real estate cadastre 
Page  2
and registration records. It would consist of three activities:  (a) Building cadastre 
construction (BCC); (c) Cadastre reconstruction (CR); and (c) Quality control (QC).  
 
The project will finance design services civil works and for renovating and 
rehabilitating up to 23 MCOs (no new construction), and provide them with equipment, 
furniture and supplies, finance technical services to conduct cadastre and legal surveys in 
7
cities and 150 cadastral zones, as well as for the Quality Control of these surveys.  
 
Component B: KCA Institutional Framework, supports two subcomponents: B1: KCA 
Institutional reform, and B2: KCA technical infrastructure. Sub-component B1 will 
support KCA#s overall reform, based on the Kosovo Cadastre Development Strategy, 
and the Business Plan as approved by the GoK in June 2009. The strategy is for 2009-
2011 but based on a longer term vision where KCA governance will be transformed into 
a
more autonomous and self-financing entity, with an Inter-ministerial Committee for 
Land Administration as overarching Advisory Body to discuss land policy, and 
eventually major user groups, such as bankers# associations, real estate agents, and other 
concerned organizations. The activities include support for KCA to devise norms to 
streamline legal framework for real property transactions, promote processes to revise 
cadastral information and other geospatial data, enforce and support MCOs in applying 
current property laws and standardized registration procedures. Sub-component B2 will 
support the establishment of a Continuous Operating Reference Network and a KCA 
hotline. This will allow surveys to be based on the same source of georeference points. 
The component will finance legal and other consultant services, GPS servers and IT 
equipment to establish the CORN, as well as recurring costs to set up, operate and 
maintain the system until it can levy its own fees.  
 
Component C: Project Management, Training and Public Outreach , supports  KCA to  
manage the project and coordinate donors, build management and other skills, and 
monitor, evaluate and report on project activities and results.  Three subcomponents will 
sustain these efforts: C1 Project Management and donor coordination: KCA#s project 
coordination unit (PCO) will be strengthened to: ensure project due diligence in 
procurement and financial management, monitor/evaluate the project#s progress, 
coordinate donor inputs, report to the GoK and donors, and organize events (e.g. 
conferences).  C2 Training: KCA#s human resource specialist will manage a 
comprehensive training program for KCAs,  MCO#s managers and staff, as well as 
private surveyors, and other land administration professionals in management, legal, 
technical and administrative subjects.   The project will support the implementation of the 
training plan, together with other donors.  C3: Public Outreach will consist of Public 
Awareness campaigns and client surveys: the project will finance Public Awareness 
Campaigns : on internal communications to instill a culture of public services and 
services standards, and public awareness to inform users about property rights with 
respect to land/property registration,  alert them to the MCOs# new standards, and carry 
out surveys will to assess the new regimen and quality of MCO services.  The component 
will finance a vehicle for KCA, IT equipment and some furniture, implementing the KCA 
training plan, consultant services for fiduciary and technical assistance, audits, customer 
surveys, and other studies.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All municipalities are elegible but only those agreeing to use standard procedures will be 
eligible for re-engineering.  For systematic registration, the results of the social 
assessments will be used to select implementation areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been assigned an Environmental Category B due to the limited office 
renovation and rehabilitation, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been 
prepared to ensure that office renovation and rehabilitation works will be 
environmentally acceptable and cause no, or minimum, damage to the environment. The 
building sites don#t have any historical value, thus the project does not have any impact 
on historical or cultural resources. The EMP has been publicized and filed in electronic 
archives before appraisal.  
 
The Project will not trigger O.P. 4.12 as it does not support land acquisition and 
associated involuntary resettlement,  nor does it include support for land use planning 
activities. The project will support registration of fully documented properties and 
provide advice on completing documentation.  
 
There will be agreed criteria for selecting areas for systematic registration. A main 
criterion would be public support for the activity, which will be gauged by conducting a 
social assessment.  
 
Early in implementation an overall social assessment will be conducted to determine 
public support and demand for project activities in different parts of the country.  The 
results of this assessment can be used to inform the selection of cadastral zones that will 
Page  4
benefit from the project. Follow-up social assessment exercises (such as focus groups and 
stakeholder meetings) focusing on how to promote the project activities and engage with 
potential beneficiaries will be integrated into the awareness and consultation activities 
planned to take place before the start of cadastre survey works. It is expected that a 
number of the 150 cadastre zones and 7 urban areas will be clustered to facilitate both the 
social assessment and the awareness / consultation campaign.  The social assessments 
would start being implemented in the first year of project implementation, and the TOR 
for the first contract would be subject to prior review.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not have any long term negative impact on environment. The focus of 
the project is capacity building project, to strengthen the institutions in charge of 
registration of property rights and secure equal land tenure rights of the stakeholders.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The team considered limiting registration to sporadic, on-demand registration. Now 
available IDA funds are sufficient to finance robust capacity building and financing of 
systematic surveys.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Kosovo Cadastral Agency will be the implementing agency. The objective of the 
project is to strengthen the capacity of the KCA and MCOs and private sector participants 
(land surveyors, lawyers). The Borrower, supported by the project, has prepared an 
Environmental Management Plan to minimize environmental impacts.  The document has 
been reviewed and discussed with the Bank and has been disclosed before appraisal at the 
INFOSHOP, the KCA#s web site, in hard copy at the notification board of the MCO 
being rehabilitated.  Staff from KCA#s Project Coordination Office has been trained in 
the Bank#s Safeguard Policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the users of the MCO services, land holders, banks, investors 
and building companies. By strengthening the capacity of the key service providers, 
namely MCOs and the KCA, all the stakeholder groups will benefit.  The public will be 
asked through local papers and internet site to comment on the EMP checklist by email or 
regular mail and a revised EMP will include brief description of the comments received  
 
Project preparation included a Social Assessment which reported on users and potential 
users of municipal cadastre offices to identify obstacles to registration and issues to be 
addressed regarding service delivery. The recommendations such as improving the public 
awareness, increasing the MCO#s organizational structure and service delivery capacity 
have been included in the project components.  
 
Page  5
Two parallel initiatives also addressed the access of women and minorities to real estate 
property rights: the Balkans Land and Gender Review and the ARD Gender in 
Agricultural Livelihoods Sourcebook, which reviewed the current status and evolution of 
women#s land rights and supported KCA in informing the standard and norm setting 
process for processing land registry transactions by Municipalities, in their distinct  roles.  
 
Under the financing of the World Bank Decentralization Trust Fund a Public Awareness 
Campaign will be launched in the Fall of 2009 and will continue as part of the project. 
The purposes is to increase public awareness of land rights, including women and 
minorities. In addition periodic client surveys will be conducted to provide feedback on 
client satisfaction of land administration services.  
 
The small civil works will be contracted and supervised by contract managers in the 
Project Coordination Office and municipal facilities staff.  Because these civil works 
contracts are small and dispersed, and the contractors are expected to be small 
companies, the PCO will explain and support the contractors to comply with the EMP 
and inform stakeholders near construction sites (municipal offices).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/04/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/13/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cora Melania Shaw 
08/27/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
08/19/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
08/27/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
08/27/2009 
Comments:  Mr. van Woerden is Acting RSC. TTL cleared on behalf of Env. Specialist. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
08/27/2009 
Comments:  Mr. van Woerden is Acting SM. 
Page  7
