Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/19/2009 
Report No.:  AC4492
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P101614 
Project Name:  Public Sector Modernization 
Task Team Leader:  William R. Dillinger 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 5, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(35%);Administrative and civil service reform (35%);Other public sector governance 
(30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
(a) To strengthen the performance of key budget organizations in budget formulation, 
budget execution, and public procurement;  
 
(b) To establish the foundations for fiscally sustainable payroll management and 
effective human resource management in the core civil service; and  
 
(c) To create conditions for further automation of government work processes and for 
development of e-government applications.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. The proposed project would consist of three main components (and a fourth project 
management component, including project audit and evaluation):  
 
(a)Component one - Improving public financial management performance (including 
public procurement) in selected budget organizations;  
 
(b)Component two - Improving payroll administration and laying the foundations for a 
professional civil service; and  
 
(c)Component three - increasing the security and efficiency of Government information 
systems.  
Page  2
2. Component one - Improving public financial management performance in selected 
budget organizations (US$ 3 million): This component will consist of two 
subcomponents:  
 
(a)Capacity building for PFM in line budget organizations; and  
 
(b)Public procurement (including e-procurement)  
 
3.
Subcomponent 1A: Capacity building for PFM in line budget organizations (US$ 1.2 
million). With the preparation of the PEFA 2009 self-assessment and Action Plan for 
PFM Reform, the Government has demonstrated ongoing commitment to improving the 
PFM system. The PEFA self-assessment demonstrates some recent improvements in the 
PFM system (e.g. in budget credibility, budget classification) as well as a few areas of 
deterioration (e.g. tax administration) compared to the PEFA assessment of 2007.  The 
key strength of the Kosovo PFM system remains the automated Treasury, which allows 
for centralized budget execution, with the accounting and payments system linked to the 
Treasury Single Account (TSA), and ensures reliable and timely financial statements. 
However, important weaknesses remain. Reform measures to improve budget credibility 
(both during budget formulation and execution) are defined as a high priority in the 
PFMRAP. Budgeting still falls short of reflecting strategic directions based on national 
and sectoral strategies. Suboptimal inputs from line budget organizations (e.g. inaccurate 
forward estimates of capital expenditure and recurrent costs; weak justification of budget 
submissions with reference to national and sectoral policy priorities) complicate the work 
of the MFE in formulating the MTEF and annual budget. Also, low rates of budget 
execution have been a persistent problem in recent years, primarily as a result of poor 
capacity to execute capital investments. Though capital budget execution increased 
dramatically in 2008, the low execution of the budget as a whole (85 percent in 2008) 
suggests that problems in realistic budget planning and timely execution remain. While 
other development partners are supporting the relevant reforms within the MFE, this 
proposed project will focus on addressing these weaknesses in selected line budget 
organizations.  
 
4.
Therefore this subcomponent would provide technical assistance and training to key 
budget organizations that have been identified by the Government and have indicated a 
strong interest in participating in the proposed project. Specifically the project will 
support the Ministries of Agriculture, Education, Health, Justice, and the Kosovo Judicial 
Council. The activities of this subcomponent will support the priority of the 
Government's PFM Reform Action Plan related to increasing the credibility of the budget 
(both in terms of budget formulation and execution) as well as priorities expressed by 
each participating budget organization. Emphasis will be placed on budget formulation 
with a focus on aligning annual and medium term budget submissions with sector 
strategies and on overall budget constraints defined by the MFE; multi-year costing for 
capital and recurrent activities; and budget execution management. The support would 
strengthen each budget organization's ability to implement the budget laws, policies, and 
procedures as the foundation for budget preparation and management. Technical 
assistance would be delivered using the PEMTAG approach of on-the-job-mentoring. 
The MFE will retain responsibility for managing this activity.  
 
5.
Subcomponent 1B: Public procurement, including e-procurement (US$ 1.8 million). 
The legal and institutional framework for public procurement has improved in recent 
years. However, inefficiencies remain, as evidenced by price distortions and limited 
Page  3
market participation in public procurement processes. A diagnostic study of the 
Government's purchasing systems, the Quick Gains assessment of 2008, analyzed the 
above problems and proposed specific actions to raise the efficiency of the supply-chain-
management system, including purchasing strategies to reduce price distortions, promote 
competition, and achieve cost savings under adequate fiduciary safeguards. Therefore this 
subcomponent would finance technical assistance training and goods for: (i) 
implementing a cost reduction strategy (Quick Gains reform program) based on the 
findings of the Quick Gains study; and (ii) upgrading the current ICT system for e-
procurement with new functionalities for e-transactions and procurement cycle 
management.  
 
6.
Technical assistance under both of these subcomponents would take into account the 
recommendations of the horizontal functional reviews of the PFM and procurement 
functions that were recently conducted with financing from DFID.  
 
7.
Component two - Improving payroll administration and laying the foundations for a 
professional civil service (US$ 2.05 million). The public administration in Kosovo is at a 
nascent stage and bears the traits of a temporary administration rather than a system 
designed as a professional civil service. Different bodies in the public administration 
were set up in a piecemeal manner by the different international institutions that were in 
charge of each of the pillars of the UNMIK administration. The "civil service" as defined 
by UNMIK regulation 2001/36 was established to provide a legal status for all employees 
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG). This regulation did not 
distinguish the civil service from public sector employment  and does not provide for a 
grading structure.  
 
8.
Until new legislation on the civil service is enacted, public employees are hired under 
fixed-term contracts of up to three years' duration and, since there is no grading structure, 
salaries are set according to 52 coefficients of a minimum base salary (as well as a 
number of fixed salaries). In the absence of any rules for determining the appropriate 
coefficient (whether with reference to a civil servant's position, qualifications, or 
experience), these coefficients are applied rather inconsistently in different civil service 
organizations. As a result, there is no consistency among civil servants' job titles, levels 
of responsibility, qualifications, and salaries. Remuneration for comparable posts varies 
significantly across civil service organizations and individual civil servants' pay levels are 
open to manipulation by their superiors. These pay discrepancies in conjunction with the 
lack of any mechanism for career or salary progression tend to cause resentment and sap 
motivation among civil servants. Finally, the lack of a pay and grading structure or any 
rules governing the classification of posts and the determination of salary levels 
undermines effective payroll controls and makes any meaningful policy on civil service 
pay all but impossible.  
 
9.
The Government has recently drafted framework legislation on the civil service and 
on civil service remuneration. This was prepared with technical assistance from DFID 
and has been reviewed by the Bank, SIGMA, and other international partners. The draft 
legislation limits the scope of the civil service to professional and administrative 
positions in central government and municipal administrations, thereby excluding 
categories of public employees engaged in service delivery (teachers, health workers) and 
law and order enforcement (judiciary, customs, police, military), which will have 
separate pay and grading structures. Therefore the new civil service legislation would 
Page  4
establish a uniform pay and grading system and a clear career structure for the core civil 
service only. It would also strengthen civil servants' protection from political pressure by 
offering tenure, conditional on satisfactory performance. Taken together, these measures 
are expected to strengthen incentives for staff to remain in the civil service and improve 
their performance.  
 
10.
In terms of payroll administration, a payroll database managed by the Ministry of 
Public Administration (MPA) has been in place for six years and includes all public 
employees, who now have a unique personnel identification number. However, this 
payroll system is currently not linked to the Treasury, so does not allow for real-time 
controls of budget availability. As a result, when budget organizations add employees to 
their payroll or increase the salaries of existing employees without relevant budgetary 
provision, they often exceed their wage bill ceilings. When this occurs, Treasury 
suspends further salary payments and enters into negotiations with the budget 
organization in question. This process leads to arrears in salary payments.  
 
11.
The MPA has recently acquired a Human Resource Management Information 
System (HRMIS), which would hold electronic personnel records and allow for the 
automation of a number of human resource functions. The HRMIS, which is currently 
being tested, was developed according to the provisions of UNMIK Regulation 2001/36. 
It is therefore likely to require some modifications to meet the functional requirements of 
the new civil service legislation, which inter alia requires an automated civil service 
registry. Moreover it is currently not linked to the payroll system, which would enable 
payroll data to be checked against personnel records, especially data on a civil servants' 
salary grade.  
 
12.
Therefore this component would consist of the following subcomponents:  
 
(a) Improving human resource management in the core civil service, including pay and 
grading reform; and  
 
(b) Upgrading of ICT systems for human resource management (HRMIS and payroll).  
 
13.
Subcomponent 2A: Improving human resource management in the core civil 
service, including pay and grading reform (US$ 1.1 million). The objective of this 
subcomponent would be to provide adequate implementation support for the pay and 
grading reform and support the initial phase of a longer term effort to create a merit-
based career structure in the core civil service. Therefore this subcomponent would 
finance technical assistance and training for the following activities:  
 
(i) Implementation support for the pay and grading reform: This will include the 
development of internal guidelines as well as implementation support (on the job training 
and guidance) to the substantial task of classifying the 15,000-20,000 civil service 
positions on the basis of a new pay and grading structure established by the framework 
legislation. In particular this technical assistance would assist the MPA and human 
resource units in other civil service organizations with the preparation  of job descriptions 
and job classification; checking of personnel records and transition to the new pay 
system.  
 
(ii) Technical assistance to build capacity for the implementation of key human resource 
management functions (staff planning, recruitment, promotions, and performance 
appraisal). This activity would include development of secondary legislation (e.g. on 
performance appraisal), guidelines and manuals, as well as training modules for human 
resource management functions. Training would be targeted at the staff at the Department 
Page  5
of Civil Service Administration in the MPA as well as trainers in the Kosovo Institute of 
Public Administration (KIPA). The activity would also include technical assistance for 
developing the training strategy for the civil service as well as for developing and 
applying a practical methodology for training impact assessment to ensure that resources 
spent on civil service training are used effectively. Technical assistance under this 
activity would also build on the findings of the horizontal functional review of human 
resource management, which was recently conducted in the context of the whole-of-
government functional review that was financed by DFID.  
 
14.
Subcomponent 2B: Upgrading of ICT systems for human resource management 
(US$ 0.95 million): The objective of this subcomponent would be to adjust/ modify and 
improve the existing ICT systems for human resource management (HRMIS and payroll) 
to better support core human resource management functions and to them to financial 
management system (i.e. the Treasury). Therefore, this subcomponent will finance ICT 
investments (consulting services and goods) and training for the following activities:  
 
(i) Development of a strategic plan for Human Resource Information Management, 
which will assess the required modifications of the HRMIS to comply with the new legal 
framework, and will include re-engineering of the business processes for human resource 
management functions in the civil service.  
 
(ii) Updating/Modifying the current information systems (HRMIS and payroll) to ensure 
their full compliance with the new legal framework; and implementing these information 
systems in civil service organizations at the central and local government levels.  
 
(iii) Linkage of the HRMIS and payroll systems with the Treasury system (Free 
Balance). The component will include the development of the required interfaces 
between the Treasury and HRMIS systems to ensure that HR, payroll, and financial data 
are updated online.  
 
15.
Component three - Increasing the security and efficiency of government information 
systems (US$ 2.3 million). The Government has adopted an e-government strategy for 
the period 2009-2015. This component will support the strategy's aims to increase the 
automation of government work processes and gradually develop selected electronic 
applications for the improvement of service delivery to citizens and businesses. However, 
the necessary inter-operability frameworks, information security provision, and human 
resource capacity are not adequately developed. Moreover, the Government currently 
lacks a secure data storage and recovery capability; different government bodies currently 
use separate facilities for data storage, some of which do not meet adequate security 
standards and also results in unnecessarily high maintenance costs. Therefore this 
component will finance technical assistance to establish the necessary information 
security and technical standards for e-government and also equipment for the 
establishment of a centralized government data center.  
 
16.
Subcomponent 3A - Technical assistance for government ICT standards and e-
government strategy implementation (US$ 0.3 million): This subcomponent will finance 
technical assistance for the MPA to support the implementation of the e-government 
strategy, including the development of standards for government ICT systems. In 
particular technical assistance will be provided in areas such as: i) inter-operability 
frameworks; ii) security provision; and iii) human resource capacity building.  
 
17.
Subcomponent 3B - Establishment of a government data center (US$ 2 million). 
This activity would finance the purchase of equipment for the establishment of a 
Page  6
government data center. The government data center would increase security and 
efficiency in the storage and maintenance costs of government information and 
applications. This center would provide processing and electronic capacity for all 
government bodies in Kosovo, thereby safeguarding the security of government 
databases.  
 
18.
Component four - project management (US$ 0.4 million). This component will 
finance the fees and training of the project director, project procurement specialist, and 
project financial management specialist as well as the costs of the annual project audit 
and independent project evaluation toward the end of project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kosovo (Pristina).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
No 
Page  8
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William R. Dillinger 
07/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
08/18/2009 
Comments:  (acting RSC for Agi Kiss) 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
08/19/2009 
Comments:   
