Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3374 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/05/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P108178 
Project Name: Second Land and Real Estate Registration Project 
Task Team Leader: Jessica Mott 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (60%);Housing finance and real estate 
markets (20%);General information and communications sector (20%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Other public sector governance 
(P);Personal and property rights (P);Other urban development (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to support development of markets for land and real estate and the more 
intensive and effective use of land and real estate through the further development of a reliable, 
well-functioning, and sustainable system for registration of rights in immovable property.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This is a repeater project which would build on the experience of the first Land and Real Estate 
Registration Project.  Its components would comprise  
 
(a)Organizational development and improved services (formerly the institutional development 
component)  
 
(i) 
Performance, strategy, and communications  
 
(ii) 
Information technology (IT) support  
 
(iii)Agency financial management and procurement improvements  
 
(iv) 
Records management improvement  
Page  2
(v) 
Organization support and improvement  
 
(vi) 
Project management  
 
(b)Expanding spatial and legal land and real estate data (formerly the operational services 
component)  
 
(i) 
Systematic registration (including novistroiki and coverage of non-private lands and real 
estate units in urban areas).  
 
(ii) 
Upgrading cadastral mapping (including orthophotomapping of prioritized areas).  
 
(iii)Valuation support.  
 
(c)Professional Development and Standards (formerly the training component)  
 
(i) 
Human resource development for Gosregister staff  
 
(ii) 
Support for educational and professional bodies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover the entire country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard issues arose under the first project.  The construction comprises simple office 
rehabilitation works.  The PIU will contract a construction engineer to oversee works, provide 
general quality control and ensure compliance with the environmental management plan (EMP). 
The engineer will receive a brief training and be assisted by the Bank team in supervising the 
project regarding environmental due diligence by compliance with the EMP. The implementing 
agency also developed a good track record on social aspects, including the regularization of 
about 600,000 land and real estate units.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental effects of the project, if any will be minor and/or indirect.  The project will 
include small scale civil and construction works connected to buildings rehabilitation.  To allow 
the flexibility to accommodate exterior office expansion or to address hazard if they are 
encountered (e.g. asbestos), the project is rated as environmental assessment category B and a 
simple environmental management plan will be prepared.  This plan will be prepared in 
ac
cordance with World Bank guidelines and the Borrower’s legal and regulatory framework. It 
willstate the foreseen environmental impacts and provide good operational practice to control 
emissions (e.g. dust, noise, and exhaust fumes), wastewater discharge and solid waste 
management on the construction site. It will provide guidance on avoiding the use of hazardous 
substances, such as toxic paints, solvents or cleaning agents. Moreover, it will include traffic 
safety in the immediate vicinity of the construction sites, as necessary. The EMP will be part of 
the tender specifications, will be priced during the bidding process and included into the works 
Contracts.  
 
Among property owners, the increase tenure security and improved land allocation resulting 
from t
he project is likely to induce environmentally positive behavioral changes through better 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
property management.  The project is also likely to contribute to improvements in information 
and the regulatory framework in ways that facilitate better public sector management of land use.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/16/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
On January 10, 2008, the implementing agency submitted an Environmental Management 
Framework which is acceptable to the Bank.  The agency will post it on its web site by the 
end of January.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jessica Mott 
02/04/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
02/05/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
