Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC4000
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P110267 
Project Name:  Second Rural Water Supply  & Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mirlan Aldayarov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 12, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Rural policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.30 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
8.05
10.35 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective of RWSSP-2 is: (i) to improve access to potable water to the 
participating communities; and (ii) to improve hygiene, sanitation and water-related 
practices at individual, family and institutional levels in the rural areas.  
 
The outcome of RWSSP-2 will be improved access, quantity, and quality of water 
supply services available to rural citizens of the Kyrgyz Republic. Specifically, the 
project performance will be assessed against criteria such as the following:  
 
•
Increase in number of residents benefiting from regular availability of safe 
potable water.  
 
•
A
decline in water borne disease in project communities   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Second Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSSP-2) will consist 
of the following four components: (a) Water Supply Infrastructure and Equipment; (b) 
Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Program; (c) Institutional Development; and, (d) 
Project Management.  
Page  2
The total cost of RWSSP-2 is estimated at US$ 20.35 million; of which US$ 10 million 
equivalent will be financed by IDA (as a blend of 55 percent credit;45 percent of grant), 
GBP US$ 8.05 million by DFID and US$ 2.30 million equivalent by the GoK (15 
percent) and the participating communities (5 percent) to the project civil works 
component.  
 
Component A: Water Supply Infrastructure and Equipment This component will 
provide grants to local communities through Community Drinking Water Users Unions 
(CDWUUs) to rehabilitate or expand existing village water supply systems. As part of the 
civil works contracts, this component will also finance the following: refurbishment or 
construction of demonstration sanitation facilities at schools and medical posts; 
equipment supplied to selected CDWUUs and/or their associations to maintain the water 
systems; and consultancy services for technical supervision of construction activities to 
ensure the quality of infrastructure financed by the project.  
 
Component B: Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Program This component will support 
village-level promotion of healthy hygiene and sanitation practices through technical 
assistance, including sanitary latrine construction. Component activities will be 
coordinated with the Republican Centre for Health Promotion (RCHP) that is working 
under the Health SWAp to foster health awareness throughout the country. (The 
refurbishment of demonstration sanitation facilities at schools and medical posts is 
included in component A as part of the infrastructure works.) Component B will be 
implemented through consulting services (to be provided by a national NGO or firm) and 
in direct coordination with the RCHP.  
 
Component C: Institutional Development This component will finance consultancy 
services to assist the Government to ensure sustainability of the rural water supply 
program, including support to: (a) endorse and implement the sector strategy; (b) develop 
or revise legislation to ensure synergies between CDWUUs and local self-governance, 
including develop and institutionalize new agreements between Ayil Okmotu and 
CDWUUs; and (c) train and assist CDWUUs and DRWS to build on the experience and 
tools developed by RWSSP-1, including ensuring that gender, voice, and choice in 
participatory processes are taken into account; and (d) strengthen the project 
Management Information System by adding a GIS interface and consolidating a country-
wide database on village-level water supply and sanitation.  
 
Component D:  Project Management The component will finance the following: limited 
equipment and vehicles, operating costs (staff salaries, in-country travel, and mandatory 
employer contributions) and training associated with project implementation; monitoring 
and evaluation activities, including regular impact surveys/assessments and annual audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would initially be implemented in three Northern obalsts (covered under the 
first project) and may expand to the fourth oblast once the demand satisfaction criteria is 
Page  3
triggered and would target about 70 Community Drinking Water Users Unions 
(CDWUUs) that will be selected on the basis of selection criteria covering approximately 
100,000 villagers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (World Bank OP 4.01). OP 4.01 is triggered by the Project as 
its sub-projects may have potential impacts that are moderate, of limited duration and 
extent, and can be easily mitigated through standard methods and procedures of good 
housekeeping and good engineering practice. Most of the adverse impacts are expected to 
occur during project construction. The types of issues or impacts normally associated 
with several of the types of sub-projects that will be considered under RWSSP-2 may 
include: noise pollution; pollution of soil and surface water at construction site with oil 
and oil products; reduced amenity values of the area, etc. Proper mitigation measures 
have been designed in an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that represents 
a
revised version of existing Annex 8 of the Operational Manual, with expanded 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). EMF defines environmental safeguards 
responsibilities and procedures, which PMU and CDWUUs will apply to subprojects 
considered for support under this project. The procedures so defined will meet the 
regulatory requirements for environmental screening of the Kyrgyz Republic as well as 
the Environmental safeguard policy requirements of the World Bank.  
 
International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50). Some water supply systems scheduled 
for rehabilitation under RWSSP-2 may draw small amounts of water from rivers that are 
smaller tributaries of international waterways shared by the Kyrgyz Republic and 
neighboring Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, although project interventions are 
not expected to adversely affect water quality or quantity to downstream riparian states. 
Page  4
Infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization and water supply management 
improvements should increase system efficiency, thereby generating water savings and 
providing users with a reliable water supply. The project is exempt from notifying 
riparian governments because proposed activities do not attempt to modify waterways, 
nor significantly increase water abstraction volumes, leaving the water rights of other 
riparian countries unaffected.  
 
Exception to the notification requirements of OP 7.50 has been granted because the 
project only supports investments for abstractions of water from (i) locally confined (non-
transboundary) aquifers, (ii) smaller, detached springs and small rivers.  
 
DRWS/PMU will maintain the dialogue with the Bank for additional guidance on what 
actions as per OP 7.50 would be applicable to any particular investment that could raise 
this issue.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12). The project will not trigger OP/BP 
4.12 as it will deal exclusively with rehabilitation/repair/upgrading of existing 
infrastructure and installations on existing premises or new routes on public rights of 
way, which will not entail land acquisition, relocation of population, or restrictions on 
access to resources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the project consistent with 
Environmental Assessment (EA) requirements for both the Kyrgyz Republic and the 
World Bank was prepared by DRWS/PMU and reviewed and approved by both the 
Kyrgyz Forestry and Environment Preservation Agency and the World Bank. A Russian-
language version of the EMF was disclosed in-country on November 5, 2008. Specific 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for each individual sub-
project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The PMU conducted a public consultation in November 2008 with interested 
stakeholders to review and discuss the EMF for the project. The PMU will also conduct 
at least one public consultation with groups affected by a particular sub-project prior to 
completion of the individual EMPs. Usually, these groups consist of people living near 
Page  5
the sub-project site, and any local NGOs. Additionally, if needed, broader consultation 
will be done involving radio or TV stations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/05/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/18/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Page  6
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mirlan Aldayarov 
01/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
02/10/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
02/10/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
