Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3371
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P104994 
Project Name:  Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (60%);Solid waste management (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.60
2.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project (BOUIP)is to improve 
the living conditions in selected semi-informal settlements (novostroiki) in Bishkek and 
Osh, the two largest cities of the Kyrgyz Republic, by increasing the availability of basic 
infrastructure to the residents of these areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
BOUIP will consist of the following four components:  
 
(A) 
Component A: Basic Infrastructure (estimated component cost US$11.5 million; 
of which IDA financing US$9.0 million):  
 
The component will finance upgrading and/or expansion of water supply, road and other 
basic infrastructure as well as rehabilitation and/or upgrading of service equipment 
required for improving the availability of basic services in selected novostroiki 
settlements,.  
 
(B) 
Component B: Community Investment Programs (estimated component cost 
US$1.005 million; of which IDA financing US$1.0 million):  
 
The component will finance small-scale investments in neighborhood infrastructure and 
equipment that will be identified and implemented with the active involvement of 
Page  2
residents of novostroiki areas in both Bishkek and Osh following the approaches used by 
other CDD-type Bank operation in the Kyrgyz Republic  
 
(C) 
Component C: Institutional Development (estimated component cost US$1.005 
million; of which IDA financing US$1.0 million):  
 
The component will finance technical assistance and other forms of institutional support 
to the Bishkek and Osh Municipalities.  
 
(D) 
Component D. Operational Support (estimated component cost US$1.0 million, 
indicative IDA financing US$1.0 million.  
 
The component will support project implementation by financing: (a) the contracting of 
local experts for assisting ARIS, the implementing agency, and the Municipal Project 
Units (MPUs) established by the Bishkek and Osh Municipalities in the implementation 
of the project investment programs; (b) the creation and maintenance of a system to 
continuously monitor and evaluate the performance and results of the project; (c) a 
portion of the operating costs of ARIS, including staff salaries, in-country travel 
expenditure and mandatory employer contributions to the Kyrgyz Social Fund as well as 
the purchase of a limited amount of office equipment and vehicles; (d) training for ARIS 
staff and other persons associated with project implementation; and (e) annual audits of 
project accounts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All physical investment components of the project will be located in so-called 
"novostroiki" settlements at the periphery of Bishkek and Osh, the capital and second 
largest city of the Kyrgyz Republic, respectively.  "Novostroiki" (literally "areas 
containing new constructions") consist of settlements established on the basis of plot lay 
out plans prepared by the municipal authorities that include (respected) rights-of-way for 
streets and public facilities (schools, etc.), but lack for the time being necessary basic 
infrastructure (water supply, roads, etc.).  All physical investments under the project will 
be implemented on public land and within existing rights of way.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECAVP) 
Ms Irina Petrovna Novikova (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has no significant and/or irreversible impact.  Its only minor impact will be 
temporary nuisances resulting from construction activities, which will be mitigated by 
including into the work contracts specific measures to be taken by contractors and close 
supervision of compliance by ARIS.  
 
Since none of the project supported activities will take place on transboundary 
waterways (i.e. in the basins of the Chui and Syr-Darya rivers, respectively), as defined in 
OP 7.50, the project will not trigger this policy.  
 
The Project will not trigger OP/BP 4.12 as it will deal exclusively with 
rehabilitation/repair/upgrading of existing infrastructure and installations on existing 
premises or new routes on public rights of way which will not entail any land acquisition, 
relocation of population, or restrictions on access to resources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N.A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Safeguard Framework has been prepared by the borrower and 
published in Kyrgyz newspapers on January 25, 2008. Specific Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for each individual sub-project.  ARIS has 
good institutional capacity to manage the preparation of EMP, as it is already 
implementing a similar Bank-financed project, where EMPs for sub-projects are required.  
The quality of EMPs under that project is satisfactory.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The implementing agency (ARIS) is conducting at least one public consultation with 
groups affected by the sub-project prior to completion of the individual EMPs. Usually, 
these groups consist of people living near the sub-project site, and any local NGOs. 
Additionally, if needed, broader consultation will be done involving radio or TV stations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
01/14/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
01/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Irina Petrovna Novikova 
01/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
01/14/2008 
Comments:   
