Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/07/2009 
Report No.:  48506
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P049724 
Project Name:  Agribusiness & Marketing Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sandra Broka 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2004 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural marketing and trade (70%);Agro-industry (15%);Banking 
(10%);Central government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (33%);Other financial and private sector development 
(33%);Rural policies and institutions (17%);Export development and competitiveness 
(17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.13 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
4.75
4.88 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the project as listed in the PAD are #(i) to 
expand the level of activity of processing, marketing, and trade enterprises downstream 
of the farmgate, (ii) to increase the number and economic importance of producer 
organizations, and (iii) to improve the functioning of markets and trade linkages between 
producers, and primary and secondary level trade organizations.# The Project works 
directly with private enterprises and producer and other commercial organizations to 
improve the competitiveness of Kyrgyz products. The ultimate objective of these efforts 
will be to increase the amount of value added to Kyrgyz agro-food commodities, to 
increase sales of those commodities both domestically and abroad, and to improve the 
operation of domestic agricultural markets.  
 
The following reformulation of the PDO has been agreed with the Government: #The 
objective of the project is to contribute to the country#s economic growth by increasing 
the business activity of the beneficiary agribusinesses.# This is not considered a change 
Page  2
in the PDO, but rather a refinement of #objective (i)# # which is the project#s principal 
objective # in order to make it simpler and more measurable.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project works directly with private enterprises and producer and other commercial 
organizations to improve the competitiveness of Kyrgyz products. There are three main 
components of the project:  
 
Component 1:  Market Development Component (original $6.65 million of which 
PHRD Cofinancing Grant $4.05 million and IDA Credit $2.6 million; revised $5.87 
million, of which PHRD Cofinancing Grant $4.05 million and IDA Credit $1.82 million). 
This component will support building business capacity activities of the parties involved 
in marketing chains of agricultural commodities and providing them the foundation to 
work together more effectively.  
 
Component 2: Access to Credit Component (original $5.9 million, of which PHRD 
Cofinancing Grant $0.6 million and IDA Credit $5.3 million; revised $6.68 million, of 
which PHRD Cofinancing Grant $0.6 million and IDA Credit $6.08 million). The 
objectives of the component are to:  (a) address key constraints associated with access to 
capital by enterprises in the agricultural and food sector of the economy, and (b) expand 
lending to agricultural and food processing sector by the formal banking sector through 
introduction of risk mitigating tools for commercial banks.  
 
The Component is implemented through eligible commercial banks and other financial 
institutions. After the initial training and technical assistance provided by the project, the 
PFIs are responsible for identifying prospective sub-borrowers, and have full autonomy 
in sub-project approval.  Detailed eligibility criteria for sub-borrowers, and terms and 
conditions for borrowing the proceeds of the Credit Facilities and on-lending to the final 
beneficiaries are specified in the Agri-Credit Guidelines. The Component is designed as a 
combination of capacity building in the participating financial institutions, and a credit 
line for investment and working capital loans, to help the commercial banks to mitigate 
the risks involved in lending to agriculture.  
 
The component provides access to investment capital for the emerging producer 
organizations and private businesses in any legal form, involved in processing and 
marketing of agricultural commodities, which also allows the PFIs to apply the improved 
knowledge in appraisal of such investment proposals. Eligible investments include a wide 
range of agriculture-related activities, such as investments in development of storage, 
grading, packing and marketing of agricultural produce, investments in processing 
facilities and domestic marketing and export of agricultural products. With the project 
restructuring it is proposed to implement a special sub-component -  Farmer Cooperative 
Matching Grant Facility (US$0.78 million, all financed from IDA Credit), which is 
designed for farmer cooperatives willing to borrow for investments in productive assets 
(such as agricultural machinery, processing equipment or storage facilities), to help the 
cooperatives meet their investment needs. The Matching Grant beneficiaries will receive 
the Sub-grants in accordance with eligibility criteria and procedures set forth in the 
Cooperative Matching Grant Program Agreement, acceptable to IDA. The matching grant 
in the amount not to exceed 50% of the total loan would be provided to cooperatives 
Page  3
borrowing from the financial sector for investments in productive assets and storage 
facilities. It is estimated that approximately 40 cooperatives will be supported through the 
grants.  
 
Component 3:  Project Monitoring and Advisory Office ($0.15 million, of which $0.11 
million financed from the PHRD Cofinancing Grant and $0.04 million from the IDA 
Credit). A  Project Monitoring and Advisory Office (PMAO) was to be established in the 
MAWRPI on the basis of the Project Preparation Unit.  Its functions was to include will 
include overall monitoring of the Project and liaising with the MAWRPI, and 
management of the public-sector capacity building activities included in the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for services and credits 
and will not be located in protected or culturally/socially sensitive areas. If potential 
projects are proposed in the vicinity of protected areas or critical habitat (highly 
unlikely), a specific and full environmental assessment will be required.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the Bank#s safeguard policies and procedures, including OP/BP/GP 
4.01 Environmental Assessment, the project is classified as Category B as the supported 
activities are not expected to generate significant environmental and social impacts. The 
project supports technical assistance activities, along with the Access to Finance 
component which supports sub-loans and now will also include the new Farmer 
Cooperative Matching Grant Facility subcomponent, which will provide matching grants 
for investment subprojects. Eligible investments include development of storage, grading, 
Page  4
packing and marketing of agricultural produce, investments in processing facilities and 
domestic marketing and export of agricultural products. These activities may generate 
some adverse environmental and social impacts mostly related to construction and 
operation of agro-processing enterprises and are the following: (a) dust and noise due to 
the demolition and construction; (b) dumping of demolition and construction wastes, 
accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants, etc; (c) solid waste, effluent discharges and 
air emissions; and (d) waste water treatment.  
 
All proposed activities under the project so far have been, and will continue to be 
implemented on land which is already used for agricultural purposes  and within the 
settlements# boundaries, thus the project will not have impact on wildlife and natural 
habitats and thus OP 4.04 #Natural habitats# is not triggered. It is also expected there will 
be no impacts on physical cultural resources which are not usually placed in the vicinity 
of agricultural lands and, consequently, OP 4.11 #Physical/Cultural Resources# is not 
triggered. The project will not support any sub-projects that might result in displacement. 
Land acquisitions are also not supported under the project. Therefore, OP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered. The lending guidelines are being amended to 
ensure that no displacement will occur as a result of sub-project implementation (see 
recommendations below). This was confirmed during the Mid Term Review (MTR; 
March 23 # April 3, 2009), which concluded that no social safeguards have been 
triggered to date, with only eight of the sub-projects approved involving construction. A 
number of these sub-projects were subjected to spot checks during which it was 
confirmed that the land on which construction took place was not encumbered by third 
party formal or informal uses (residential or economic) prior to their realization.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impacts of the proposed activities are mostly positive and 
include improved knowledge on best agricultural and agro processing practices as well as 
improved livelihood.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project team has analyzed the alternative of #no project#. It was concluded with no 
project there would be negative social impacts, including lower productivity in the 
agricultural sector, leading to issues with food safety of the country, and, possibly, 
increased poverty in rural areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To avoid/mitigate any negative impacts, during the project preparation the Borrower 
conducted an Environment Assessment (EA) and prepared an Environment Management 
Plan (EMP), which contains relevant mitigation and monitoring measures and the 
institutional responsibilities for EMP implementation. The EA contains special 
Guidelines for Identification, Assessment and Mitigation of Environmental Impacts, 
which are used for subproject screening, assessment and approval.  
Page  5
A
review of the status of EMP implementation and of compliance of subprojects with 
environmental safeguards was carried out during the MTR. Overall, the mission was 
satisfied to see the good progress in implementing the environmental requirements of the 
project. All supported subprojects have been preliminary assessed from environmental 
point of view, based on completing in each case an Environment Screening Checklist, 
assigning an environmental category and determining a set of mitigation measures to be 
applied during the subproject implementation. It was also acknowledged that no 
environmental complaints related to the supported subprojects have been registered to 
date. None of the visited agro-processing enterprises have any outstanding environmental 
issues, and they operate based on environmental permits and licenses. However, it should 
be noted that in several cases the subprojects supported construction of new small scale 
buildings without preparing an EMP and/or a special mitigation plan.  
 
Recommendations  
 
The mission provided a series of recommendations:  
 
(A) 
For improving the implementation of project EMP and of Environmental 
Guidelines: (a) continuing the capacity building of PFI loan officers through training to 
improve their subproject environmental screening and assessment skills; (b) 
strengthening cooperation with local environmental inspectors on supervision and 
monitoring in the cases of category B subprojects; (c) preparing semi-annually 
environmental monitoring reports; (d) ensuring no CFCs containing refrigerators, as well 
as no PCBs containing equipment are purchased; and (e) ensuring preparation of EMP 
checklists, based on preliminary completed Field Site Visit Checklists in the case of new 
construction activities.  
 
(B) 
With regard to social safeguards: (a) no sub-project should be approved for 
implementation on land that is formally or informally occupied or used by third parties, 
where implementation of the sub-project would result in their displacement; (b) pre-
approval site inspection must verify that the site is unencumbered by formal or informal 
use; (c) where necessary, the PFI should use external experts to verify that the site is 
conflict-free; (d) Public Infrastructure investments should only involve refurbishing or 
reconstructing existing publicly owned buildings, and should not involve the acquisition 
of private land, or any construction on Greenfield sites; (e) even in the case of existing 
publicly owned buildings, due diligence should be conducted in the form of pre-approval 
site inspections to confirm that these buildings are not being formally or informally used 
by third parties; (f) in the case of the cooperative support program even though the 
project itself may not finance land acquisition, all purchases of land made with the intent 
of realizing a sub-project must occur on a #willing-buyer, willing seller-basis#.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Task Team met with the key public sector stakeholders and representatives from potential 
project beneficiaries in the Project. Non-government organizations as well as members of 
the ABMPPU were invited to a round-table discussion (February 19, 2004) during the 
preparation of the draft EIA. This roundtable was held to explain the Project. More 
importantly, the discussion was used to allow these organizations to express their views 
regarding important environmental issues as these relate to components of the Project, 
Page  6
particularly agro-processing. An advertisement was taken out in Bishkek#s main 
newspaper (March 26, 2004) to invite interested members of the public wishing to review 
the draft EIA in the offices of the ABMPPU at the MAWRPI over a one week period. 
Individual invitations were extended to the participating NGOs of the round table to 
review the draft EIA at the PPU offices in the MAWRPI. A summary of the draft EIA 
was circulated to the relevant government ministries and departments for their review and 
comment.  
 
The final EIA report was submitted to the World Bank InfoShop for public review. The 
final EIA is also available for review at the World Bank Resident Mission office in 
Bishkek and in the MAWRPI.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/26/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sandra Broka 
05/05/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
05/06/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
05/05/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/07/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
05/07/2009 
Comments:   
