Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC4027
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P101392 
Project Name:  Emergency Energy Assistance 
Task Team Leader:  Mirlan Aldayarov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (60%);Power (40%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is urgently to increase the volume and 
reliability of the national energy supply, especially, thermal power in the winter season, 
thereby supporting the implementation of the GoKR’s Energy EmergencyMitigation 
Action Plan (EEMAP).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance (i) the provision of equipment materials and spare parts to 
increase thermal generation and heat at the Bishkek and Osh combined heat and power 
plants, and (ii) project Management and Capacity-Building.  
 
Project has the following two components:  
 
Component I: 
Rehabilitation of the Electricity and Heat Systems - Carrying out 
the rehabilitation of the electricity and heating systems of the Recipient’s Power Plant 
Company, including the rehabilitation of electrostatic precipitators and the provision of 
low sulfur fuel oil to the Bishkek and Osh combined heat and power plants as well as the 
provision of brass pipes and coal handling equipment, such as bulldozers, in support of 
such rehabilitation.  
Page  2
Component II: 
 Project Management and Capacity-Building. Strengthening the 
Recipient’s capacity for project management, monitoring and evaluation, including 
environmental management and safety, procurement, disbursement and financial 
management activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the cities of Bishkek and Osh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has no significant and/or irreversible impact. The project support for 
upgrading the electrostratic precipitators at one power plant will have positive 
environmental benefits on local air quality.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative of 'no action' or 'delayed action' is estimated to have negative 
environmental consequences resulting from increased pressures on forests for fuelwood 
and increased local air pollution from improvised household level fuel stoves for heat.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared to address the main 
environmental issues of the project: diligence in transport and handling of the fuel, safe 
storage at the power station site and the availability of permits for its combustion and 
related emissions. The EMP also covers occupational health and safety measures as well 
as waste management issues for the construction activities, as construction works relate 
mainly to rehabilitation/repair and are expected to have low, limited environmental 
impacts. Clear instructions will be issued by the implementing agency to contractors to 
separate these waste types, safely store them and arrange a final disposal according to 
best practice available in the Kyrgyz Republic.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The PIU will conduct public consultations with groups affected by the project. 
Additionally, if needed, broader consultation will be done involving radio or TV stations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
In-country disclosure of environmental safeguard documents will be completed in 
parallel with or after Board approval given the time contraints to complete disclosure and 
consultation process.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mirlan Aldayarov 
11/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
11/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
11/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
11/04/2008 
Comments:  cleared as Acting Safeguard Coordinator on behalf of Agi Kiss.  EMP cleared earlier 
and approved for Info Shop disclosure by safeguard team. 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iftikhar Khalil 
11/04/2008 
Comments:   
