Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4452
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P107608 
Project Name:  National Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana) 
Task Team Leader:  Cordula Rastogi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (40%);Other rural development 
(40%);Regional integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to reduce transport costs and travel time 
along the Osh-Batken-Isfana Road corridor and improve road safety planning. As 
transport costs and travel time decrease, route options increase, allowing more direct 
travel between destinations, thereby creating a more accessible and reliable transport 
system. It will also allow cost saving for the road users; travelling will become safer than 
today. This will benefit people and goods going to and from Batken Oblast or on transit 
to Tajikistan. The completion of the proposed Project will make a significant contribution 
to the level of connectivity offered as the road corridor provides the only connection 
between the main Kyrgyz cities in Fergana valley (such as Osh and Batken city) and the 
rest of the country.  
 
Project design is kept simple to reach the PDO within the three year implementation 
period. Progress towards the attainment of the PDO will be assessed through the 
following indicators: 
 
Page  2
Project Outcome Indicators:  
 
#
Reduction in transport costs along project road section 
 
#
Reduction in travel time along project road section 
 
#
Increase in traffic along project road section 
 
#
Increase in rural access in the project area and nation-wide 
 
#
National Road Safety Program developed and launched 
 
Intermediate Outcome Indicators:  
 
#
Number of km of road improved/rehabilitated in project area  
 
#
Percentage of total road network in the project area in good and fair condition 
 
#
National Road Safety Program developed and launched 
 
#
Pilot demonstration projects on road safety along the corridor developed 
 
#
Improved technical quality of the road works along project area   
 
3. Project Description 
The transport system, in particular the road network, is a priority for the Government of 
the Kyrgyz Republic given its importance in providing access to markets and basic public 
services. To date, 92 percent of passenger and 59 percent of freight traffic is carried by 
road in the Kyrgyz Republic. The road network covers all seven oblasts (provinces), and 
provides connections to remote communities and links to neighboring countries. Travel in 
most of the country is severely constrained by the predominantly mountainous 
topography where roads have to cross passes of above 3,000 meters altitude and are 
subject to frequent mud slides, debris flow, rock falls, and snow avalanches. Travel in the 
Southwestern part of the country, namely between Osh and Batken town has some 
specific problems since the road crosses Tajik and Uzbek enclaves which require a 
double-entry Kyrgyz visa and a transit visa.   
 
The existing basic transport infrastructure is adequate for the level of economic activity 
likely to occur in the medium term. About 18,800 kilometers of roads (the republican 
road network) are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications (MoTC). About 40 percent of the roads are sealed, including some with 
gravel mixed with bitumen binder. Over 50 percent are gravel and about 10 percent are 
earth roads.  Consequently, the primary concern is not expansion or major upgrading of 
the transport system, but proper maintenance and rehabilitation to preserve the existing 
network. Roads at all levels are deteriorating; over 60 percent require periodic 
maintenance or rehabilitation.  
 
Cognizant of this, the Government#s focus is on rehabilitating key links in the road 
transport network that have regional and national strategic importance. Substantial 
investments (of about US$ 350 million) have already been made in the last decade to 
rehabilitate the country#s major road corridors. The rehabilitation of six strategic road 
corridors which carry the majority of the traffic on the republican road network is the 
focus of the current country and sector strategies. The six strategic corridors include: 1) 
Osh-Sarytash-Irkeshtham, 2) Suusamyr-Talas-Taraz, 3) Bishkek-Naryn-Torugart, 4) 
Sarytash-Karamyk, 5) Osh-Batken-Isfana, and 6) Tyup-Kegen.  
 
Page  3
The Government has asked the World Bank to finance the rehabilitation of a section of 
the Osh-Batken-Isfana road, one of the six strategic corridors. The original alignment of 
this road corridor crosses through Uzbek territory at Kok-Talaa, and at Sokh and through 
Tajikistan at Vorukh. Traveling this road was no problem in the past when there was one 
transport network connecting cities from within the Former Soviet Union and the Fergana 
Valley. Since 1991, the situation has changed due to the creation of enclaves and the 
passing through foreign territory. To travel the original alignment nowadays causes 
frequent delays at border crossing points arising from lengthy, arbitrary and sometimes 
harassing control procedures, which severely hamper connectivity along the road. 
Existing secondary roads which deviate around 110 kilometers from the original 
alignment (so-called #detours#) exist, but are in poor to very poor condition. The 
Government#s plan is to rehabilitate the detours and link them with the original 
alignment. This will form the Osh-Batken-Isfana road corridor which will by-pass foreign 
territory (Uzbekistan and Tajikistan) and their enclaves within the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
The proposed project responds to the general need to preserve the road network and 
specifically to the growth of traffic along an important route which provides the only 
connection between the main Kyrgyz cities in Fergana Valley (about one million 
inhabitants or 18 percent of the country# population) and the rest of the country. 
Currently, the average daily traffic varies along different sections while significant 
disruption is reported at border crossings. On the eastern section of the road (between 
Osh and Kyzyl-Kiya) in the absence of any constraints, the average daily traffic is about 
3,050 vehicles (km 133). However, on the border between Osh and Batken oblasts and 
further westwards along the second detour of the Osh-Batken-Isfana road, average daily 
traffic drops drastically to about 1,000 vehicles per day (km 176) due to the roads current 
condition and because road users are reluctant to travel through border crossings at Kok-
Talaa. Traffic along the existing road at the entrance of the Uzbek enclave Sokh (km 129) 
is reported about 7,400 vehicles per day of which 90 percent are passenger cars. The 
crossing of international borders at Uzbek and Tajik enclaves significantly increases 
travel time and costs and road users therefore limit the number of their trips. 
 
The Bank financed proposed Project will consist of the following components:  
 
The Bank-financed proposed Project will consist of the following components 
(estimated costs are presented net of all taxes and duties). Taxes and duties are covered 
by Government#s co-financing and represent about 20 percent: 
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of about 30 kilometers of the Osh-Batken-Isfana Road 
Corridor (from Pulgon to Burgandy): The component will finance civil works associated 
with the rehabilitation of the road section as well as consultancy services for construction 
supervision (estimated at US$ 1.5 million) including physical and price contingencies 
(estimated at about 10 percent). Estimated total cost: US$ 22 million equivalent. 
 
Component 2: Road Safety Planning Improvement: This component will build on the 
Government#s Road Sector Development Strategy and on the work currently carried out 
by the Permanent Secretariat for Road Safety on the revision of road safety guidelines 
Page  4
and the preparation of a National Road Safety Program (expected to be approved in 
2009). Activities will support the development and launch of the National Road Safety 
Program, the preparation of pilot demonstration projects on road safety with a focus on 
the city/town of Pulgon, and other activities to improve road safety planning (eg 
establishment of road accident database and other road safety equipment). Estimated total 
cost: US$ 1.5 million equivalent.  
 
Component 3: Project Preparation and Implementation Support. This includes (i) a 
Project Preparation Advance (PPA) to update the feasibility study and designs (about 
US$ 1 million), and (ii) support for incremental operating costs of the Project 
Implementing Unit (US$ 0.5 million). Consulting services will be used to assist the PIU 
with the preparation, management and implementation of all activities associated with the 
project, including the supervision of all safeguards and fiduciary aspects. Other donors 
are providing the PIU with parallel financing for their operating costs. Estimated total 
cost: US$ 1.5 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Osh-Batken-Isfana road corridor, which is central to the economy of Southwest 
Kyrgyzstan, is in poor to fair condition. The road corridor runs close to the Kyrgyz 
Republic's international border with Uzbekistan. The current road cuts through Uzbek 
territory at Kok-Talaa, through the Uzbek enclave Sokh and through the Tajik enclave 
Vorukh. This original alignment dates back to a time when there was one transport 
network connecting cities from within the Former Soviet Union and the Fergana Valley. 
Since 1991, the situation has changed. There are frequent delays at the border crossing 
points arising from lengthy, arbitrary and sometimes harassing control procedures, which 
severely hamper access and increase travel times along the road. This has resulted in the 
local communities along the road feeling physically and economically isolated from Osh 
and the rest of the Kyrgyz Republic. Agriculture as one of the region's main economic 
activities and indeed general economic development, are restrained by the poor access.  
 
The road traverses two oblasts (Osh and Batken) in the South West of the country which 
together comprise a population of just over 1.5 million people. The road leads west over a 
distance of about 356 km from the outskirts of Osh (km 2) through Batken (km 220) to 
Isfana (km 358),  a town close to the Tajik border in the South West of the country. 
According to the updated feasibility study, a major part of the project alignment will 
follow the existing road where the new surface elevation will be approximately 0.5 
meters above the existing road on average. Deviations from the original road corridor 
total 110 kilometers, where the new corridor will follow existing secondary roads and 
unpaved tracks. The only entirely new section will be at km 195 to km 200 that includes a 
bridge over the Sokh river as well as its access roads, which mostly follows existing 
secondary roads and involves only minor Greenfield construction. Settlements along the 
existing road are sparse.  
 
According to the updated Feasibility Study (FS) prepared for the entire corridor, a 6 
kilometer long bypass for Batken city is proposed, by upgrading existing generally wide 
Page  5
and unencroached roads. This bypass runs past the airport on the south-east side of the 
city. Another alternative proposed on the other side of the airport is possible, but would 
be considerably more expensive as it would include 9 kilometers of mainly new 
alignment. An improved alignment was also proposed for Naukat pass (km 10-28) under 
the second phase, but this would have involved additional land acquisition and 
demolition of restaurants, hence it has been decided by the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications (MoTC) to follow the existing unencroached road for this bypass.  
 
The climate in this region of Kyrgyzstan is continental and dry, resulting in arid, often 
semi-desert landscapes with few perennial water courses. The road corridor is located 
mostly on the flat alluvial fans and gentler hills of the foreland of the Alau Mountain 
Range, occasionally climbing slightly higher into the foothills to altitudes just below 
1,500 m. The natural vegetation is very sparse, dominated by grassy rangelands with 
small clusters of forest near rivers and in valleys, or where irrigation based agriculture is 
located. The few perennial streams crossing the alignment are fed from snow- and glacial 
melt from the mountains, which#s highest peaks reach an altitude of over 7,000 m. The 
land is mostly used for animal grazing; agriculture and horticulture are concentrated 
around settlements along the perennial rivers, where irrigation sustains mainly fruit and 
vegetable crops.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The updated feasibility study (FS) which was carried out by the Recipient through an 
international consultant, Finnroad (hereafter the Consultant) included an environmental 
and social impact assessment (ESIA). Detailed designs are being finalized for the 
sections of the first phase, mainly Pulgon - Burgandy - Batken (km 123-220). In the 
updated FS for this project, the corresponding environmental and social documentation 
Page  6
has identified potential impacts, and for negative ones drafted mitigation measures and 
plans for management and monitoring of environmental and social due diligence 
measures. The safeguards documentation was reviewed by the Project Team's 
environmental and social specialists and found to be acceptable to the Bank in scope and 
substance.  
 
Environment: The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) carried out by 
the Borrower through the Consultant pertains to the entire corridor from Osh to Isfana 
and thus addresses a much wider regional scope than the Bank financed section would 
constitute. For the corridor in its entirety the ESIA concludes that according to OP4.01 
the project should be classified as environmental Category B. Based on the updated FS, 
the Consultant states that there need be no significant adverse environmental effects 
resulting from the proposed rehabilitation of the Osh-Batken- Isfana road corridor, 
provided that compliance with recommendations and provisions of the EMP is achieved 
during project preparation and implementation. There are no environmentally sensitive or 
vulnerable areas along the alignment.  
 
The following key recommendations result from the FS-level ESIA:  
 
-
For the most part the rehabilitation works will not deviate from the existing established 
alignment or stay with existing secondary tracks or gravel traces;  
 
-
Designs should make full consideration of the range of mitigation measures described 
in the EMP, which should be incorporated into detailed designs;  
 
-
The tender and contract documents shall include appropriate clauses to cover all of the 
environmental protection requirements listed in the ESIA report and EMPs; activities to 
be performed for compliance with the EMP shall appear in the specifications, SoW and 
BoQ as clearly defined items, which shall be adequately budgeted and priced by the 
Contractor;  
 
-
Provision shall be made for adequate future maintenance of the road, possibly through 
loan covenants; this relates especially to dust and emission control, waste management, 
erosion control and runoff management;  
 
The Bank team had, after a first screening of the road corridor in the pre-feasibility 
stage, originally proposed a Category A safeguards classification for the project (ISDS 
dated October 28, 2007).  This was a precautionary classification based on the very 
limited information available during the identification mission.   The team now proposes 
to change the Environmental Assessment Category from A to B, based on the following 
considerations:  
 
a) A detailed ESIA is available at this time, which presents a thorough description and 
analysis of the environmental and social conditions and baseline data along the project 
corridor. The ESIA concludes that the environmental and social conditions are 
characterized by significantly lesser sensitivity / vulnerability than previously thought. 
An example is the potential hydrological impact of Sokh Bridge, which the team 
originally thought to be considerable, while the ESIA demonstrated that the impact is 
insignificant.  
 
b)
A
techno-economic Feasibility Study was recently submitted by the Recipient, which 
describes a more advanced stage of design, than hitherto available conceptual designs. 
Page  7
From the updated FS it becomes evident, that newly constructed road alignments are 
restricted to a few kilometers (e.g. Sokh bridge).  
 
c)The FS and ESIA in detail describe the environmental and social impacts of the 
planned project, which are deemed routine for any civil construction projects, are 
manageable in scale and require mitigation measures which are off-the-shelf, readily 
available and well tested on similar project context both in the country and 
internationally. Thus the key objective of environmental activities around the project will 
mainly be the preparation and implementation of a well designed EMP and monitoring 
plan, rather than extensive analyses and assessments of alternatives.  
 
d)The Consultant stated in the ESIA that no protected areas or important natural habitats 
will be affected by the project, which correlates with the team's observations made during 
an identification mission in 2007.  
 
The sections and structures already under construction or completed with Government 
funds were included in the environmental and social analysis undertaken by the 
Consultant. For both ongoing work on upgraded road sections, as well as for a recently 
constructed bridge over Sokh River (km 195 - km 200) the assessment concluded that, 
while the process followed by the Kyrgyz Government did not fully comply with World 
Bank procedures, environmental safeguards measures were duly implemented in 
accordance with domestic regulations and no significant negative impacts occurred.  
 
Especially for the new bridge over Sokh River, the Consultant concludes that no 
significant harm was done to the environment as result of bridge construction and that 
design and construction have been conducted in a manner that was in line with 
international good practice. The Consultant detected several minor issues relating to 
environmental impacts and good housekeeping at the site (e.g. post construction 
landscaping, removal of construction waste), which could be improved and/or rectified 
ex-post through this project; these measures, and the required costs may be included in 
the safeguards measures developed during detailed project design.  
 
A
chance finds procedure for the case of encountering physical cultural resources (PCR) 
during road construction is available as an Annex attached to the ESIA produced by the 
Borrower.  
 
Social: The main findings of the social assessment undertaken as part of the updated FS 
were that the loss of land and buildings would not be significant. This is mainly due to 
the fact that (i) the works contain rehabilitation of an existing transport corridor; (ii) the 
road will mostly follow existing alignments of secondary tracks and gravel traces. 
However, the precise extent of these losses will not be known until the designs have been 
finalized. The works planned may result in minor acquisitions, in the form of agricultural 
land, commercial land, gardens, walls and some houses. The road corridor runs largely 
through uninhabited land except at the beginning and the end of the corridor.  
 
A
draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and revised in 
accordance with comments provided by the Project Team#s social development specialist 
and has been disclosed nationally and locally. This draft RPF covers the entire corridor 
Page  8
and will be applied retroactively to any land acquisition that has taken place during the 
preparation phase of the project. According to the updated FS, some taking of land has 
taken place for the approaches of the Sokh bridge (km 195-200). The construction of the 
bridge and its approaches has been completed by the Government. A due diligence 
exercise conducted by the consultants confirmed that there were five affected people, and 
that compensation for the land acquired had not yet been completed. During the pre-
appraisal mission it was established that only one of the affected people was located 
adjacent to the bridge, and in this case, the 0.40 hectares of rice paddies was acquired 
temporarily for usage as an asphalt plant. A local commission was established to 
determine the compensation paid for this temporary acquisition and assess the 
compensation as being equal to the market value of the rice harvest forgone. The other 
four affected persons were located on the eastern approach to the bridge. The land 
acquisition for this section was not the responsibility of the PIU, but rather was 
conducted on by the local government on behalf of the Ministry of Transport. Therefore, 
the PIU had incomplete information on what transpired in these cases. However, it was 
known that each individual was offered alternative land by the local government. This 
land was not deemed of comparable value by the affected persons. Therefore, during the 
pre-appraisal mission, the PIU agreed to establish a valuation commission to assess the 
replacement value of the land lost.  
 
This commission would follow the same model applied to land acquisition carried out 
on km 248-271 of the corridor during 2008 under an EC financed project conceived in 
2005. In this case, agricultural structures and plantings belonging to 40 households were 
removed from the right of way for the rehabilitation of this section of the road. The 
Ministry of Transport and Communications requested the local administration to establish 
a
valuation commission to estimate the cash compensation to be provided. This 
commission was required to hire a valuation expert who based the valuation on market 
comparators. Following the completion of the valuation, the expert#s report was 
circulated to the relevant state agencies and ministries for comment and correction. The 
report was subsequently amended and shared with the Southern Kyrgyz Society for 
property assessors. Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance requested another commission 
to verify the values assessed on a random basis. Even though compensation is not yet 
complete for this section, it is anticipated that it will be completed soon and that the 
assessed value will reflect the replacement value of the assets lost. In comparison with 
Km 248 # 271, the Sokh bridge valuation and compensation process should be simpler 
and quicker to complete as there are fewer affected persons and the asset being assessed 
is the land as opposed to agricultural structures or plantings. The PIU is committed to the 
timely completion of the valuation and compensation process. Once this is finalized, the 
land acquisition carried out will be in compliance with the procedures outlined in the 
resettlement policy framework.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the project area has been in use as transport corridor and settlement area for several 
decades an equilibrium between natural processes and conditions as well as human land 
use has been established. A key limiting factor to development appears to be the 
Page  9
availability of fertile land in reach of perennial water courses. Thus the sustainable use of 
natural resources is not expected to be significantly impacted by the better transport 
capacity the improved road corridor will offer. The main positive impacts will be 
improved access to markets, better service delivery to the population and generally 
enhanced mobility. There is a very low probability that the project would trigger or 
contribute to major economic shifts, such as development of large areas, construction 
booms or similar.  
 
Also, it is anticipated that permanent land acquisition will be kept to a minimum along 
the entire corridor, as the road primarily runs through arid unoccupied land. The only 
instances where land acquisition is likely to occur is where the road enters and exits 
settlements, and this process will be governed by the resettlement policy framework for 
the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The 'no project' alternative was discussed by the Recipient's Consultant, who concluded 
that a well engineered road with a maintenance program according to good practice 
would environmentally perform better than the current improvised, poorly constructed 
and non-maintained tracks and secondary roads. The main improvements from the 
upgraded road would be less erosion, less impact on surface drainage networks (which 
currently are frequently narrowed/blocked by improvised bridges), better dust control, 
higher degree of traffic safety and less emissions from traffic due to better surface 
conditions and the absence of 'stop-and-go-obstacles' (e.g. large potholes.  
 
The proposed Project is keen to minimize land acquisition and, at the detailed design 
stage, will take all measures to reduce the amount of land to the absolute minimum taking 
into account adequate safety measures. The detailed design that will be implemented is 
intended to be the option that minimizes land take and loss.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Kyrgyz Government shows a high degree of ownership and interest in the Project 
due to its strategic importance. Under its auspices a number of technical and 
environmental studies were prepared, both by local the local firms (e.g. 
Kyrgyzdortransproekt - KDTP), and international Consultants (Finnroad, Oy). This 
allocation of responsibilities for the production of safeguards documents mitigates 
shortcomings identified during a mission in 2007 by the Bank team, when KDTP, then 
the main designer for the corridor, was found to have insufficient staff resources and 
capabilities in the areas of environmental and social safeguards.  
 
During a meeting with the local branch of the MoEFM (Ministry for Environment and 
Forest Management) in Batken the status of environmental monitoring, permitting and 
enforcement for road projects was discussed. The Oblast has 28 environmental staff, 
distributed among the Oblast#s 3 Rayons and 2 Cities. Inspectors routinely carry out site 
visits and inspections (both announced and unannounced), identify violations of 
environmental permits and supervise / check their rectification. If violations of 
Page  10
environmental regulations or permits are ongoing, the MoEFM Oblast unit has the power 
(and has already used it in several cases) to suspend works until environmental 
compliance is achieved.  
 
The MoEFM unit is aware of the planned road projects and has a role in reviewing the 
designs and granting approval with respect to environmental criteria. A project such as 
for roads needs the MoEFM#s formal approval in order to receive the construction permit 
(CP).  
 
Regarding the Oblast unit's capability to fulfill its legally prescribed monitoring, 
permitting and enforcing role during construction and operation of the road, staffing 
appears adequate both in numbers and in general qualifications. There are, however, 
shortcomings in transport, communication, documentation and IT equipment of the local 
branches. Also the staff lacks specific skills and knowledge in assessing environmental 
criteria on the severity of impacts of roads / large infrastructure projects, as well as the 
range of potential mitigation measures. These issues can be resolved with appropriated 
training and possibly the provision of key equipment and will be addressed by the project 
under Component.  
 
The capacity of the PIU to deal with resettlement has been built through their experience 
with resettlement planning under ADB projects, the recruitment of a social specialist for 
ADB projects, and the active engagement of the PIU in the resettlement planning process 
for the Project with Finnroad experts. Going forward, attention should be paid to building 
capacity further, through staff participation in regional safeguards training workshops 
provided by the World Bank and the recruitment of an additional social specialist.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders in this process include the PIU within the Ministry of Transport and 
Communication (the project implementing entity), The Ayl Okmotu#s (local self 
government Rayon Administrations (regional government), local NGOs and Community-
Based-Organizations (such as village councils) and most importantly - the potentially 
affected people. As part of the social assessment, meetings have already been held with 
people who have been affected by previous works along the road, and who may 
potentially be affected by future works. However, a comprehensive consultation cannot 
take place until designs are finalized and the exact number and location of people to be 
affected is known. The procedures for conducting consultations are specified in the 
Resettlement Policy Framework.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/26/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/04/2009 
 
Page  11
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/05/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/26/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/04/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/05/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  12
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cordula Rastogi 
08/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
08/07/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
08/05/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
08/13/2009 
Comments:  acting for Agi Kiss as regional safeguards coordinator 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Andreas Schliessler 
08/13/2009 
Comments:  acting for SM Henry Kerali.  The team confirmed that the EA/EMP and the 
Resettlement Framework have been reviewed and cleared by the regional safeguards unit. 
