Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3630 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P108525 
Project Name: Capacity Building for Economic Management Grant 
Task Team Leader: Roland N. Clarke 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Macroeconomic management (P);Analysis of economic growth 
(P);Administrative and civil service reform (P);Public expenditure, financial management 
and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching development objective is to establish and institutionalize a sound framework 
and capacity for economic policy making and implementation in the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
The most important project objectives are: (i) To enhance inter-ministerial coordination and 
enhance capacity to ensure a coherent economic policy decision-making process; (ii) assist the 
authorities to develop and implement policies to improve the business environment; (iii) to 
support the restructuring and capacity building of MEDT for economic analysis and policy 
development including the use of technical tools to maintain a consistent macroeconomic and 
fiscal frameworks and to develop and implement policies to improve the business environment; 
(iv) To build capacity to enable public institutions (and particularly the MEDT) to analyze the 
implications of external shocks (e.g. inflation, changes in foreign currency flows, commodity 
prices) or major proposed policy measures; (v) To assist the authorities to develop the capacity 
for carrying out a reform of wages and employment in the civil service.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The grant would finance training, consultancy services and capacity building in the following 
three areas: (i) Institutional and technical framework for government-wide macro-economic 
policy development and co-ordination; (ii) Strengthening the capacity of MEDT to fulfill an 
effective role in macro-economic analytical work and policy development; and (iii) Development 
of capacity to carry out a pay and grading reform in the civil service. A fourth component of the 
project would cover necessary project management activities.  
 
Component 1: Institutional and technical framework for government-wide macro-economic 
policy development and co-ordination.  
 
This component will have a Government-wide focus on establishing effective inter-agency co-
operation in the development and implementation of economic policy (for example in setting and 
enforcing overall spending, revenue and fiscal deficit targets, broad composition of public 
expenditure and of revenue, exchange rate policy and broader monetary policy.)  
 
Consultancy support will therefore be provided to the Presidential Administration, office of the 
Prime Minister and, the MOF, the MEDT and the NBKR, to develop clear procedures, roles and 
responsibilities for establishing broad parameters of economic policy and screening significant 
policy proposals for their consistency with such a framework, particularly taking into account 
their impacts on the fiscal stance and the business environment. One of the key issues here would 
be to develop the systems and procedures necessary to ensure that one macroeconomic 
consistency framework will be the authoritative source of macroeconomic forecasts for the 
whole of the government.  
 
In addition, the consultants will support the creation of a secretariat consisting of a task force of 
senior officials to support a formal cabinet level coordination mechanism to either replace or 
restructure the Council for Macroeconomic policy, which has had formal responsibility at the 
ministerial level for economic policy coordination, although has in practice been unable to fulfill 
this responsibility.  The project’s consultants will assist the secretariat to prepare terms of 
reference, policy agendas and procedures for coordination meetings.  
 
Funds would also be made available to the central institutions for the commissioning for a 
number of strategic macro-policy papers from local think tanks and academic institutions, 
including the International Institute of Strategic Research under the President of the Kyrgyz 
Republic.  
 
The work under this component will be carried out jointly with a proposed ADB TA of $1 
million for strengthening the Government (Prime Minister’s) office, and with the support of and 
in consultation with the IMF. The work would also build on an analysis conducted by the 
USAID Business Environment Improvement project to provide recommendations to the Prime 
Minister’s office to strengthen its operations and oversight of Government activities. The World 
Bank financed activities will focus on strengthening the policy making function at the center of 
government and on its capacity to provide policy guidance to sectoral ministries, from its own 
resources and by contracting policy analysis from local think tanks and academic institutions. It 
would also be closely linked to the development of overall fiscal policy making capacity in the 
MOF and MEDT. This would complement the activities of the ADB TA project which would 
focus on capacity building in strategic planning and the establishment of management 
information systems in the key central agencies.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening the capacity of MEDT to fulfill an effective role in macro-
economic analytical work and policy development.  
 
This component will focus on developing capacity within MEDT so that it is better able to 
support the government and individual ministries on the formulation and implementation of both 
Page  3
macroeconomic and structural economic policies including particularly those to improve the 
business environment. It is crucial that the MEDT is able to demonstrate clear leadership in the 
formulation of economically sound policies and that it has in place the technical capacity to 
generate coherent policy proposals and sound economic forecasts. One of the key tasks of the 
Ministry for which currently there is virtually no capacity in the Ministry is to provide a coherent 
analysis of the economic impact of external or internal shocks to the economy, to analyze the 
economic impact of initiatives from other agencies or to develop its own policy initiatives to deal 
with specific problems such as agricultural development, internal obstacles to trade, reduction of 
pressures on business through inspections. The other key task of the MEDT is to coordinate the 
implementation of measures (often by other agencies) to improve the business environment.  
 
The project will provide resources for consultancy support to the MEDT: (i) to assist the 
Ministry to clarify MEDT objectives, strategy and structure, prepare a Strategic Development 
Plan (SDP) for MEDT and an implementation plan to reorganize the ministry to focus on its 
objectives and strategy; (ii) to establish a Policy Development Group of qualified officials, 
including mechanisms to ensure merit based selection of these officials and possible financing of 
salary supplements for the members of the group; (iii) to reform Human Resource Management 
in the Ministry to enable the recruitment and retention of professional staff (iv) develop ongoing 
professional training for MEDT staff; and (iv) to establish a Department for commercial law and 
economic analysis, which would build the capacity for an embryonic Regulatory Impact 
Assessment (RIA) unit, with at least the basic skills to make an informed analysis of the likely 
impact of major legislation and policy initiatives on the economy and the business environment. 
The component will also support the development of internal capacity to use technical tools to 
maintain a consistent macro-economic framework upon which a consistent fiscal framework can 
be based.  
 
The nature and process of the reorganization of the Ministry, so as to focus its work on that of 
providing support to a properly functioning market economy, would be defined in the MEDT 
Strategic Development Plan with implementation of the plan supported by an SDP 
Implementation Task Force of 2 staff recruited from the civil service and reporting to the MEDT 
State Secretary. Another important aspect of the SDP would be reform of human resource 
management in MEDT to enable the Ministry to recruit, develop and retain suitably qualified 
staff, particularly for economic policy.  
 
The Policy Development Group (PDG) would consist of well qualified officials complemented 
by outside local consultants, (with some resources provided under the project to contract policy 
advice from local think tanks), and would both develop policy and provide analysis of the 
economic impact of external events and new developments in the economy.  The PDG will also 
have a key role to play in linking the activities of the Ministry of Economy to the Investment 
Council, chaired by the President. The investment council has a mandate to oversee government 
efforts to improve the business environment, and includes representatives of the private sector 
and donors. In addition the government is interested in expanding this approach to a number of 
other key ministries such as transport, energy and agriculture.  
 
In addition this component would provide specific technical support to specific divisions within 
a
restructured MEDT, in a number of areas including:  
 
•
Simplification of the regulation of businesses and foreign and domestic trade, and other 
key items to improve the business climate identified within the framework of the ongoing CEM 
TA. In particular it would enable the Bank team to support the provision of sectoral experts to 
Page  4
provide assistance to agencies in following up the implementation of the current process of 
improving the Doing Business ratings under the CEM TA.  
 
•
the economic evaluation of and prioritization of major investment projects (both local and 
donor financed) and their integration into the fiscal and budgetary framework;  
 
•
support to the Ministry of Finance to maintain a coherent fiscal framework, based on the 
macroeconomic framework of the MEDT, with the technical ability to set overall spending, 
revenue and fiscal deficit targets, and the broad composition of public expenditure and of 
revenue.  
 
•
interpretation and use of the results of M&E indicators generated from an M&Esystem 
for the CDS being developed with the support of the ADB.  
 
The areas of support to the MEDT will be agreed jointly with the ADB, which has a proposed 
$10 million Business Environment and Investment Climate Support Program  and USAID 
(which is currently implementing its Business Environment Improvement Project, which is 
focused on working with the local private sector to assist it to participate in legal and regulatory 
drafting processes and to develop its capacity to utilize information to protect its rights and build 
demands for reform).  
 
Component 3: Development of capacity to carry out a pay and grading reform in the civil 
service  
 
This component focuses on a key issue impacting on all areas of development in the Kyrgyz 
Republic – the need for pay and grading reform within the Civil Service.  It will follow up on the 
technical note on Civil Service wage reform developed under the PPER.  
 
This component will finance a Salary Task Force (STF) of approximately five civil servants, 
recruited on merit and seconded to the Task Force for 6 months (supported by local and 
international consultants as required) to develop the necessary information base and possible 
options for a pay and grading reform within the civil service, essentially items (ii) and (iii) in the 
previous paragraph, based on the general principles established in the technical note. This would 
include technical work to establish a basic grading system of job classes and salary scales over 
the medium term.  
 
The STF will report to the Prime Minister’s office and the Economic Strategy Department of 
the Presidential Administration and present options for a gradual introduction of this reform. In 
doing so the group will consider the scope for pilots in selected ministries and pay particular 
attention to the mechanisms needed to ensure that only appropriate and qualified staff are 
selected under the new system. The STF will also provide advice on the key institutional links 
required between the main institutions involved with salary and employment policy in the Civil 
Service (including particularly the MOF, Presidential Administration, Government Office, and 
Civil Service Agency).  
 
A
longer-term issue is the need to establish an institution with sufficient authority to manage 
the process of salary reform in the civil service. The STF will therefore present options for the 
institutional location of a central government unit with the authority and capacity to oversee and 
implement civil service strategy which would determine the overall size, shape, and cost of the 
service.  
 
Component 4: Project management and coordination  
 
This component would finance two local senior policy advisors (one on macro fiscal issues and 
the other on growth and business environment issues, with at least one of the advisors having a 
strong background in institution reform issues) reporting to a steering committee of the principal 
agencies involved in the project to provide substantive guidance (under component 1) as well as 
Page  5
to undertake the necessary project management of the project. It would also finance necessary 
additional procurement and financial management assistance to an existing PIU in the MEDT 
which is already implementing other WB projects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Project raises no safeguard issues   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard studies will be required   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roland N. Clarke 
04/30/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/01/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Kazi Mahbub-Al Matin 
05/01/2008 
Comments:   
