Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3488 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P110267 
Project Name: Rural Water Supply  & Sanitation 2 
Task Team Leader: Mirlan Aldayarov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Rural policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  10.00
13.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Second Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSSP-2) 
is (i) to have improved access to potable water from water supply systems which the 
communities own, operate, maintain and manage in a sustainable manner; and (ii) to improve 
hygiene, sanitation and water-related practices at individual, family and institutional levels in the 
rural areas.  
 
The outcome of the project will be monitorable improvements in the quantity and quality of 
water supply services available to participating village communities as well as improvements in 
health outcomes such as a reduction in the incidence of diarrhoeal disease in children.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument for the project is a SIL.  Its cost is estimated at USD 23.0 
million (IDA - USD10.0 million; DFID - USD10.0 million).  It will tentatively consist of the 
following four components:  
Page  2
A. 
Water Supply Rehabilitation and Construction (tentative cost USD 14.0 million):  This 
component will support provision of mix of grants/credits to local communities, self-organized 
into Community Drinking Water Users Unions (CDWUUs) to rehabilitate/expand/construct the 
village water supply systems. An assessment of the specific needs of the different villages (with 
main focus on those not selected in the first project) will be undertaken over the next two 
months. Its results will allow selection the investments of the first-year investment program.  
 
B.  
Village Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion (tentative cost USD 6.5 million):This 
component will support promotion of hygiene and sanitation behaviors related to water supply 
through extensive technical assistance, village level hygiene promotion, and assisting the 
refurbishment of demonstration sanitation facilities at schools and medical posts.  
 
C.  
Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (tentative cost USD1.5 million):  
The component will finance technical assistance focusing on quality project management and 
assisting the Government and the Department of Rural Water Supply (DRWS) in the 
implementation of the strategy of sector development, developed under the current RWSSP.  
 
D.  
Operating Costs and Other Expenditure (tentative cost USD 1.0 million):   The 
component will finance the operating costs of the implementing unit. It will also finance 
expenditure for monitoring systems and surveys, and annual audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented country-wide although at innitital stages of implementation 
the Project will focus on three Northern regions. The Project would target about 150 Community 
Drinking Water Users Unions (CDWUUs) that will be selected on the basis of selection criteria 
used by the original RWSSP, which, nevertheless, will need to be strengthened. Clear selection 
criteria would be drawn up during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Kyrgyz Republic has adequate environmental legislation and mechanisms, which include an 
environmental permit procedure for physical activities, and an environmental impact assessment, 
including a State Environmental Expertise Review.  Rehabilitation of water supply schemes 
under ongoing project (RWSSP) has not resulted in significant environmental concerns.  
Category A subprojects will not be financed by the Project. A comprehensive environmental 
management framework will be prepared with a sample EMP check-list to be integrated into the 
bidding documents. Implementation of mitigation measures (e.g. pollution prevention, protection 
of natural resources, and worker and public safety) would be required from contractors who 
would have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound construction practices.  These 
requirements would be included in bidding documents and meeting them would be a contractual 
requirement of the works, to be supervised by construction supervision consultants.  
 
The subprojects will be screened according to the Kyrgyz procedures and specific 
environmental management measures will be developed for each subproject and the roles and 
responsibilities for implementation defined before any subproject is approved. The Project 
Operations Manual will include an environmental annex describing these procedures. The 
operations manual will be reviewed by Environmental Safeguards Specialist to ensure the Bank 
comments are addressed in the final draft.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
Page  3
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is unlikely to raise environmental issues other than those associated with 
construction activities.  Its only minor impact will be temporary nuisances resulting from 
construction activities, which will be mitigated by including into the work contracts specific 
measures to be taken by contractors and close supervision of compliance by PMU.  
 
Once finalized, the first-year investment program will be reviewed to confirm the absence 
of environmental issues or, if needed, determine the specific environmental management and 
review requirements.  The subprojects will be screened according to the Kyrgyz procedures and 
specific environmental management measures will be developed for each subproject and the 
roles and responsibilities for implementation defined before any subproject is approved. The 
Project Operations Manual will include an environmental annex describing these procedures. 
The operations manual will be reviewed by Environmental Safeguards Specialist to ensure the 
Bank comments are addressed in the final draft.  
 
Nevertheless, this may involve development of Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF), which will include a sample of Environmental Management Plan (EMP) check-list to be 
developed for the certain sub-projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Although OP 4.12 is not expected to be triggered, it has been marked as TBD so that the task 
team can ascertain whether any encroachments/ squatters from the public rights of way will need 
to be removed, either temporarily or permanently, to carry out some of the planned civil works. 
The TTL expects to find out whether such situations requiring removal of squatters has existed in 
the previous project, and if yes, will document what the adopted approach has been. If squatters 
have to be permanently removed such that new pipes can be laid, OP 4.12 will be triggered, and 
a
brief land acquisition policy framework [that indicates what measures can be put in place to 
mitigate the loss of structures and some transition support for loss of livelihood to the affected 
parties] should be submitted as a condition of appraisal. We would consider loss of land as 
temporary if structures are not physically demolished and people are quite simply 
inconvenienced for a brief period of time through difficult access to buildings etc. Such cases 
would be deemed “disturbances” and the OP is not triggered. The team will re-group with 
Safeguards staff after the preparatory mission for further consultation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Applicability of World Bank Operational Policy 7.50, “Projects on InternationalWaterways” 
may constitute an exception to notification requirement.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/20/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental specialist will join the preparation mission to carry out the environment-
related work described above.  A social scientist will join that mission as well.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mirlan Aldayarov 
08/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
08/18/2008 
Comments:  Cleared on behalf of Agi Kiss. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Alison C. N. Cave 
08/18/2008 
Comments:  Cleared on behalf of Wael Zakout. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
