Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3377
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P108178 
Project Name:  Second Land and Real Estate Registration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jessica Mott 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (60%);Housing finance and real estate 
markets (20%);General information and communications sector (20%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Other public sector governance 
(P);Personal and property rights (P);Other urban development (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To support development of markets for land and real estate and the more intensive and 
effective use of land and real estate through the further development of a reliable and 
well-functioning system for registration of rights in immovable property.   
 
3. Project Description 
This is a repeater project which would build on the experience of the first Land and Real 
Estate Registration Project.  Its components would comprise  
 
(a)Organizational development and improved services (formerly the institutional 
development component)  
 
(i) 
Performance, strategy, and communications  
 
(ii) 
Information technology (IT) support  
Page  2
(iii)   Agency financial management and procurement improvements  
 
(iv) 
Records management improvement  
 
(v) 
Organization support and improvement  
 
(vi) 
Project management  
 
(b)Expanding spatial and legal land and real estate data (formerly the operational 
services component)  
 
(i) 
Systematic registration (including novistroiki and coverage of non-private lands 
and real estate units in urban areas, and community pasture lands in one district).  
 
(ii) 
Upgrading cadastral mapping (including orthophotomapping of prioritized areas).  
 
(iii)   Valuation support.  
 
(c)Professional Development and Standards (formerly the training component)  
 
(i) 
Human resource development for Gosregister staff  
 
(ii) 
Support for educational and professional bodies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover the entire country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
SLRERP environmental effects, if any, will be minor and/or indirect.  It will include 
small scale civil works connected to building rehabilitation.  To allow the flexibility to 
expand office exteriors or to address hazards if they are encountered, the environmental 
assessment is rated category B.  An environmental management framework (EMF) 
containing a simple environmental management plan (EMP) template has been prepared 
in accordance with Bank guidelines and the Borrower’slegal and regulatory framework. 
The EMP is tailored to small civil works, where contractor’s environmental awareness 
and capacities are expected to be low.  TheEMP thus is designed to be practical, 
descriptive, implementation-oriented. The EMP states anticipated environmental impacts 
and provides on site measures to control emissions (e.g., dust, noise, and exhaust fumes) 
and manage wastewater discharge and solid waste.  It provides measures to avoid the use 
of hazardous substances, such as toxic paints, solvents or cleaning agents. Moreover, it 
addresses traffic safety in the immediate vicinity of the construction sites.  No significant 
issues regarding physical cultural resources (PCR) are expected due to the small scale of 
the foreseen civil works, but the EMF provides guidelines to address this issue in the 
event that it does arise.  The EMP will be part of the tender specifications, will be priced 
during the bidding process and included into the works contracts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Among property owners, the increase tenure security and improved land allocation 
resulting from the SLRERP is likely to induce environmentally positive behavioral 
changes through better property management.  The project is also likely to contribute to 
improvements in information and the regulatory framework in ways that facilitate better 
public sector management of land use.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Environmental Management Framework will minimize adverse impacts, which in 
any case are expected to be minor.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Management Plan has been approved by State Environmental Agency 
and submitted to the Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Regarding Bank safeguards, the only potentially affected people will be the contractual 
workers and other people located in the vicinity of the rehabilitation works.  
 
Page  4
Regarding other stakeholders, project beneficiaries will include the full range of 
individual private customers, as well as members of private and government professional 
organizations, and Gosregister staff.  Professional organizations include banks, local self 
government bodies, notaries, realtors, valuers, courts, and legal companies.  
 
The project will not support land acquisition and associated involuntary resettlement.  
The project also does not support eviction or similar enforcement of laws addressing 
illegal occupation of state land.  All civil construction works planned will be executed on 
existing land plots which are already in the possession of the implementing agency.  The 
project will generate information on the magnitude and nature of occupation and 
settlements, and this information will be used to help regularize tenure rights.  It will 
build on the positive experience of the first project, which included the regularization of 
property rights on some 600,000 land and real estate units.  
 
Project activities will not change boundaries, ownership or use rights in forest lands or 
protected areas.  Project activities may improve the accessibility of information on 
boundaries, ownership and use rights of these areas.  
 
The Environmental Management Plan has been 
posted on the Gosregister’s web siteand 
on the boards of all land registry offices. Mechanisms for discussions with NGOs and for 
receiving public comments within a fixed time frame on the Environmental Management 
Plan are operational.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jessica Mott 
01/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
01/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
01/16/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
02/03/2008 
Comments:   
