Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/17/2009 
Report No.:  50866
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P098949 
Project Name:  Second Village Investment Project 
Task Team Leader:  Keith W. McLean 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 31, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 3, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (33%);General education sector (33%);Sub-national 
government administration (18%);Water supply (8%);Power (8%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (25%);Participation and civic engagement 
(25%);Rural non-farm income generation (24%);Decentralization (13%);Other social 
protection and risk management (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.50 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  13.20
20.70 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The second Village Investment Project (VIP-2) continues the efforts made under the first 
VIP, by expanding the coverage and continuing the support provided to local 
communities and local self-government bodies.  The project development objective is to 
assist the Recipient with: (a) improving governance and capacity at the local level; (b) 
strengthening the provision of, and access to, essential infrastructure services; and (c) 
supporting private group-owned small scale enterprise development. It does this at the 
grassroots level, by supporting income and employment generating investments in village 
infrastructure and in group-managed small enterprises, and by helping communities and 
local authorities work together to achieve key development objectives at the local level.  
It seeks to strengthen local government administrations (aiyl okmotus) and councils (aiyl 
keneshs) and grassroots institutions -- making the more inclusive, accountable and 
effective at meeting villagers' self-identified development needs.  This ISDS updates the 
original ISDS dated 05/30/2006 to reflect that OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is now 
triggered in the context of project restructuring, and a Land Acquisition Policy 
Page  2
Framework (same as Resettlement Policy Framework) has been prepared for the project 
and henceforth will apply to all investments financed by IDA and the DFID trust fund 
under the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is supported by a Grant from the International Development Association 
(IDA) of US$15 million equivalent plus US$ equivalent 13.2 million in cofinancing 
provided by DfID.  Through this repeater project, the VIP was expanded to the country's 
remaining 126 aiyl okmotus not yet participating, and continued support will be provided 
for the 347 communities already participating (scaled up to all 475 aiyl kenesh okrugs).  
VIP-2 utilizes the institutions, processes, and mechanisms developed under the first VIP.  
It builds upon the capacity created, experience gained, and lessons learned from VIP.  
The project consists of three main components:  Capacity Building and Empowerment, 
Village Investments, and Project Management.  
 
Component 1 - Capacity Building and Empowerment - comprises training and support 
to communities, local governments and community based organizations (CBOs) in (i) 
social mobilization, (ii) strategic planning, micro-project preparation and implementation, 
and (iii) good governance. Participating communities are be provided with training and 
support in social mobilization and monitoring, needs assessment, resource assessment, 
and participatory planning.  The project collaborates very closely with a number of 
partner organizations already engaged in community mobilization and capacity building 
in the ongoing VIP (e.g., DFID, UNDP, Urban Institute/USAID, Swiss Red Cross, 
Counterpart Consortium, etc.).  Residents in beneficiary communities build skills and 
gain experience in local development planning and micro-project implementation through 
their participation in the Village Investments component and are eligible to receive 
training in: business development, infrastructure planning and operation, and good 
practices for avoiding or mitigating environmental impacts of micro-projects. 
Governance training emphasizes: (i) skills, mechanism, processes and tools for good 
governance, (ii) accountability and transparency in conducting public affairs, and (iii) 
strategic planning for community development. It includes broadening of awareness and 
understanding of national procedures and requirements for environmental assessment and 
management.  Particular emphasis is placed on measures to minimize the room for 
misuse, fraud and corruption.  
 
Component 2 - Village Investments - supports a facility and mechanisms for delivering 
financial and technical support for community-based initiatives around which villagers 
and local authorities collaborate in an ongoing process of strategic planning, investment 
selection, and micro-project implementation.  Communities are required to apply and 
adhere to principles of transparency, participation and accountability.  Through a 
participatory and transparent process, communities assess and identify local problems, 
establish their own priorities for using their community grants, and identify and prepare 
micro-projects that address their needs. The aiyl-kenesh level Local Investment Union 
(LIU), through its Executive Committee (LIC), coordinate this effort, drawing on the 
contributions of the Village Investment Unions (VIUs) and their Executive Committees 
(VICs).  
Page  3
Participating communities receive community grants, phased over four years, to 
implement their agreed and approved community investment plans.  Micro-projects 
included in the community investment which reflect the villager's needs and priorities 
and their willingness to organize themselves and dedicate material, financial and 
managerial resources to common undertakings.  The micro projects fall into two main 
categories: economic and social infrastructure, and group-based small business ventures.  
The communities themselves decide on the most appropriate use of the financial support 
they receive and on the composition of their annual investment plans.  The communities 
will contribute at least 25% (including at least 3.75% in cash) of their community grant 
allocation as their own counterpart contribution.  
 
Component 3 - Project Management - provides support for overall project management 
by the Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS).  The agency does not 
have a large cadre of technical staff.  Instead funding is provided to contract local 
expertise to screen micro-project proposals, and facilitate and monitor their 
implementation.  Community Development Support Officers (CDSOs) work directly with 
two to three communities and provide the essential link between the communities, ARIS 
and other outside partners.  The project finances key agency staff, consultants, operating 
costs, technical assistance, training, essential equipment and office refurbishment.  
Funding is also being provided for information dissemination, M&E activities and project 
audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented countrywide.  Project activities will be located mainly 
within or close to existing settlements. Proximity to protected or sensitive areas is not 
anticipated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The project 
funds micro-projects of different types, primarily small-scale social and economic 
infrastructure facilities in or very close to existing settlements, but also small investments 
in local services, agro-processing, natural resources management and income generation. 
All will be very small and are not expected to have significant negative environmental 
impacts.  Possible minor impacts will most likely relate to construction residues and 
management of waste material from small-scale agro-processing facilities and village-
level primary health care centers.  Investments potentially carrying environmental risks 
that are unlikely to be manageable at the local level are not eligible for financing under 
the project.  
 
While during preparation no resettlement or land acquisition was anticipated, a small 
number (six) of cases emerged during supervision where title on land donated to the 
community to realize projects by private parties was unclear or where municipal land 
planned for micro-project implementation was encumbered by third party use.  These 
have been on a small scale and have either been resolved to the satisfaction of all parties 
involved or resulted in the micro-project not been implemented. Therefore, OP/BP 4.12 is 
now triggered in the context of the restructuring of VIP-II and the proposed Additional 
Financing (AF). OP 4.12 was not triggered for the original project as no land acquisition 
was expected to take place.  The decision to restructure and trigger OP 4.12 is based on 
the fact that: (i) during implementation a few cases were identified where issues arose 
surrounding the land acquisition and were resolved by communities; (ii) given the large 
number of communities carrying out investments under the project it is possible that 
additional cases could come to light later; (iii) additional land acquisition could 
potentially be required to implement additional community projects funded by and co-
financed by DFID in VIP-II; and (v) some further land acquisition may occur for 
subprojects to be financed under the proposed AF.  
 
The project will not finance any micro-projects that would be rated Environmental 
Category "A".   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long-term negative impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Very effective measures have been put in place under the current project to address 
safeguards issues, and they are being applied and closely monitored.  They are laid out in 
detailed Guidelines for Environmental Review of Micro-Projects, which are part of the 
Operational Manual and are provided to all participating communities and micro-project 
groups.  The procedures to be followed are consistent with OP 4.01 and Kyrgyz 
requirements and will ensure compliance with safeguards procedures and issues.  Each 
micro-project will be reviewed for safeguard purposes, and where warranted specific 
mitigation and compliance measures will be identified; their implementation will be 
monitored by project staff, community safeguards volunteers and public officials.  The 
prescribed procedures clearly define and assign institutional arrangements and 
responsibilities and the process of safeguards assessment requirements, emphasizing 
transparency and comprehension by the target communities and local officials.  
Appropriate training is being and will continue to be provided to local officials and 
community safeguards volunteers.  
 
Since this is a demand driven project and it is difficult to anticipate whether or not 
communities will develop micro projects that would require land acquisition it is 
impossible to determine the exact location where land acquisition will take place or who 
the affected persons would be. The client has therefore prepared a land acquisition 
(resettlement) policy framework, acceptable to the Bank, which will be disclosed locally 
during August 2009. This document will provide clear procedures for future land 
acquisition in the event that it is deemed necessary by the communities preparing micro-
projects.   Only minor land acquisition or resettlement is anticipated.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project is highly participatory and demand-driven.  The main stakeholders are 
members of rural communities, leaders and staff of local governments, community 
leaders, political leaders, traditional leaders, CBOs and NGOs. The principal 
participatory mechanisms will be extensive interviews, workshops at different levels, and 
structured participatory planning and M&E processes. As appropriate, stakeholders will 
be provided with training or experiential awareness-raising exercises to increase their 
own capacity to participate or to enable them to include others in the process.  The land 
acquisition (resettlement) policy framework will be disclosed in-country and discussed 
extensively as part of the clients social mobilization process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2006 
 
Page  6
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/27/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
A
full environmental assessment, involving multiple and extensive consultations with a 
broad range of stakeholders, was carried out in 2003, and detailed Guidelines for 
environmental micro-project screening, scoping, review and assessment of micro-projects 
were developed and are included in the Operational Manual.  The Guidelines also include 
a
list of ineligible micro-projects.  The prescribed process of screening, scoping and 
analysis or assessment described in the Guidelines is designed to identify any potential 
conflicts with existing or future safeguard policies.  Further screening is carried out in 
accordance with the national legislation and regulations for environmental review and the 
outcomes are monitored by the ARIS safeguards specialist.  Compliance is also 
monitored during implementation by the LICs themselves, and independently by local 
staff of the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) and of 
other ministries with relevant jurisdiction (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture).  
The Community Development Support Officers, under the direction o f the ARIS 
safeguards specialist, will track compliance with agreed mitigation measures and 
operational practices to ensure that micro-projects remain in compliance with the Bank's 
safeguard policies.  
 
The Guidelines (and compliance with them) under the current operation have been 
reviewed during the preparation of the proposed repeater project and have been found 
appropriate and effective.  Some minor revisions were introduced to reflect current 
institutional responsibilities in the country (primarily the establishment of the SAEPF in 
2005). Future ex-post compliance assessments will ensure that the samples assessed are 
fully representative of the range of micro-projects implemented.  
 
Additional consultations with representative stakeholder groups in different parts of the 
country have been conducted during the preparation of the repeater project.  The 
Guidelines, incorporating several small modifications, have been disclosed and widely 
publicized in the country before project appraisal, as have the updated EA (reflecting 
recent institutional changes in the Kyrgyz Republic) and the minutes of the recent 
stakeholder consultations.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Keith W. McLean 
08/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Pieter David Meerbach 
08/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
08/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jeyhun Sahavat Sultanov 
08/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
08/12/2009 
Comments:   
