Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4680 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/15/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P116734 
Project Name: Lao Environment and Social Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Jitendra J. Shah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASTS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (48%);Forestry (25%);Other social services 
(11%);Sub-national government administration (9%);General education sector (7%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (33%);Participation and civic 
engagement (17%);Water resource management (17%);Biodiversity (17%);Other social 
development (16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objectives will be the same as the original design:  
 
#
The PDO is to assist the country to strengthen the management of environmental and 
social issues associated with the sustainable use of natural resources in Lao PDR for enhancing 
quality of growth and reducing poverty.  
 
#
Specifically, the project aims to: (a) strengthen institutions and instruments for 
assessment, monitoring and compliance for environmental and social sustainability, and broaden 
the constituency for environmental changes; (b) invest in on-the-ground environmental 
improvement activities, with emphasis on sustainable biodiversity management, community 
environmental management and livelihoods enhancements; and (c) operationalize the EPF to 
become a permanent entity that is eligible to use NT2 revenues for priority environmental 
protection activities by developing two Windows that serve as models for EPF operation and 
potentially become permanent structure within EPF.  
Page  2
#
Three outcome indicators include: (1) improved policies and instruments are understood 
by stakeholders, institutionalized within government agencies and system, and implemented by 
technical competent staff; (2) selected protected areas and local communities benefit from 
improved environmental management, and enhanced livelihood options; and (3) EPF is a 
competent institution, eligible to received NT2 revenues.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project comprises three components:  
 
#
Component 1: Policy Implementation and Capacity Enhancement (PICE). This 
component will strengthen at the national, provincial, and district levels: (i) environmental and 
social safeguard policy formulation and implementation, including monitoring; (ii) integrated 
river basin management; (iii) environmental and social capacity development focusing on 
environmental assessment, compliance monitoring, and coordination; and (iv) environmental 
education and awareness.    There would be about 10 large subgrants under this window.  
 
#
Component 2:  Community and Biodiversity Investment (CBI).  This component will 
support initiatives to strengthen conservation practices and livelihood improvement activities in 
and around protected areas (building on the conservation planning approaches developed for the 
Nakai Nam Thuen National Protected Area and its corridor) and to improve localized 
environmental conditions through partnership activities with communities, local governments, 
and civil society organization, in Central Laos.   There would be about 6-7 large subgrants under 
this window.  
 
#
Component 3:  Management and Monitoring Support.  This component will support the 
following activities:  the day-to-day operation of the EPF, specifically PICE and CBI windows; 
marketing and business development of the windows to assist beneficiaries to prepare sub-grants; 
developing and implementing a monitoring, evaluation and dissemination process to assess 
performance of the two windows, and training of WMU staff to perform all the above.  
 
Type of activities include: (i) capacity building grants for Component 1 which will include 
studies, surveys, workshops, training, preparation of technical guidelines, monitoring and 
assessment of environmental conditions, etc.; and (ii) grants for protected area management and 
community environmental management and community livelihood activities.  The project will 
also support the sourcing of regional and/or international expertise to assist in the 
implementation of some tasks for the project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Lao PDR   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Lao has been developing safeguards capacity over the years. This project is to further strengthen 
this capacity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASTS) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Most of the subgrants will be related to training and capacity building of government 
agencies at national and local levels to increase their ability to effectively implement and monitor 
the EIA/SIA process, the management water resources in Nam Thuen-Nam Kading, the 
management of protected area, and the development of conservation community network.  
However, given that the target provinces (Borikhamxai, Khammoune, and Savanakhet ) are 
located in the central part of Lao which is rich in natural resources and inhabited by many ethnic 
groups, some small subgrants may create negative impacts on local environment and 
communities and trigger the Bank safeguard policy related to natural habitats, resettlement, and 
indigenous people.  To address this concern, an Environment and Social Safeguard framework 
(ESSF) has been developed to ensure that adverse impacts will not occur (via negative list) and 
that appropriate actions will be undertaken to mitigate the impacts.  Bank consultation and post 
review will ensure that the agreed actions are carried out and the ESSF is adequate.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The subgrants will not create negative impact on natural habitats.  However, the target areas 
are located in the areas that may involve sensitive natural habitat.  The ESSF has been designed 
to address this issue.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not involve logging or large scale forest clearing as defined by the policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not involve procurement of large scale pesticides as defined in the policy.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The subprojects are not located in any known archeological sites.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some subprojects are likely to be located in areas inhabited by ethnic minority groups, 
however significant negative impacts are not expected. To make sure that the ethnic groups are 
properly informed and aware of the need to use natural resources sustainably and to protect 
wildlife sactuary and protected area, prior consultation will be required during the development 
and/or approval of the subgrant.  If significant impacts are expected, preparation of the Ethnic 
Group Development Plan (EGDP) will be required.  This requirement is included as part of the 
Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGDP) which has been included in the ESSF.  In addition one 
subgrant has been allocated to the Lao Front for National Construction for developing a national 
guideline on consultation with ethnic groups, including training and capacity building activities.  
Several small subgrants have been allocated for the implementation support on the protected 
areas of which one subgrant has been allocated for development of the national regulation for the 
protected area and building management capacity of staff.  Consultation with local community 
will be an integral part of the planning and consultation process.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Population relocation and major land acquisition is prohibited and this is included in the 
negative list of the ESSF.  Small land acquisition can be proceed in line with the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) which has been included as part of the ESSF. Possible restriction of 
natural resources used will be addressed through close consultation with the affected population, 
and will require preparation of a Re
settlement Process Framework.  Close consultation and WB 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
post review during supervision will ensure that this issue is properly addressed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not involve any construction of dam and thus will not involve dam safety.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not involve water resource development activities and thus will not involve 
the international waters   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
All subprojects are not located in any know international disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/04/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESSF will be consulted with the local authorities, local communities, and representative 
of ethnic groups in Borikhamxay province on 10-11 September.  If needed, the ESSF will be 
updated and disclosed in the InfoShop and in-country.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah 
09/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Patrick Labaste 
09/15/2009 
Comments:  Acting for M. Lovei, Sector Manager, EASER 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
