Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3943
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P108505 
Project Name:  SUSTAINABLE FORESTRY FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT II 
Task Team Leader:  Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Biodiversity (S);Land administration and 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FINLAND: Ministry for Foreign Affairs 
14.00
14.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of SUFORD is to help the Borrower to achieve the 
sustainable management of production forests to alleviate rural poverty in the Project 
Provinces by implementing key forest policy reform actions and policies set forth in the 
Government’s Letter of Forest Management Policy.  Specific objectives of the project are 
to: (a) improve the policy, legal and incentive framework enabling the expansion of 
Participatory Sustainable Forest Management (PSFM) throughout the country; (b) bring 
the country’s priority natural production forests under PSFM; and (c) improve villagers’ 
well-being and livelihood throughbenefits from sustainable forestry, community 
development and development of viable livelihood systems.   
 
3. Project Description 
SUFORD was originally approved by the Board of the World Bank in June 2003 and has 
been under implementation since 2004.  The project is currently being financed by an 
IDA Credit of US$9.9 million with parallel financing provided by the Government of 
Page  2
Finland in the amount of EUR8 million.  The current closing date is December 31, 2008.  
The Government of Lao PDR has requested the World Bank to provide additional 
financing to SUFORD and extend the project closing date by three years to December 31, 
2011. SUFORD is designed along the following four components:  
 
(a)  
Support Services of Sustainable Forest Management: This component includes 
support for sector policy reform, development of regulations and bylaws, designation and 
establishment of a national Production Forest Area (PFA) system, development of 
technical forest management guidelines and community management procedures, and 
capacity building.  
 
(b) 
Sustainable Forest Management and Village Development:  This component 
includes the implementation of Participatory Sustainable Forest Management (PSFM) 
practices in PFAs through operational plans, training to forest management units and 
villagers in management planning, land-use zoning for production, conservation, 
protection and implementation of monitoring and evaluation.  In addition, this component 
includes the establishment of Village Development Committees and Village Forestry 
Committees and the implementation of village development activities.  
 
(c) 
Forest Sector Monitoring and Control: This component includes capacity building 
for the forest administration at all levels to collect and process current and reliable data 
on key developments and trends in the forest sector, and support for improved forest 
cover monitoring and forest law enforcement.  
 
(d) 
Project Management: This component includes support to the Project 
Coordination Office and provincial project coordination units, project monitoring and 
evaluation, and capacity building in general project management.  
 
3. 
SUFORD Additional Financing would help finance the costs associated with the 
scaled-up activities and three year project extension to enhance the impact of a well-
performing project.  Specifically, during the extension period, the project would support: 
(a) the geographical expansion of the proven PSFM model from eight currently 
designated PFAs in four project provinces to new sites in five new project provinces, 
covering approximately 1.3 million hectares of natural production forests (or 40 percent 
of all production forests of Lao PDR); (b) national policy development and 
implementation covering the development of the national forest estate, equitable timber 
revenue and benefit sharing arrangements with local communities, transparent timber 
sales procedures to maximize timber revenues, and timber products industry 
restructuring; and (c) technical assistance to develop and implement a comprehensive 
program of forest sector monitoring, forest management control, independent forest 
certification, and forest law enforcement.  The Government of Finland has committed to 
continue parallel financing of SUFORD during the extension period in an amount of 
EUR9 million.  
 
4. 
The expected outcomes of the project include: (a) strengthened government 
capacity to effectively lead forest policy formulation and implementation and to provide 
Page  3
forest management services at national, province and district levels; (b) improved forest 
management of natural production forests and PFA system as verified through 
independent forest management certification; (c) community development and improved 
rural livelihoods through participatory planning and the institution of equitable and fair 
benefit sharing arrangements from timber sales; and (d) the establishment of efficient 
forest sector monitoring and control mechanisms.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
5. 
Environmental conditions.  Current SUFORD PFA sites are located mostly in the 
lowland areas of Khammouane, Savannakhet, Salavan and Champasak provinces of Lao 
PDR.  These PFAs are characterized by flat or very slightly sloping terrain, relatively 
simple forest zonation with contiguous blocks of evergreen/semi-evergreen forest types, 
and a generally well-established network of district and inter-village roads.  New PFAs 
proposed for inclusion in SUFORD are located in more complex environmental 
conditions: (a) Bolikhamxay, Sekong and Attapeu Provinces are located in the foothills 
of the Annamite Mountains; and (b) Xayaboury and Vientiane are located in the Northern 
Highlands.  
 
6. 
Both areas are characterized by: (a) complex topography with mountain slopes 
and often deeply incised tributary gullies; (b) complex and fragmented forest zonation, 
with intact Mixed Deciduous Forest Types largely confined to steeper hill-slopes; (c) a 
sparse network of district roads which are generally in poor condition; and (d) few wood 
processing facilities, generally located at considerable hauling distances from PFAs.  
Given the characteristics of these areas, a careful selection of PFA sites and a feasibility 
analysis has been required as part of project preparation, and this assessment of 
environmental suitability forms a major component of the updated Environmental Impact 
Assessment of the project.  
 
7. 
GOL has developed several sets of criteria for PFA selection that are sufficient for 
first approximations of future potential PFAs for inclusion into SUFORD-AF.  These 
criteria were applied in a study by the Post-graduate and Research Division, Faculty of 
Forestry, National University of Laos of pre-identified PFAs in Xayaboury, Vientiane, 
Bolikhamxay, Sekong and Attapeu provinces. In addition the authors undertook a critical 
review of the three sets of GOL criteria and proposed a new set of criteria that could be 
more practically applied using existing information systems.  The study identified 13 
PFAs that met the majority of the agreed criteria; and the 13 were subsequently reduced 
to 8 PFAs: 1 in Xayaboury, 2 in Vientiane, 2 in Bolikhamxay, I in Sekong and 2 in 
Attapeu.  
 
8. 
A table on Area Statistics for the Eight Production Forest Areas for Inclusion into 
SUFORD are available in the disclosed updated Environmental Impact Assessment. The 
new sites include: Phouphadam,Phou Youy, Nongpet Naxang, Phoupaxang, Phakbouak, 
Houay Pen, Ban Bengvilay, Nampa Houyi.  
 
Page  4
9. 
Socio-economic conditions.  The most common ethnic groups in the expanded 
SUFORD project areas are as follows:  
 
Attapeu Province: 
Brao, Harak, Tariang  
 
Sekong Province: 
Harak, Ngkriang  
 
Bolikhamxay: 
 
Moey, Khmou, Hmong  
 
Vientiane: 
 
Lao, Khmou, Hmong  
 
Xayaboury: 
 
Hmong, Lao, Mien  
 
10. 
These groups belong to three broad ethnic families:  Thai-Kadai (Loa), Mon-
Khmer (Tarieng, Harak, Khmou, Brao, Ngkriang) and Hmong-Mien (Hmong, Mien).  
Based on the expected relationship between these groups and the forest, project 
implementation in these areas will relate to lower levels of development, higher levels of 
poverty, language and communication issues, and incorporating traditional ecological 
knowledge in forest and NTFP management prescriptions.  This situation will need to be 
addressed through the Project’s extension strategies and training programs.  The 
implications of this multi-ethnic situation for project implementation include:  
 
(a)  
Communication/language issues (i.e. the constraints to communication between 
villagers not fluent in Lao and government and project staff not fluent in ethnic 
languages), with respect to project design, implementation, and training;  
 
(b)  
The need to establish a framework/process for important ethnic issues to be 
adequately considered in working with each village;  
 
(c) 
Examining the implications, if any, of the delineation and management of 
production forest on existing swidden agriculture systems;  
 
(d) 
The challenge of building traditional ecological into forest and NTFP 
management prescriptions;  
 
(e) 
Determining, through consultation, what types of village development activities 
would be most suitable for different ethnic groups; and  
 
(f) 
Determining which ethnic groups may have difficulty participating in project 
participation, the reasons behind those difficulties, and possible solutions to achieve 
fuller participation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John H. Dick (EASRE) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental aspects and safeguards issues under the expanded project relate to 
appropriate area and site selection for natural forest management interventions in new 
project provinces, the introduction of management planning based on sustainability 
principles, as well as the fine-tuning of the participatory sustainable forest management 
approach to be applicable to new forest ecosystem types occurring in the new project 
areas.  No large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts are foreseen.  The project is 
introducing science-based forest management into the sector and independent and 
internationally-recognized forest certification will be pursued (as has been done in 
existing project areas) to ensure that forests management meets accepted sustainability 
criteria.  
 
From a socio-economic perspective, ethnic groups comprise the majority of the 
population in the new project areas.  These groups belong to three broad ethnic families:  
Thai-Kadai (Loa), Mon-Khmer (Tarieng, Harak, Khmou, Brao, Ngkriang) and Hmong-
Mien (Hmong, Mien).  Based on the expected relationship between these groups and the 
forest, project implementation in these areas will relate to lower levels of development, 
higher levels of poverty, language and communication issues, and incorporating 
traditional ecological knowledge in forest and NTFP management prescriptions.  The 
project will pay specific attention to these issues as reflected in the safeguards 
instruments.  Based on implementation experiences, no large-scale negative impacts are 
expected as the project explicitly takes traditional community land use into consideration 
when forest management plans are formulated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no negative long-term impacts foreseen.  Positive long-term impacts include 
the sustainable management and use of natural resources based on scientific principles 
and community participation and traditional land use tenure.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This is an additional financing to an existing and well-performing project. No project 
alternatives were considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Receipient has conducted a full environmental and social impact assessment in the 
project areas, including a review of existing project implementation experiences and thier 
applicability to new areas.  All safeguard documents have been revised based on ESIA 
findings to be applicable to old and new project areas. Capacity to implement safeguard 
measures is adequate as has been demonstrated during implementation.  Additional 
qualified Techncial Assistance (social development specialist, anthropologist) will be 
provided under the project to address the more complex issues in new project areas.  
 
and a full social impact assessment, including detailed consultations with project-
affected people in all project provinces, has been carried out by independent experts 
during project preparation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholder include enthinc minority groups in new project areas as well as civil 
society organizations.  Consultations on the project has been carried out as part of the 
SIA and broad community support to the project has been obtained and is documented in 
the SIA report.  Consultation has been carried out in local languages supported by 
experienced local experts in a sample of villages covering all new project provinces as a 
number of different ethnic groups.  Safeguard documents have been disclosed through the 
project prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/20/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/15/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/09/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/31/2008 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/20/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
Yes 
Page  8
constraints? 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt 
10/09/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John H. Dick 
10/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
10/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
10/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
10/15/2008 
Comments:  originally signed copy has been filed in IRIS 
