Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4457 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P114863 
Project Name: Community Nutrition Project 
Task Team Leader: Magnus Lindelow 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASHH 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To improve coverage of essential maternal and child health services and improve mother and 
child caring practices among pregnant and lactating women and children less than 2 years old in 
the seven southern and central provinces.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The CNP will support (a) conditional cash transfers (CCTs) to stimulate uptake of health 
services; (b) a community-based health and nutrition program; and (c) project support and 
management.  Due to budget constraints and to allow evaluation of the impact of (a) and (b) 
separately, the geographic coverage of the planned activities will be limited to selected areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be piloted in one or two of the Provinces currently covered by the on-going 
Project, namely Attapu, Bolikhamxai, Champasak, Khammouane, Salavan, Savanakhet, and 
Xekong.   
 
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower' capacity has been deemed acceptable as it has been satisfactorily implementing similar 
safeguard policies under an on-going health Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASTS) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASTS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) has been triggered since the Project may be supporting 
activities in areas in which ethnic minorities reside. A particular focus of the Project will be on 
improving women's and children's access to specific health care in return for a cash transfer.  
 
During Project preparation, the task team reviewed the Social Impact Assessment (SIA) 
which was prepared for the ongoing Health Services Improvement Project (HSIP).  Its purpose 
was to address the social issues associated with HSIP, and in particular to assist in HSIP 
formulation by considering how to improve the design of specific interventions and activities, 
and by considering whether any proposed activities might cause adverse social impacts. The 
social assessment reflected views obtained through consultations with relevant stakeholders 
(especially poor and ethnic groups).  
 
In addition to reviewing the SIA, local consultations have also been carried out on the 
Community Nutrition Project (CNP) specifically. In keeping with the principle of free prior and 
informed consultation resulting in broad community support for the Project, consultations were 
held with six ethnically distinct villages in a sample of two provinces from the project area, 
during February 27th and March 5, 2009. Selection of districts and village was purposive in 
order to select villages which represent distinct minorities; which represent considerable portions 
of the minority population; and which have poverty incidence rates of 60 percent and higher.  
 
During these consultations, the CNP, as described in the project document, was disclosed by 
the consultation team with special emphasis on the CCTs. The women, who were facilitated by 
the consultation team, discussed aspects related to the CCTs further.  
 
The Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) developed for HSIP formed the basis for 
consultations held with ethnic groups. The document was subsequently updated to reflect new 
consultations and specific reference to CNP activities, and will be disclosed in line with the 
World Bank's policy on disclosure. The document prepared for the CNP is an Ethnic Group 
Development Framework, rather than a plan, because specific details and locations are to be 
determined during the implementation phase. Furthermore, a multidimensional safeguards 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
document was not prepared, as there is nothing to be gained by preparing a multidimensional 
safeguards document to address issues associated with a single safeguard policy.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/09/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Ethnic Group Development Framework will be adopted within three months of signing 
of the Grant Agreement.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Magnus Lindelow 
04/02/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan Pablo Uribe 
05/01/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
