Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3806 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P108505 
Project Name: SUSTAINABLE FORESTRY FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT II 
Task Team Leader: Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 31, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Biodiversity (S);Land administration and 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FINLAND: Ministry for Foreign Affairs 
5.00 
 
JAPAN: Gov. of (excl. Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants) 
0.50
5.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of SUFORD is to help achieve the sustainable management of 
natural production forests to alleviate rural poverty by implementing key forest policy reform 
actions set forth in the Government’s Letter of Forest Management Policy. Specific objectives of 
the project are to: (a) improve the policy, legal and incentive framework enabling the expansion 
of Participatory Sustainable Forest Management (PSFM) throughout the country; (b) bring the 
country’s priority natural production forests under PSFM; and (c) improve villagers’ well-being 
and livelihoods through benefits from sustainable forestry, community development and 
development of viable livelihood systems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
SUFORD currently operates in 8 Production Forest Areas (PFAs) with a total area of about 
650,000 hectares in the four provinces of Khammouane, Savannkhet, Saravane and Champasak, 
Page  2
covering approximately one fourth of the country’s estimatednatural productive forests (outside 
of protected areas). An area of 45,000 hectares of production forest has been FSC certified and 
independent audits have reconfirmed the sustainability of demonstrated forest management 
practices. Village development activities are being implemented in more than 400 project 
villages using project grants and revenues from sustainably harvested timber.  
 
SUFORD is designed along the following four components:  
 
(a) Support Services of Sustainable Forest Management: This component includes support for 
sector policy reform, development of regulations and bylaws, designation and establishment of 
the national PFA system, development of technical forest management guidelines and 
community management procedures, and capacity building.  
 
(b) Sustainable Forest Management and Village Development: This component includes the 
implementation of PSFM practices in pilot PFAs through operational plans, training to forest 
management units and villagers in management planning, land-use zoning for production, 
conservation, protection and implementation of monitoring and evaluation. In addition, this 
component includes the establishment of Village Development Committees and Village Forestry 
Committees and the implementation of village development activities.  
 
(c) Forest Sector Monitoring and Control and Capacity: This component includes capacity 
building for the forest administration at all levels to collect and process current and reliable data 
on key developments and trends in the forest sector, and support for improved forest cover 
monitoring and forest law enforcement.  
 
(d) Project Management: This component includes support to the Project Coordination Office 
and provincial project coordination units, project monitoring and evaluation, and capacity 
building in general project management.  
 
Overall design of the project, including PDO and components, is expected to remain unchanged 
under Additional Financing. The proposed three-year extension of SUFORD would continue 
support the implementation of PSFM in existing SUFORD areas to tackle a number of technical 
and managerial questions to ensure sustainability of forest management practices. It addition, a 
geographical expansion would cover the introduction of PSFM in a number of additional priority 
PFAs which are now being identified in Xayaboury, Vientiane, Bolikhamxay, Sekong, and 
Attapeu provinces.  These PFAs include approximately 400 villages with an estimated 
population of 120,000 villagers, most of whom would benefit either directly or indirectly from 
the expanded project. With the expansion would come a stronger focus on capacity building at 
national and provincial levels to advance the institution of PSFM throughout the country. The 
four existing project provinces would play a key role in the capacity building program and serve 
as demonstration areas of the program. Expected results would include:  
 
(a) A refined PSFM system and improved capability of national agencies to support the 
application of PSFM practices;  
 
(b) Expansion of the implementation of PSFM methodologies in PFAs throughout the country;  
Page  3
(c) Increased contribution of forestry to poverty reduction, village development, and the local 
and national economies through forest-based livelihood and enterprises; and  
 
(d) Improved forest sector law enforcement, governance, and trade to help maintain the area of 
natural forests, protect their productivity, biodiversity, and other high conservation values.  
 
Challenges, which would continue to be the focus of World Bank supervision under an 
expanded SUFORD, would revolve around (a) further strengthening community involvement in 
various dimensions of forest management and governance; (b) strengthening incentives for 
PSFM through more participatory and transparent methods of timber sales, royalty assessments 
and benefit-sharing and (c) addressing a number of silvicultural aspects with regard to forest 
stand management, timber species distribution; and re-growth patterns in degraded and/or under-
stocked areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
SUFORD operates in 8 Production Forest Areas with a total area of about 650,000 hectares in 
the four provinces of Khammouane, Savannkhet, Saravane and Champasak.  The proposed 
geographical expansion of SUFORD under Additional Financing would included up to 10 new 
Production Forest Areas in Xayaboury, Vientiane, Bolikhamxay, Sekong, and Attapeu provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
SUFORD additional financing will be implemented by the National Agriculture and Forestry 
Service (NAFES) and the Department of Forestry (DOF) as lead agencies. Both agencies are 
responsible for the implementation of the ongoing implementation of SUFORD and both have 
some experience in implementing safeguard policies of the World Bank. Nevertheless, it will be 
necessary to complement the currently modest implementation capacities at central and 
provincial levels with experienced environmental and social safeguards consultant. This has been 
the practice in the ongoing SUFORD implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John H. Dick (EASRE) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
SUFORD was originally designated as a Category A project. Although SUFORD additional 
financing will not 
have ‘significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse or 
unprecedented’, Category A for the overall project, including additional financing, will be 
maintained because of the project’s focus onsustainable management interventions in natural 
tropical forests. The scale-up of the project and expansion into new provinces and areas requires 
an update of the original Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) to assess and 
document the environmental and social issues in the proposed new areas. Environmental aspects 
under the additional financing part relate to appropriate area and site selection for natural forest 
management interventions in new project provinces and will be addressed through a Technical 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Feasibility and Slope Analysis of proposed new production forest areas. From a social 
perspective, ethnic minority groups comprise the majority of the population in the new project 
areas and a full social impact assessment, including consultations with project-affected people, 
will be carried out by an independent expert not affiliated with the project. An updated ESIA, 
integrating the environmental and social aspects, is expected to be available by end of August 
2008 for Bank review and public disclosure prior to appraisal of Additional Financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
SUFORD aims to introduce sustainable management of natural forests for productive 
purposes and improve control of forest resources through village-based forestry and incentives 
for stronger regulatory mechanism that involve communities. The project will not involve any 
conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats but instead promote natural habitat 
conservation, improved land use and maintenance of ecological functions in line with OP4.04. 
As part
 of
the project’s management planning process, critical natural habitats (termed 'High 
Conservation Value Forests' under the project) will be identified in each project site and 
appropriate management and protection prescriptions developed.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
SUFORD aims at improving the management of natural forests through a community-
forestry approach based on participatory sustainable forest management. This will also involve 
harvesting operations based on scientifically developed forest management plans, participatory 
planning, and community management. Compliance with internationally recognized practices for 
sustainable forest management has already been demonstrated in existing project areas through 
the achievement and maintenance of independent certification of community forests by the 
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). Independent and internationally recognized certification will 
be pursued in the existing and new expanded project areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The overwhelming majority of project beneficiaries in the areas targeted for SUFORD 
additional financing are ethnic groups (>90%). Hence, a separate IPP is not required according to 
OP. 4.10 under additional financing. The ESIA process will include consultations with project 
affected ethnic minority groups and, based on the ESIA, the project will ensure that specific 
attention is given to IP aspects in overall project design. Specifically, during preparation the 
existing SUFORD Ethnic Group Development Plan will be revised into a Community 
Consultation and Participation Framework. This framework will include the basic procedures 
and detailed steps of community participation and consultation and be applied during project 
activity implementation. Social constrains, ethnic rules and indigenous knowledge identified 
during ESIA will be considered in the preparation of this Framework.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
SUFORD additional financing will not require any involuntary resettlement in the new 
project areas. However, some adverse impacts could result from land or asset acquisition and/or 
restrictions to access to natural resources. Given the implementation experiences in existing 
SUFORD project areas, these impacts are expected to be very marginal or not to materialize.  
 
Land acquisition: Under the project’s Village Development sub-component, the project may 
support some upgrading of existing roads and construction of small
-
scale
village infrastructure as 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
part of the project’s community development approach where a limited amount of land 
acquisition may be required.  
 
Access restrictions to natural resources. The project will be supporting participatory 
sustainable management of natural production forests in the new provinces. Forest management 
planning will take full account of on existing customary forestry use rights. However, 
management plans might result in some involuntary restriction of natural resource access, which 
could impact upon peoples’ livelihoods. Although these restrictions would occur outside of 
formal protected areas, these are nevertheless included here.  
 
During the preparation of SUFORD additional financing, the existing Resettlement Policy 
Framework/Process Framework, which governs mitigation and compensation of affected people 
in the existing project areas, will be revised based on the results of the updated ESIA.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment: submission and disclosure by August 30, 
2008  
 
Resettlement Policy /Process Framework: submission and disclosure by August 30, 2008  
 
Community Consultation/Participation Framework: submission and disclosure by August 
30, 2008   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt 
07/09/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/10/2008 
Comments:  The ISDS was approved on July 10, 2008. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
07/17/2008 
Comments:  The ISDS was approved by SM on 7/17/08. 
