Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/23/2008 
Report No.:  AC3491
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P078113 
Project Name:  Second  Education Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jeffrey Waite 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2003 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2004 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (54%);Central government administration (35%);Tertiary 
education (11%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project contributes to the achievement of universal completion of primary 
education by 2015. The specific development objective of the project is increased 
primary school enrolment and completion in the 19 poorest districts of the six poorest 
provinces.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components. Component 1 consists of three sub-components: (1.1) 
"Community Based Contracting for School Construction" (CBC) upgrades incomplete 
primary schools to complete Grades 1-5 primary schools; (1.2) "Community Grants 
Scheme"(CGS) lowers the cost of education to communities by providing resources for 
operations, maintenance, and subsidies to poorest households; and (1.3) "Teacher 
Upgrading Program" provides multigrade teaching to all teachers in participating 
villages. Component 2 consists of two sub-
components: (2.1) "Textbooks and Teachers’ 
Guides Program" provides updated textbooks to all Grade 1-5 students and updated 
guides to all their teachers; and (2.2) "Assessment of Student Learning Outcomes" 
(ASLO) establishes a permanent national assessment system that will develop student 
Page  2
assessment instruments to monitor achievement of basic competencies. The last 
Component has three sub-components: (3.1) "Policy and Strategy Development" supports 
capacity building in the Education Ministry to make information-based decisions through 
institutional alignment, policy studies and dissemination on key education issues, the 
Ethnic Group Development Plan, and project impact evaluation; (3.2) "Information 
Systems Upgrading" supports improved collection, analysis, and maintenance of data and 
information; and (3.3) "Education Administration and Management Training" supports a 
broader effort to strengthen capacity in management and administration.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
About half of project investments are targeted towards villages in 19 districts in six 
provinces. The villages are small, rural, poor, mountainous, and the majority of the 
population is ethno-linguistically non-Lao. Province (and districts): Phongsaly 
(Samphanh, Gnot Ou); Lounagnamtha (Long, Viengphoukha, Nalae); Oudomxay 
(Namor, Nga, Beng, Houne, Pakbeng); Houaphanh (Xiengkhor, Viengthong, Viengxay, 
Huameung, Xamtay); Attapeu (Sanxay, Phouvong); Xekong (Dakcheung, Khaleum).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah (EASRE) 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no large-scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts, existing or 
anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The following plans and guidelines have been prepared: an environmental checklist, land 
acquisition framework, and an Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP). The 
environmental checklist, land acquisition framework and safeguards pertaining to the 
School Construction program are set out in the School Construction Operational Manual. 
The EGDP is a separate, stand alone, document that includes the safeguards contained in 
the School Construction Operational Manual as well as other activities.  
 
Institutional Responsibilities. Overall responsibility for the implementation of these 
guidelines lies with the Project Manager in Vientiane. The Project Manager ensures that 
the guidelines are appropriately disseminated and that project staff have the required 
skills and receive appropriate training. The Project Manager is responsible for proper 
monitoring of social and environment issues and incorporates necessary changes to the 
guidelines and procedures, in agreement with the World Bank, based on 
recommendations from monitoring exercises.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation. Approved projects with environmental and/or social 
impacts are supervised and monitored by District Engineers, and the Provincial Program 
Managers to whom they report. Findings and any recommendations are recorded in 
quarterly reports which are sent to the Project Manager, through the Provincial Education 
Service, and shared with World Bank supervision missions. General monitoring and 
evaluation of the project supervises the application of the safeguard frameworks for the 
environment and land acquisition.  
 
For the Ethnic Group Development Plan, as for all project activities, monitoring of 
implementation is the responsibility of the Project Manager in the Department of 
Planning and Cooperation in the MoE, with each Implementing Unit responsible for 
implementation and reporting on areas under its responsibility.  
 
Complaints related to environmental, ethnic minority or resettlement issues are handled 
as follows:  
 
*
As a first stage, affected or concerned persons present, verbally or in wnting, their 
complaints to the District Engineer or DEB as appropriate, who has to provide a 
documented response to the claimants within 30 days.  
 
*
If the claimants are not satisfied with the decision of district facilitators or authorities, 
the case may be submitted to the Provincial Education Service or the Project Manager, as 
well as to relevant government authorities, such as the Provincial Assembly or the Lao 
Front for National Construction. Specified project office or authorities should record 
receipt of complaints and reply to the claimants within 15 calendar days. Claimants will 
be exempted from any administrative or legal charges associated with pursuing 
complaints.   
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders in the project are the Government (central, provincial, district), 
education staff, and communities/ villages. Central Ministry of Education staff have 
direct responsibility for project preparation. Decision makers have their input through the 
Steering Committee and technical staff express their views through the Project 
Preparation Task Force. Provincial and district education staff, provincial government 
representatives, village heads, school directors and teachers have participated in a 
workshop to identify/confirm the constraints to achieving the universal completion of 
primary education, and strategies to address them, and are engaged in planning and 
managing the activities implemented at the local levels, i.e. classroom construction, 
maintenance, in-service teacher training and school grant program. Relevant agencies are 
consulted as needed. The Ethnic Group Development Plan was prepared in consultation 
with potential project beneficiaries/communities through a Social Assessment, and 
agencies responsible for various facets of ethnic minority issues - the Lao Front for 
Reconstruction, the ethnic minority unit of the National Assembly, and the Institute for 
Linguistic Research. Disclosure of safeguard policies has taken place through broad 
dissemination of the School Construction Operational Manual. The Ethnic Group 
Development Plan and School Construction Operational Manual are distributed to all 
participating Provinces and districts as part of the Bank's public disclosure policy. They 
are also utilized throughout project implementation, and further consultations will 
continue under project implementation as participating villages are known.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/17/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/28/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/23/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/28/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/23/2003 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jeffrey Waite 
03/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah 
03/20/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong 
03/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr James A. Stevens 
03/21/2008 
Comments:  Signed by Sector Director Emmanuel Y. Jimenez, for Acting Sector Manager, James A. 
Stevens 
