Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2008 
Report No.:  43597
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P106188 
Project Name:  LA - Poverty Reduction Fund Project 
Task Team Leader:  Iamele P. Rigolini 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (30%);Roads and highways (30%);General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%);Health (10%);Water supply (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Education for all (S);Health system performance (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Objectives are: (i) Financing community infrastructure activities, and other 
community public capital investments endeavors and training activities at the village 
level; (ii) Building local capacity at the village level in poor districts to manage public 
investment planning and implementation; and (iii) Strengthening the capacity of local 
institutions to support participatory decision-making at the village, koumban, and district 
levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Poverty Reduction Fund Project (PRFP) has three main components:  
 
A. Village Sub-Project Grants  
 
This component finances grants for eligible infrastructure sub-projects identified by the 
villages, such as access and transport infrastructure; schools and nurseries; clinics; 
community halls and other public buildings (but not village administrative offices); 
Page  2
communal water supply systems or structures; and local markets. Training sessions to 
communities on livelihood activities, and to individuals or communities related to the 
O&M of infrastructure and environmental management are also financed.  
 
B. Local Capacity Building  
 
This component supports the PRFP objective of empowering communities by  training 
them in assessing their own needs, in discussing them with the  district, and in 
implementing and supervising the construction of public  infrastructure. The component 
also reinforces capacity at the district and provincial level via training sessions and 
targeted assistance/incentives mechanisms to improve ownership of PRFP infrastructure 
by district line agencies; improve the quality of service delivery of PRFP infrastructure; 
promote participatory planning at the district and provincial level; and facilitate the 
dialogue between districts and communities. The component therefore finances, among 
others, PRF  district offices costs (including operating costs, equipment and staff 
salaries), the costs associated to the meetings of villagers (such as  village needs 
assessment meetings, prioritization and decision  meetings), to communities’ training on 
funds management,procurement  methods, sub-project implementation, infrastructures’ 
operation andmaintenance, etc. It also finances the field travel costs of PRF provincial 
staff, the development of IEC tools and PRF staff training costs.  
 
C. National Project Management  
 
This component finances the cost of staffing, managing, monitoring, reporting and 
operating the PRFP. It includes salaries and fees of PRF staff; office equipment; vehicles 
needed to carry out operational work; operating costs not covered by Government 
counterparts; evaluations; technical assistance in the areas of training, monitoring, MIS, 
accounting, procurement assessments, legal services, auditing, and other specialist areas, 
at the exception of the costs financed by the Component B.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The PRFP will only operate in "first priority" districts. At the beginning of the Additional 
Financing phase, it will operate in the provinces of Champassak, Huaphan, Luang 
Namtha, Saravane, Savannakhet, and Xiengkhoang.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Ms Gillian M. Brown (EASSO) 
Mr Hiroshi Ono (EASRE) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Since most subprojects are very small (the estimated average is US$8,500), no major 
environmental and adverse social impacts are expected. The project will, by the nature of 
the decision-making process, not fund any investment that is not acceptable to a 
significant number of villagers involved. Decisions on the allocation of funds are made 
by villagers themselves, through a negotiation process, and with information provided by 
project facilitators and consultants. However, small-scale civil works may require minor 
land acquisition or may have minor adverse impacts on ethnic minorities or the 
environment. Thus, guidelines are included in the operations manual in order to avoid or 
minimize adverse environmental and social impacts of sub-projects and to ensure that 
they meet with the requirements of the Bank as described in its safeguards policies. The 
Social and Environmental Guidelines prescribe a screening and review process for all 
sub-projects that may cause adverse impacts on the environment, physical cultural 
resources, or people; procedures to avoid or mitigate these impacts; complaint 
mechanism; and procedures for monitoring and evaluation. Screening and review will 
take place prior to submission of sub-project proposals to the district meeting.  
 
With the majority of the population in the project areas being of smaller ethnic groups, 
the entire project is considered as an ethnic groups development plan. A Social 
Assessment was done which focused on the challenges faced by smaller ethnic groups in 
Lao PDR, and in the challenges the PRFP has encountered in working with these groups. 
The Social guidelines have been revised to help the PRFP better address these challenges.  
 
The ethnic composition of the district will influence the design of communication 
materials to ensure messages are well targeted and appropriate to the population groups. 
Any activity unacceptable to an ethnic group in a village of mixed ethnic composition 
cannot be funded without prior review. Activities that will have significant adverse 
impacts on ethnic groups in neighboring villages cannot be funded. In addition, to these 
safeguards for ethnic groups incorporated into the planning phase as described in the 
Operations Manual, the project itself has been designed to ensure that all ethnic groups 
Page  4
will be included and benefit in appropriate ways. Specific measures to support the 
involvement of all ethnic groups include: hiring staff, as far as possible and needed, that 
come from local smaller ethnic groups, and providing additional training if needed; 
training of project staff and facilitators on ethnic minority issues; grievance redress 
mechanism that allows all ethnic groups an avenue for complaints; and particular 
attention to indigenous peoples issues in monitoring and evaluation.  
 
In the PRFP operational cycle, the Provincial Technical Support Team and district 
facilitators will play an important role in overseeing the application of these procedures, 
monitoring their results, and educating village teams to their importance. The aim is to 
integrate environmental and natural resource education and awareness raising at the 
village level through the Technical Support Team and facilitators.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No major indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged given the scale and nature of 
the subprojects.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the scale and nature of the subprojects, the project has adopted a negative list and 
will screen out a subproject upfront which may potentially involve substantial 
environmental issues, rather than considering subproject alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
With the majority of the population in the project areas being of smaller ethnic groups, 
the entire project is considered as an ethnic groups development plan. A Social 
Assessment was done which focused on the challenges faced by smaller ethnic groups in 
Lao PDR, and in the challenges the PRFP has encountered in working with these groups. 
The Social guidelines have been revised to help the PRFP better address these challenges.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement will not be allowed, and as such the Bank’s OP4.12 will not 
be triggered. Nonetheless, procedures to regulate and document voluntary contributions 
have been put in place and are contained in the Operations Manual.  
 
In order to address potential environmental issues, an Environmenral Management 
Framework is included in the Social and Environmental Guidelines to screen out 
subprojects in the negative list, identify the nature and magnitude of environmental 
impacts, develop adequate mitigation measures to address the impacts, and ensure public 
involvement and adequate monitoring.  
 
With respect to the negative list, the project will not support projects that involve new 
roads; electrical, gasoline or diesel generators or pumps; chain saws, pesticides, 
insecticides, herbicides, asbestos or other investments detrimental to the environment. 
Also, no forest operations, including logging, harvesting or processing of timber products 
Page  5
will be supported. No new settlement or expansion of existing settlements will be 
supported in critical habitats, protected areas or areas proposed for protection. Where 
settlements already exist proposals for funding should be in compliance with any local 
regulations on land management and other provisions of the protected area management 
plan. No road construction or rehabilitation of any kind will be allowed inside critical 
habitats and existing or proposed protected areas.  
 
The project will not fund the acquisition of land under any conditions, however some 
may occur on a voluntary basis or with compensation paid by the village's own funds. 
Involuntary resettlement is not allowed and any voluntary movement or resettlement of 
more than five households or household structures will need special approval from the 
National Executive Office in Vientiane prior to decision at the district level meeting.  
 
Finally, the project will not support government programs involving village 
consolidation and/or resettlement that are not consistent with Bank policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the beneficiary districts and villagers included in the project. At the 
beginning of project implementation in a district, a large scale socialization process 
informs districts and villagers of the project, including the safeguards requirements 
included in the Operations Manual.  During the environmental screening and assessment 
process, information disclosure to and consultation with key stakeholders will take place 
in accordance with the Environmental Management Framework in the Social and 
Environmental Guidelines.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/08/2008 
 
Page  6
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  7
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Iamele P. Rigolini 
03/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hiroshi Ono 
03/25/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Gillian M. Brown 
03/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Emmanuel Y. Jimenez 
04/08/2008 
Comments:   
