Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3655 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P101750 
Project Name: LaoPDR Customs and Trade Facilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Ekaterina Vostroknutova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other domestic and international trade (40%);General industry and trade sector 
(30%);Agricultural marketing and trade (30%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Other trade and integration 
(P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to facilitate trade by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of 
customs administration. The project will simplify customs procedures, eliminate duplication and 
redundancy, reduce transaction costs and time to clear goods, and increase transparency and 
accountability.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A. Implementation of an automated customs system ASYCUDA World. The Project will finance 
the acquisition of equipment, customization and installation including user training of 
UNCTAD’s ASYCUDA system at headquarters and nationwide at international border 
checkpoints, in three phases: (1) Development of prototype; (2) Validation on a pilot site; (3) 
Replication to remaining checkpoint sites. In addition, it will provide minor refurbishment of 
offices to accommodate the new hardware, related office and auxiliary equipment, as well as 
training for Lao PDR Customs Department (LCD) IT Staff to prepare them to maintain and 
operate the system once implemented.  
Page  2
B. Customs Modernization Support. The Project will finance capacity building activities to 
assist Lao PDR to implement modern approaches to customs administration as well as meeting 
requirements for WTO membership.  It will also finance a long term international Customs 
Reform and Modernization advisor to provide international expertise in the introduction of new 
Customs systems and to provide overall change management support including assisting the 
national management team in quality control and verification.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Lao PDR.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The computerized system will be installed in existing buildings, and thus social and 
environmental safeguards risk is considered to be low.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Surhid P. Gautam (EAPCO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The PCN states that Component A of this Specific Investment Grant will finance the 
installation of the computerized system.  It is not clear whether these systems will be installed in 
existing facilities or in new buildings.  If new buildings are to be ensure that standard 
construction guidelines are followed to mitigate any adverse environment impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not affect any protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or 
proposed critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not affect critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Teh project will not procure any pesticides, nor will an increased use of pesticides result from 
the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or 
unique natural values.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project will not affect indigenous peoples as defined in the policy.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Refer to OP4.01 above.  In case of new construction, please confirm how the land 
requirements will be met.  If land is acquired, the policy will be triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined in the 
policy.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known area of territorial dispute as defined in the policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard Risk Rating is expected to be low.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ekaterina Vostroknutova 
07/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/01/2007 
Comments:  The safeguard screening form at PCN was reviewed by Surhid Gautam. 
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
