Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3634 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P109736 
Project Name: Lao PDR: TA for capacity development in hydropower and mining sectors
Task Team Leader: Mohinder P. Gulati 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (50%);Mining and other extractive (50%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to strengthen Lao’s institutional capacity for 
sustainable development of its natural resources and extractive industry through (a) better project 
planning and transparent mobilization of revenues from hydropower resources, and (b) 
implementation of mining regulation, management of mineral resources, improved practices of 
alluvial and small-scale mining, and increased transparency in revenue management.  
 
The expected outcomes are improved institutional capacity of GOL and its agencies as 
measured through adoption of river-basin planning in all river-basins, application of lessons 
learnt through NT2 to other hydropower projects in the country, adoption of mining regulation, 
initiating implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) for 
transparency in reporting of revenues from the extractive industries, transparent award of future 
concessions for mining and hydropower investments, and regulation of alluvial and small-scale 
mining.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
It is proposed to support the two sectors, i.e., hydropower and mining, through a combined 
technical assistance project which would put emphasis on capacity building within sector 
agencies as well as across related government institutions.  The proposed project is envisaged to 
have two components- hydropower and mining.  
 
Hydropower component is expected to include technical assistance for: (i) increasing the use of 
river-basin as a unit of planning for optimizing development of hydropower potential, water and 
land use, and minimizing cumulative impacts of development activities in a river-basin; (ii) 
optimization of revenue benefits for the government from export-oriented hydropower projects, 
by establishing a more systematic and simplified approach to capture revenue benefits that may 
accrue through a possible upside in the price of electricity; (iii) establishment of a Lao 
Hydropower Learning Center (LHLC), which would reinforce the policy and analytical 
underpinning of hydro development in Lao PDR and provide a platform for expanding training 
efforts and capacity building, and application of NT2 lessons to other hydropower projects, and 
(iv) adapting the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) to hydropower sector.  
 
The mining sector component will include technical assistance to: (i) deepen the process of 
legislative reform through implementation of the revised Mining Law, assist in preparation of 
detailed regulations and guidelines for the sector, strengthen the sector supervisory institutions, 
and enhance clarity as to roles and responsibilities; (ii) up-
grade the government’s mine title 
registry and cadastre systems in order to ensure that prospective investors and operators maintain 
a
high standard of performance and to improve security of tenure for all investors and enable the 
government to better monitor activities on the ground (this, possibly in coordination with other 
donors); (iii) enhance the government’s  geological data processing skills and dissemination of 
information relevant to investors in order to strengthen business environment; (iv) enhance 
operational efficiency as well as health and safety conditions for artisanal and small-scale 
operators; (v) improve investment appraisal practices, and (vi) strengthen capacity for mine 
inspection and monitoring/evaluation and for implementation of EITI.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All over the country.   
 
E.  Borrower
’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Recipient has limited but growing capacity for managing social and environmental impacts 
of natural resource development and extractive industry. Through financing provided by 
multilaterals and other development partners for various projects safeguards policies are being 
improved and practical training in monitoring and enforcement is being provided. Targetted 
programs such as IDA funded Lao Environment and Social capacity building project are also 
helping strengthen  
 
capacity of government agencies.  Neverthless, compared to the demands placed on the 
agencies due to rapid development of hydropower and mining sectors, the country remains 
capacity constrained.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASCS) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental assessments would be part of the technical assistance implementation: 
Strategic Environmental Assessment will be carried out for the river basin selected for the study 
under hydro component, and for the mining sector the SEA will examine environmental and 
social issues related to the industry licensing for exploration and development of resources, 
community development, mine closure, artisnal mining etc.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Not triggered   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/01/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohinder P. Gulati 
08/11/2008 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
08/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
08/11/2008 
Comments:   
