Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3388
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P087716 
Project Name:  LA- Khammouane Rural Livelihoods Project 
Task Team Leader:  Toru Konishi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Sub-national government 
administration (30%);Crops (20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions 
(P);Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.38 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop.  0.18 
 
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
0.99
1.55 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the planning process and 
public financial management associated with the decentralized delivery of services and 
infrastructure, including irrigation development, in Khammouane Province.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 
–Local Development and Provincial Capacity Building (Estimated Cost: 
US$ 7.03 million). The component would support Khammouane province to: (a) adopt 
more transparent and participatory procedures for public investment to improve rural 
livelihoods and (b) strengthen three key provincial departments to implement and sustain 
this approach. As a result, departments (the Department of Finance (DoF), the 
Department of Planning and Investment (DPI), and the Provincial Agriculture and 
Forestry Office (PAFO)) would be able to implement the new procedures and approaches 
adopted by the GoL.  
Page  2
Sub-component 1-1: The District Development Fund (DDF)(Estimated Cost: US$ 3.15 
million).  aims at assisting the province to develop and implement a more transparent and 
participatory way to carry out sub-project investments in public infrastructure and service 
delivery with rural communities.  Civil works, goods, training, technical assistance (TA), 
and incremental operating costs will be financed. This sub-component would support the 
districts’ capacity for conducting stakeholder consultation and developing and executing 
multi-sectoral investment plans for public infrastructure and service delivery in a 
participatory manner.  It would be initiated in three districts (Boulapha, Himboun, and 
Nongbok) during the first year and expanded to all nine districts in the province over a 
period of five years.  It is expected that the province will adopt the procedures upon 
completion of the project so that the project impacts would be sustainable and replicable.  
 
DDFs would finance infrastructure and service delivery in support of poverty alleviation 
based on priorities identified through stakeholder consultation carried out by village and 
khum banh representatives.  An inter-departmental team (District Planning Team - DPT) 
will carry out stakeholder consultation, prioritize proposed investments, and prepare a 
DDF investment plan for each year. The investment plan would be implemented by the 
district after approval by the province.The DDF funding will consist of: (a) Basic Block 
Grants (BBGs) to finance public infrastructure and services, mainly at the khum banh and 
village levels; (b) Agriculture and Livelihood Grants (ALGs) to support the production 
groups at the village level, and (c) contingency funds for unexploded ordinance (UXO) 
clearance for infrastructure investment supported by the BBGs.  
 
The allocation of the BBGs would be pre-determined for each district by a formula 
considering the number of population and percentage of poor households.  In addition, in 
order to support the implementation of the DDF, incremental operating costs and 
technical assistance would be provided within the BBG.  Typical investments supported 
by the BBG would cost US$3,000 – 5,000 each in the following sectors: transport 
(improvement in access roads), education (rehabilitation and upgrading of primary 
schools), health (up-grading the local clinics), and water supply (basic water and 
sanitation at the villages).  It is estimated that the BBGs would benefit about 1,000 
villages comprising 50,000 households.  
 
ALGs will support the livelihood activities for the 27 villages in Mahaxay, Himboun, 
and Boulapha districts already identified by Khammouane Province.  These villages have 
been classified as severely poor by national criteria yet are not currently participating in 
any of GoL or donor-funded rural livelihoods programs.  ALG will support groups of 
villagers through the purchase of community facilities (e.g., rice mills, equipment), 
and/or demonstration materials (e.g., seeds, livestock) for village production groups, 
which would cost up to US$5,000 per village.  The target village would prepare a 
proposal with the support of the District Agriculture and Forestry Extension Office 
(DAFEO) and submit to the district for approval.  
 
Sub-component 1-2: Provincial Capacity Development (Estimated Cost: Approximately 
$
3.39
million).   This subcomponent would mainly support the capacity building of the 
Page  3
provincial government to carry out provincial-level public investments that are 
strategically important for rural livelihoods, and increase the capacity of a few key 
departments.  Civil works, technical assistance, goods, training and incremental operating 
costs will be financed.  
 
Activity 1-2-1:  The Provincial Development Fund (PDF) (Estimated Cost: 
approximately $ 1.06 million) would be provided to the province to support the 
undertaking of the provincial level strategic investments that are unlikely to be identified 
at the district level.  Such investments may include: the expansion of teacher training 
facilities, improvements to the provincial agriculture extension services center, and other 
small-scale infrastructure improvements expected to cost up to US$50,000 per 
investment.  The planning for the PDF sub-projects would be carried out by the DPI 
through prior consultation with the district governments and involve an annual multi-
stakeholder planning workshop, to which users of sector services, as well as concerned 
line ministries will be invited.  Proposed PDF sub-projects would be selected by the 
Provincial Planning Team (PPT) comprising the representative of line departments 
according to the specific criteria linked to the KDS and stipulated in the operational 
manual. The subproject would then be presented to the Provincial Steering Committee 
(PSC) for approval.  The implementation procedures would follow the guidelines 
developed by the JICA funded PCAP.  Similar to the DDF, respective provincial line 
departments will be responsible for the implementation of PDF investments, whereas the 
DoF will manage the funds and the Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) will 
monitor the overall progress.  
 
Activity 1-2-2: Provincial Capacity Building (Estimated Cost: approximately $ 1.62 
million).  Technical assistance and training will be provided in the following areas to 
strengthen provincial capacity to manage the development process consistent with 
NSEDP and KDS priorities:  
 
•
Implementation of PDF and DDF.   Technical assistance would be provided to the 
province and the districts to assist in implementing the PDF and DDF.  Particular 
attention would be given to: (a) proper consultation and priority setting, (b) overall 
resources allocation, (c) public disclosure of information, (d) reporting and oversight, and 
(e) fiduciary management (particularly procurement and financial management).  The 
project would finance the UNCDF on a sole source basis to provide technical assistance 
based on UNCDF’s extensive experience in othercountries as well as Lao PDR with 
implementation of decentralized investment funds.   
 
•
Public Financial Management.   Further technical assistance would be providedto 
strengthen the core public expenditure and financial management activities of the 
province consistent with the GoL’s new Budget Law.   The first technical assistance 
activity would be a participatory capacity needs assessment of the Department of 
Finance, which would provide a basis for a series of support and training activities 
addressing the institutional organizational and individual-level capacity gaps within the 
provincial PFM.  The activity would include support extending down to finance officials 
at the district level.  
Page  4
•
Investment Planning, Monitoring, and Evaluation.  The project will provide 
additional technical assistance and capacity building aimed at strengthening the key 
functions of the DPI, with focus on local level planning, monitoring and evaluation, 
particularly in alignment with the NSEDP priorities and to monitor the outcomes of its 
investment planning process.  
 
•
Agriculture Extension Services.  Technical assistance, logistic support and small 
investments (equipment and works) will be provided to update the knowledge and 
facilities so as to be ready to implement the newly-approved LEG in the ALG targeted 
villages.   
 
Subcomponent 1-3: Component Management (Estimated Cost: Approximately $0.49 
million).  Implementation of decentralization and provincial capacity building will be 
supported by a small provincial coordination section (PCS) within the DPI of 
Khammouane Province.  Although key personnel and office space will be provided by 
the Province, this component will finance equipment, technical assistance (including 
contracted project staff) and incremental operational costs.  
 
Component 2:  Support for Irrigation Development along NT2 Downstream Channel 
and Lower Xe Bang Fai River (Estimated Cost $3.58 million).  The water to be 
discharged by the NT2 dam is an opportunity for increasing agricultural production 
during the dry season, but also poses a risk of increasing floods during the wet season.  
Given that the NTPC is constructing five outlets along the downstream channel to help 
the GoL to develop irrigation facilities utilizing discharge water from the NT2 
hydropower station, this subcomponent would mainly support the GoL’s effort to develop 
downstream irrigation.  Further, as an alternative to protect livelihoods in the lower Xe 
Bang Fai River from possible floods, this component would also support the 
rehabilitation of small pump-based irrigation facilities.  
 
Sub-component 2-1:  Rehabilitation of the Existing Irrigation Facility in Tha Thot 
Village (Estimated Cost: US$ 0.88 million). The existing irrigation facilities were 
designed to support about 470 ha but have deteriorated and the irrigation area has been 
reduced to one-third of the designed area.  While the facilities had originally been 
planned for rehabilitation in 2004 under the Bank-financed ADP, it was excluded as one 
of the main canals of the scheme and two of the secondary canals were cut by the NT2’s 
downstream channel.  Now that NTPC plans torestore the connection of the main and a 
secondary canal through two siphons is nearing completion, this sub-component would 
support the rehabilitation of the irrigation facilities in order to restore irrigation services 
to farmers.  This subcomponent would include rehabilitation works and technical 
assistance for capacity building for Water User Groups (WUGs), to improve the 
administration and management of the irrigation facility.  
 
Sub-component 2-2:  Support for Pilot Downstream Irrigation Development in Tha Thot 
Area (Estimated Cost: Approximately US$0.99 million).  This subcomponent would 
Page  5
support the feasibility study, detailed design and construction of irrigation facilities 
utilizing discharge water from NT2 hydropower station for an area of about 710 ha 
surrounding the existing irrigation facility in Tha Thot Area.  The area has been indicated 
as high priority given that it is already 
developed for agriculture and farmers’ interest in 
irrigation is high; operation costs areexpected to be reasonable as the delivery of water is 
via gravity. Accordingly, NTPC plans to construct a pipeline to draw water from the 
regulating dam and cross the downstream channel through an inverted siphon to provide 
water to the area.  Financing under this sub-component would support the feasibility 
study and detailed design for the four separate facilities during the first two years of 
project implementation.  Starting the third year, the project would also support the 
construction of one irrigation facility of about 130 ha.  Efforts are being made to identify 
possible donors to finance the other three facilities.  This subcomponent would include 
civil works and technical assistance for capacity building for WUGs, to improve the 
administration and management of the irrigation facility.  
 
Subcomponent 2-3: Strategic Plan for Irrigation Development along Downstream 
Channel (Estimated Cost: US$0.59 million).  The objective of this sub-component is to 
help GoL to develop a strategic plan to utilize water flowing through the NT2 
downstream channels.  With the support of the NTPC, a scoping study has been carried 
out to explore the possibilities for developing five irrigation facilities comprising about 
21,000 ha in total.  The study concluded that while it is technically feasible, economic 
viability needs to be carefully examined on a site-by-site basis, with possible breakdown 
at the sub-scheme level, as the concerned area is quite heterogeneous in terms of social, 
environmental, topographical, and geo-morphological conditions and access to the 
market terms.  The plan would support the GoL to develop:(a) scheme level pre-
feasibility study to identify priority development area with basic canal layout, (b) 
recommendation on the institutional arrangement for operation and maintenance and 
capacity building programs for the WUGs, (c) technical scoping study for additional sites 
and modes of water storage to further utilize the discharge water, and (d) feasibility study 
for the identified high priority area.  Technical assistance and incremental operating costs 
would be financed to implement the study.  
 
Subcomponent 2-4:  Rehabilitation and Institutional Strengthening of Small Pump 
Irrigation Facilities along Lower Xe Bang Fai (Estimated Cost: Approximately US$0.60 
million).  While the first three subcomponents aim at supporting downstream irrigation 
along the NT2 downstream channel, this subcomponent would support the communities 
along the lower Xe Bang Fai River.  It would support PAFO’s initiative to rehabilitate the 
small pump irrigation facilities and re-establish a sustainable institutional framework for 
operation and management.  In particular, the sub-component would support the 
rehabilitation of pumping stations, minor concrete works (e.g. repairs to headworks), 
technical training and institutional strengthening for WUGs and PAFO.  
 
The GoL has developed about 30 small pump-based irrigation facilities ranging from 20 
–
100
ha in the lower Xe Bang Fai River in Khammouane province.  Most of these pumps 
are still operating; WUGs are responsible for operation, including payment for the 
electricity and operational costs.  However, most of these have experienced serious 
Page  6
performance problems due to poor maintenance as WUGs do not have proper technical 
knowledge.  With few exceptions, most of the pump equipment is relatively small and 
simple, and WUGs can manage with good technical knowledge.  Through rapid rural 
assessment, it has been confirmed that the farmers are in general keen to continue in 
irrigation during the dry season, as the dry season crop would provide them with reliable 
income.  It has also been confirmed that farmers have actually paid substantial amounts 
of the cost for operation, mainly electricity and labor costs, which amount to US$15 
–
25
per ha.  The discharge water from the NT2 hydropower would provide a good economic 
prospective for these pumping stations; it would increase the water level of the Xe Bang 
Fai River by one to two meters; this would certainly improve the economics of these 
pump facilities.  
 
Subcomponent 2.5:  Component Management (Estimated Cost: Approximately US$0.51 
Million).  This small sub-component would support the MAF, particularly its Department 
of Irrigation (DoI) and the PAFO in Khammouane province.  Vehicles and goods, 
technical assistance and incremental operating costs will be provided to support their 
ability to work with WUGs and technical specialists in carrying out planning, training 
and construction activities, as well as to support administration, procurement and 
reporting needs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Khammouane province.  Investment supported under 
the Component 1 would be small scale infrastructure (utilities and social services) which 
occur mainly in villages, district capitals, and the province capital where human 
settlements have already developed.  For irrigation investment to be supported by 
Component 2, two specific locations have been identified; the first location is Tha Thot 
area in Gnomalat District.  The project would rehabilitate the existing irrigation scheme 
covering about 470 hectares and support development of new irrigation schemes 
comprising about 710 hectares immediately adjacent to the existing scheme and the 
downstream irrigation of the Nam Theun 2 hydropower station.  The project area has 
been developed for intensive rice cultivation with a few villages.  
 
The second location of the irrigation activities under Component 2 is lower Xe Bang Fai 
area in Xe Bang Fai and Nongbok Districts. The project would support the rehabilitation 
of small irrigation schemes covering 30-100 hectares located along the Xe Bang Fai 
Area.  The rehabilitation works would include critical repairs to the existing pump 
facilities, and resectioning of distribution canals.  
 
The population of Khammouane province is ethnically heterogeneous, with almost 40% 
of the total population being made up of ethnic minorities.  For the most part, ethnic 
minority populations inhabit the upland and eastern parts of the province, whilst the Lao 
Loum population is generally located in the Mekong valley and immediately adjacent 
areas.   
 
Page  7
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The activities proposed for the different components will involve only small scale civil 
works. Five policies are triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); Pest 
Management (OP 4.09); Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10); Involuntary Resettlement (OP 
4.12), and International Waterways (OP 7/50). Additionally, the applicability of the 
policy on the Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) will need to be determined during 
implementation of the KRLP.  It is anticipated that most aspects related to the OP 4.04 
can be addressed as part of the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Indigenous People 
(OP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  The KRLP will apply all key 
principles of the triggered safeguard policies. KRLP Policy frameworks for the triggered 
Safeguard Policies have been prepared under the Environmental and Social Safeguard 
Framework (ESSF).  
 
During the implementation of the KRLP, the adopted KRLP safeguard screening 
process will still be applied and the Project staff will assess the individual schemes and 
subsequently, upon the satisfactory assessment, individual approvals will be issued based 
on the Safeguard Policy Manual that was prepared under the project.  
 
No major environmental and negative social impacts are expected.  KRLP is designed 
with a community-driven and participatory assessment and implementation approach, and 
has capacity-building as a major focus.  Some eligible subprojects of small-scale civil 
works may involve minor negative environmental impacts and rehabilitation and 
construction of eligible small-scale irrigation schemes and its subsequent operation may 
result in some direct and indirect impacts with minor negative environmental impacts. 
Page  8
Certain supported project activities may also require minimal land acquisition or cause 
minor social impacts on some members of the community.  
 
Although five WB safeguard policies are triggered, the investments proposed under this 
Project do not pose major risks to the local environment and local communities and the 
water quality will not be the issue. The IEE study carried out by an independent 
international environmental specialist confirmed that (a) the project activities will involve 
only small scale civil works and the negative impacts could be mitigated through good 
engineering practices and close supervision and monitoring; (b) potential increase in the 
use of chemicals would also be small and can be mitigated through application of the 
negative checklist for the chemicals, training on the IPM approach, and promotion of 
organic farming; and (c) the Project will not significantly convert or degrade any 
protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural 
habitats as defined in the policy. Given that investment activities under Component 1 will 
be identified through participatory planning during the project implementation, a simple 
safeguard screening (ESSF) will be used to ensure that the potential negative impacts will 
be properly addressed and/or mitigated.  A safeguard manual was also prepared and it 
will be applied to the Project.  No large scale or irreversible impacts are expected.  
 
On the social side, no major negative impacts are expected. The social study (by an 
independent social specialist) concluded that relocation of people and assets are not 
anticipated, however, small land acquisition may be required. The safeguard manual 
provides an entitlement for compensation and allowance for all losses (if any), including 
grievance procedure and contents of an abbreviated RAP (Resettlement Action Plan).  
Voluntary donation will not be applied for any assets except very minor losses of 
residential land. Consultation with stakeholders and their capacity building will be the 
key elements of the Project implementation since the Project has been designed to apply a 
community-driven and participatory assessment approach during the planning and 
implementation stages.  Guidelines on the information required for the preparation of the 
Indigenous People Development Plan, a preliminary screening of ethnic minorities, 
sample public consultation and disclosure framework, and key indicators for monitoring 
have also been provided in the safeguard manual.  
 
To comply with the policy on Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), the 
Government of Lao PDR requested the Bank to inform all the Mekong riparian countries 
(including Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar, and China)about the project details.  
The Bank has sent a letter to these countries in early March 2008 asking them to submit 
comments before May 5, 2008.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project will not create any potential indirect or long term negative impacts.  
However, there have been significant development activities in the Project area in 
Gnomalat due to the construction of the downstream channel across the Gnomalat plain. 
After year 2010, the area, including the Xe Bang Fai downstream of Mahaxai, will 
undergo a major change due to the operation of NT2 project. Increased management 
Page  9
capacity of the Khammouane province could enhance capacity of the local authorities and 
local communities to minimize potential indirect or long term impact and, when possible, 
benefit from the development in the area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives analysis is not largely applicable to the project. Investment under 
Component 1 would be of small scale and selected through a community participation 
process.  Irrigation investment under Component 2 would be mainly for repairs and 
rehabilitation where the irrigation canals exist.  The planned new irrigation would of 
small scale, and constructed in the areas where intensive agriculture have already been 
established.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project will be implemented by two agencies.  The Khammouane Province through 
the Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) will be responsible for Component 1.  
A
Provincial Coordination Section (PCS) will be established (headed by its director as 
the provincial program director) to be responsible for the overall implementation while 
the day-to-day management of activities will be assigned to relevant provincial line 
departments and to districts 
–
particularly with regard to DDF/PDF-related activities.  
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) through the Department of Irrigation 
(DoI) and the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office (PAFO) will be responsible for 
Component 2. DoI will be responsible for the overall implementation while the day-to-
day management of all activities would be delegated to PAFO. PAFO will establish a 
small ‘Downstream Irrigation Management Section’ to manage the following activities: 
the preparation oftechnical reports (feasibility, detailed design), procurement of civil 
works, carrying out capacity building, as well as developing a master plan.  
 
The Khammouane Province and DOI/PAFO have recognized the needs to avoid and 
mitigate the potential negative impacts of the Project and to comply with the environment 
and social safeguard requirement by the Government and the World Bank.  During the 
Project preparation, they hired two independent specialists (one on environment and one 
on social) to conduct an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and a rapid social 
study, including the preparation of a safeguard manual.  The key findings and proposed 
mitigation measures were presented and discussed and the reports were finalized, 
translated, and submitted to the Department of Environment for approval.  The reports 
were also sent to the World Bank for review and disclosure.  
 
During the planning and implementation of the NT2 project, MAF, the Khammouane 
Province, and the local offices/communities directly affected by the NT2 project have 
some experience with the planning and implementation of the safeguard measures to 
mitigate the potential negative impacts on the local environment and local people.  
However, DOI, DPI, PAFO, and the local offices to be involved in the Project are new to 
the World Bank operations. Therefore a series of safeguard training to the Project staff 
will be necessary to build their capacity to carry out the proposed mitigation measures 
Page  10
(safeguard screening, mitigation of impacts, supervision, monitoring, and reporting).  
Special training to PAFO staff on IPM, safe use of chemicals, and organic farming will 
also be conducted.  A budget of $30,000 has been allocated for these training and a TOR 
for the training program will be prepared in consultation with the Bank.  The PCS and 
DOI will assign Safeguards Coordinators, who will be the central resource person for all 
safeguards issues.  Given that there are other planned activities on developing Lao-Thai 
partnership, the effort to promote cross border organic farming and self sufficiency 
agriculture will be considered separately.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The potentially affected population (positive and negative) is the local people living in 
the districts and villages where the project activities will be carried out.  For Component 
1, DPI/PSC will be the project owner and will undertake the participatory planning 
process in which the potential negative impacts of the proposed investment activities will 
be identified and the appropriate mitigation measures will be incorporated.  The 
necessary information on the safeguard policies can be discussed and disclosed as agreed 
with the affected population (if any) inline with the safeguard manual.  The results will be 
included in the Project progress report.  
 
For Component 2, PAFO/DOI will ensure that (a) all district and villages are properly 
and timely consulted on the final design and the implementation plan/schedule of the 
Project, including information on the potential negative impacts, proposed mitigation 
measures, and the safeguard policies; (b) an opportunity I given to the people to express 
their concerns on the potential impacts; (c) the mitigation measures during construction 
are including the contract documents; and (d) key safeguard information are effectively 
disclosed, via public posting or by community meetings, especially on the grievance 
procedure.  
 
Before appraisal, the safeguard documents (IEE, the social study, and the safeguard 
manual) both in English and local language were disclosed at Khammouane offices, the 
WB and MAF offices in Vientiane.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2008 
 
Page  11
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/04/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/04/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/04/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  12
Manager review the plan? 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Toru Konishi 
03/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul 
03/07/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
03/07/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
03/11/2008 
Comments:   
