Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2175 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Latin America 
Project ID: P096017 
Project Name: LAC Regional Sustainable Transport and Air Quality Project 
Task Team Leader: Paul Procee 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 6, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (60%);Health (25%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
20.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
56.37 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.00
56.37 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1) To help reduce the amount of carbon dioxide and air pollutants emitted in specific Latin 
American cities by facilitating the use of public transportation and non-motorized modes, as well 
as planning for physical investments and regulatory frameworks that reduce the need for 
excessive movement of people and goods;  2) Facilitate the ability of policy makers, civic 
leaders, and technical staff in cities to envision and articulate a sustainable transport vision 
adapted to local conditions, and to identify concrete and measurable steps to move toward that 
vision; and  3)  Facilitate the ability of cities to share knowledge, information, and 
methodologies relevant to their development of sustainable transport visions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is structured in two components.  Component 1 consists of pilot investments, 
technical assistance, and capacity-building activities in 22 cities in 9 countries.  Component 2 
consists of regional (cross-cutting) technical assistance activities that are applicable to and will 
Page  2
benefit the region’s cities as awhole. See Annexes 4 and 19 to find specific details on the 
proposals.  
 
4.1  
Component 1: Pilot investments, technical assistance, and capacity building activities in 
select cities ($37,663,200)  
 
This component is formed by 3 sub-components.  Sub-component 1.1 consists of pilot 
investment and technical assistance on a range of activities to 15 cities , based on proposals 
submitted during a regional competition held in late 2005 and early 2006. Sub-component 1.2 
consists of limited pilot investments in 4 cities.  For both of these sub-components, activities 
funded fit into the five “windows”, or areas of intervention.  These windows include freight 
management, integration of land-use planning with transport and environmental management, 
modal interconnection and improved effectiveness and efficiency of public transport, non-
motorized transport, and travel demand management.  Sub-component 1.3 consists of capacity-
building grants to 3 selected cities which will help develop proposals into the next phases. In 
total there will be funded activities in 22 cities or metropolitan areas in 9 countries.  
 
4.1.1  Sub-component 1.1.  
 
This sub-component will provide direct funding to 15 cities or urban centers in 8 countries. The 
activities funded in this sub-component fit into the five windows or areas of intervention as 
follows:  
 
•
Window 1: Freight management.  Activities in 3 cities for a total of 707,000. 
 
•
Window 2: Integration of Land Use Planning, Transport Management and Environmental 
Management.  Activities in 9 cities for a total of $5,347,000.  
 
•
Window 3: Modal Interconnection and improved effectiveness and efficiency of public 
transport. Activities in 13 cities for a total of $15,366,792.  
 
•
Window 4: Non-motorized Transport.  Activities in 12 cities for a total of $12,038,597.  
 
•
Window 5: Travel demand management.  Activities in 6 cities for a total of $2,002,000.  
 
4.1.2  Sub-component 1.2.  
 
This sub-component will provide direct funding to 4 cities in 3 countries.  The activities funded 
in this sub-component fit into windows.  These windows include:  
 
•
Window 1: Management of freight transport.  Activity in 1 city for a total of$120,000.  
 
•
Window 3: Modal Interconnection and improved effectiveness and efficiency of public 
transport.  Activities in 4 cities for a total of $1,044,000.  
 
•
Window 4: NMT activities in 2 cities for a total of $305,000.  
 
4.1.3  Sub-component 1.3.  
 
This sub-component will provide direct funding to 3 cities in 3 countries.  The activities funded 
in this sub-component will focus on institutional strengthening and capacity building for future 
developments in the different windows.  Specific activities fall mostly under Window 2, and are 
of cross-cutting nature, although in general are related to the integration of BRT with other 
modes, to the creation of local authorities on mobility, and to the development of master plans 
and strategies. Final details will be ready prior to project appraisal.  
 
Page  3
4.2  
Component 2: Technical Assistance and Institutional Strengthening at Regional Level 
($2,336,800)  
 
This component is formed by 5 sub-components consisting of cross-cutting activities and 
technical assistance to help leverage the region’s capacity to tackle sustainable transport and 
energy efficiency, while reducing GHG emissions and air pollution. The component will fund 
training, development of methodologies, activities to measure impact of other components, 
dissemination, and cross fertilization. The role of the Clean Air Initiative Center and other 
existing entities already engaged in promoting sustainable transport and air quality in the region 
will be key in the implementation of this component. One key activity to fund through this 
component is the overall supervision, and reporting, of all 22 sup-projects funded by Component 
1.  
 
4.2.1  Sub-component 2.1.($650,000) This sub-component will fund the development of an 
internationally recognized methodology for estimating reduced GHG and air pollutants as a 
result of sustainable transport measures. Key players in promoting sustainable transport in the 
region and worldwide will be invited to take part of this development. Case studies from selected 
cities will help add data to illustrate impact of specific sustainable transport activities falling 
within the project windows or areas of intervention. Workshops and toolkits will be produced.  
 
4.2.2  Sub-component 2.2.($675,000) This sub-component will fund a program to build 
capacity at the regional level through training courses directed to sustainable transport, including 
the following topics: integrated urban development; transport and environment planning; 
mobility management; cycling, walking and inter-modality; and freight transport. Workshops, 
virtual courses, and toolkits will be produced.  
 
4.2.3  Sub-component 2.3($360,000). This sub-component will foster policy dialogue, not only 
at a cross-regional level, but also at the local level, to ensure that federal or national 
governments, and the regional jurisdictions share and work together towards common 
sustainable transport objectives, including the introduction of efficient technologies, and cleaner 
fuels. The link to air quality and the co-benefits arising from measures addressed to reduce fuel 
consumption per trip per person will be discussed at national, and international fora. Most cities 
engaged in rationalizing and renovating their transport systems normally do not coordinate with 
the national and federal efforts to improve fuels, or to generate energy security in the long-term. 
Also, policies aimed at reducing air pollution at local level require a better coordination with 
other layers of government, and sectors to ensure compliance and results.  
 
4.2.4  Sub-component 2.4.($651,800) This sub-component will fund activities to monitor the 
implementation of the project, conduct general audits, ensure adequate and prompt reporting, and 
to allow public participation at all levels.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Regional: Mexico, Brazil and Argentina   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Good   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Margarita Rosa De Castro Illera (LCSTR) 
Mr Hernan Aristizabal (LCSTR) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is designed to have a positive long-term impact due to the reduction of global and 
local emissions, as CO2, Particles, NOx, SOx and other contaminants currently present in 
selected cities. The reduction will be directly linked to improved vehicle operation, reduced trip 
lengths, use of more efficient modes of transport and improved technologies.  
 
Nevertheless, the project will involve minor civil works to insert bikeways, busways, 
improve existing street infrastructure (landscaping, modal segregation, traffic signs and signals) 
and assist in building multi-modal terminals. Almost all civil works under the project will follow 
the alignments of existing roads and right of way. Construction will cause some minor and 
localized negative environmental impacts. Such impacts are expected to consist essentially of 
noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. Additional negative impacts during construction will 
occur due to haulage and final disposal of materials from the construction sites.  
 
An environmental assessment will be prepared for all civil works under the project. The EA 
will also include screening for the presence of natural habitats and any potential impacts caused 
by the project. An Environmental Management Plan will be prepared to address all 
environmental impacts identified, including specific procedures for environmental screening and 
management, responsibilities (institutional and individual) and budget to ensure adequate 
implementation. These provisions, or reference thereto, should also be included in all contract 
documents. The EMP will also include, if necessary, measures to minimize, mitigate and 
compensate for the possible impacts on natural habitats and cultural property.  
 
Guidelines on the elements to be included in the EMP will be produced as part of the 
project preparation, and will be made available at the Manual of Operations for the project. 
These guidelines will follow the principles of OP4.01, and will be applied according to each 
country system. Besides, during implementation, the guidelines will be improved in accordance 
with all clients’ requirements, sothat they can be later adopted as national guidelines for this type 
of infrastructure interventions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Project activities might be carried out near known culturally-sensitive sites; therefore, work 
sites will be screened for the presence of physical cultural resources. These procedures will be 
included both in the environmental framework and in civil work contracts under the project.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project does not include any involuntary resettlements. The GEF resources will 
complement counterpart investments in civil works where resettlement issues are neither present 
nor potential.  Nevertheless, the involuntary resettlement policy is triggered due to possible land 
acquisition; physical displacement (such as households located along the right-of-way) or 
economic displacement (such as street vendors within the right-of-way), adequate resettlement 
policies and procedures will be prepared and borrowers will be required to disclose information 
in accordance with the Bank’s policies. The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will include specific procedures and an abbreviated resettlement framework and public 
participation framework.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
09/17/2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Procee 
03/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
