Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC2176
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Latin America 
Project ID:  P096017 
Project Name:  LAC Regional Sustainable Transport and Air Quality Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paul Procee 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 6, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (60%);Health (25%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
20.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
56.37 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.00
56.37 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The higher-level objective of the STAQ Program is to reduce the rate of growth of GHG 
emissions from transport in Latin America through the promotion of less energy intensive 
and cleaner modes of transport.  
 
Regional project development objectives  will be: (i) to establish a sustainable network 
of local and national government stakeholders, international organization and private 
sector entities to promote policies and actions for more energy efficient and cleaner urban 
transport systems in Latin American cities; (ii) to analyze and disseminate the local and 
global environmental impacts of pilot investments in the 12 cities and disseminate lessons 
learned to the cities and governments in the LAC Region; (iii) to develop and disseminate 
modeling tools for decision makers and project developers to assess and compare 
transport policies and investments in terms of climate and air quality benefits   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The STAQ Program consists of a 4 year GEF umbrella grant, following the structure of a 
Horizontal Adaptable Program Loan (APL) financing: (i) a Regional Project which will 
deepen the knowledge base regarding climate change issues related to the transport 
sector, developing a framework of knowledge exchange, foster the multi-sectoral policy 
dialogue on climate change and transport related issues; and, analyze, compare and 
disseminate lessons learned from pilot investments in the 12 cities; and,  (ii) three 
Country Projects ? Argentina, Brazil and Mexico - comprised of 12 city sub-projects to 
promote sustainable urban transport and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through 
investments in the following thematic windows: (i) Management of Freight Transport; 
(ii) Integration of Land Use, Transport and Environmental Planning; (iii) Modal 
Interconnection and improved effectiveness and efficiency of public transport; (iv) Non-
motorized Transport; and (v) Travel demand management.  
 
Project 1: Regional Project (USD2,903,000). The Regional Project aims at establishing 
a
regional framework for sustainable transport, climate change and air quality that will 
have an impact beyond the individual projects and sub-projects. It will draw from 
practical experience and lessons learned from the implementation of activities in the 
different cities and countries. It will foster the development of a regional network of local 
and national government agencies, international organizations and private sector entities 
that will contribute to the implementation of mechanisms to carry out horizontal (across 
municipalities) and vertical (between municipal, national and regional levels) knowledge 
sharing on the preparation, appraisal, implementation, outcomes, and lessons of the 
individual projects. The project will also help develop better methodologies and tools to 
assess the greenhouse gas and air quality emission reduction benefits of different urban 
transport investments, including policy and technology options. The lessons learned will 
be disseminated widely and have an impact beyond the 12 cities and 3 countries. The 
project will help develop policy guidelines and initiate dialogues with key decision 
makers to address financial, institutional and regulatory barriers and create long-term 
strategies and incentives for sustainable transport in cities and countries in Latin 
America. It will be implemented in coordination with other implementing agencies, like 
UNEP, and involve participation of key players in the region in the area of sustainable 
transport, such as GTZ, WRI/EMBARQ, ITDP, Hewlett Foundation, and the Clean Air 
Initiative  The expected outputs are a regional network, studies, tools and website. Annex  
4
provides a more detailed description of the STAQ Program.  
 
Project 2: Country Projects (USD 17,897,000).  The Country Projects consist of 4 city 
sub-projects, which are not identical in design and to allow for local institutional realities, 
priorities and conditions. However, the city sub-projects will seek to achieve common 
objectives and will have to meet eligibility criteria (see PAD).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program will be carried out in 12 cities in 3 different countries in Latin America. All 
cities selected have population equal or higher than 300,000 inhabitants, while many are 
located in highly urbanized areas with more than one million inhabitants. Minor physical 
Page  3
investments ? bikeways and segregated bus-ways ? will take place in developed and 
consolidated areas, with mostly temporary and minor impacts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Regional component has no associated works; therefore, no safeguards would be 
triggered. Additionally, each country project will have minor works, such as bikeways, 
having minor associated impacts. There are no large scale or irreversible impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no potential long term impacts due to future project activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The institutional capacity of the borrower varies from city to city and country to country, 
which will be discussed in the PAD for each country project. The competitive selection 
process of cities and projects included screening for environmental management capacity 
of local government agencies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared prior to 
appraisal and endorsed by the countries. Borrowers will be required to endorse the 
Page  4
framework or adapt it in accordance to local policies and regulations and the Bank 
policies.  Cities will be required to prepare an environmental assessment and 
management plan based on agreed framework prior to starting of the bidding process of 
any civil works under the project.  
 
The program will assist in developing the capacity of participating city agencies and 
stakeholders to apply the environmental and social management framework to civil 
works and monitor and evaluate implementation of agreed policies and measures by 
contractors and other stakeholders involved in project preparation and implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  5
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Procee 
03/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
03/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
03/24/2008 
Comments:   
