Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3621 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lebanon 
Project ID: P111602 
Project Name: Lebanon Emergency Fiscal Management Reform Implementation Grant 
Task Team Leader: Sebnem Akkaya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSED 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (50%);Central government administration 
(50%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Other 
accountability/anti-corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
4.00
4.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The ultimate objective of the proposed project is to raise the efficiency of public financial 
resources and improve aid effectiveness, by supporting a number of core inter-linked 
improvements in the context of the broader fiscal budgetary reform program of the Government. 
To this end, the project puts emphasis on consolidating the progress already made by the 
Government in linking policy with the budget, placing the annual budget in a multi-year 
perspective and managing public debt, while fostering a gradual re-orientation of the budgeting 
process toward achievement of results on the ground.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would include five components. The first component will support the 
establishment in the Ministry of Finance of a dedicated Macro-Fiscal Analysis Unit. The second 
component would provide assistance to further key improvements in the management of public 
expenditures. The third and fourth components would provide essential advisory services to 
strengthen debt and aid management respectively. The fifth component would assist in the 
Page  2
provision of targeted training and other capacity building, specifically connected to the other 
components of the project. To this end, the project would finance international and local advisory 
services (with a small provision for office equipment essential to the effectiveness of the 
project), as well as training and capacity building directly related to the envisaged reform 
measures. In addition to the above, the project would facilitate the establishment of a project 
management unit within the Ministry of Finance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The consultants financed by the project would be working in the central and line ministries in 
Beirut. Principally this would include the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Education, the 
Ministry of Health, the Court of Auditors, and the Council for Development and Reconstruction 
(CDR). The training component would be closely linked to the Institute of Finance. The Prime 
Minister's Office would be consulted as required.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no identified safeguard issues in this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/13/2008 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sebnem Akkaya 
05/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
05/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Farrukh Iqbal 
05/14/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
