Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3110 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/28/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lesotho 
Project ID: P108143 
Project Name: Second Water Sector Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: N. Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 13, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%);Water supply (40%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Regulation and competition policy (S);Corporate governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
32.80 
 
Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa 
10.00 
 
KUWAIT: Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development 
20.00 
 OPEC 
FUND 
6.00 
 
SAUDI ARABIA: Saudi Fund for Development 
10.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
83.00 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
32.70
194.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To support the GoL to develop the next least-cost, long-term solution to supply water to the 
Lowlands (Maseru and surrounding areas), along with distribution network expansion, continued 
reforms within the sector and scaling up community water supply systems, in an environmentally 
sustainable, socially responsible and economically viable framework.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Situated 35 km outside of Maseru on the South Phuthiatsana River, the Metolong Dam will be a 
68m high Roller Compacted Concrete (RCC) dam. The catchment area of the South Phuthiatsana 
River at the proposed site for the Metolong Dam is 250km2 with a MAR of 53.67MCM. The 
dam would store 52 million m3, have a crest length over 210m and a reservoir with an upstream 
Page  2
reach of approximately 16km.  Full supply level will be at 1671mASL. Supply to Maseru and 
surrounding areas will be achieved through associated works, including 112km of transmission 
mains ranging in size from 200mm to 700mm ND, four pump stations and a treatment plant.  
 
Financing Plan: The total cost of Phase 2, the Metolong Dam and Water Supply Program, is 
estimated to be US$190 million. The GoL has secured US$122 million in financing, comprising 
US$83 million from the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) and US$46 million from 
several Arab Funds. An additional US$32.8 million from the GoL is to be used in financing 
advanced infrastructure. Under the existing financing plan the US$46  million from Arab Funds 
will cover the projected cost of the dam and pump station (US$46.2 million), however dollar 
deflation has made some of the cost estimates unreliable.  There is  an estimated financing gap of 
US$25.2 million for which funds need to be identified.  
 
Component Description: The following gives a preliminary outline of the components being 
considered under proposed World Bank support for Phase 2 of the WSIP.  
 
COMPONENT 1:  (US$10m) - Component 1 would support the Environmental and Social 
Management Program. Proposed World Bank/Co-finance Contribution would be US$10.0 
million toward Resettlement & Compensation, Catchment Management, Instream Flow 
Requirements, Cultural Heritage, Implementation of the EMP and an Environmental and Social 
Panel of Experts. These are described in more detail below.  
 
Resettlement Plan & Compensation: The ESIA supported under Phase 1 of the WSIP has 
drafted a Resettlement Plan. The project will require permanent acquisition of land as well as 
temporary occupation of land. However, there is no identified involuntary resettlement for any of 
the Project components, with the possible exception of the temporary relocation from existing 
road reserves of moveable facilities for the laying of transmission pipelines. Up to 10 households 
may request voluntary assistance in relocating to higher ground due to proximity to the reservoir. 
The ESIA has drafted an Entitlement Matrix for the proper compensation and rehabilitation of 
any households or businesses that may require relocation that would be supported under this 
component. This would address loss of land and other privately-owned assets, loss of community 
assets, impacts on subsistence/livelihoods and income-earning capacity, the restoration of access 
and the specific needs of vulnerable groups.  
 
Catchment Management: Current land-use practices in the Phuthiatsana catchment is largely 
non-sustainable due to issues related to livestock grazing, over-harvesting of medicinal plants, 
fuel wood collection and fires. These result in high sediment loads and nutrient enrichment of the 
Phuthiatsana River, particularly after rainfall events. These impact on water quality and have the 
potential to undermine the long-term storage capacity of the Metolong reservoir. A program 
modeled on the experiences of the LHWP would support the establishment of an appropriate 
coordinating agency to implement a catchment management program. This program would 
quantify the location and extent of any problems along with a system of prioritizing the sites for 
remediation. Interventions would be aimed at promoting sustainable land-use, improving 
agricultural practices and implementing measures to control soil erosion, while providing 
livelihood opportunities to local communities.  
 
Page  3
Instream Flow Requirements: The ESIA used the Downstream Response to Imposed Flow 
Transformations (DRIFT) methodology to determine the Instream Flow Requirements. DRIFT is 
a
data-management tool which is able to provide flow scenarios and descriptive summaries of 
their consequences in terms of the condition of the river ecosystem for examination and 
comparison by decision makers. The results of the assessment showed that sections of the 
Phuthiatsana River closest to the dam are likely to be most affected by alterations to the flow 
regime. These may be partially offset by the effect of reduced sediment load and reduction in 
flood events. With the feasibility allocation of 11% MAR released from the dam (consistent with 
the LHWP experience), the study indicates that the present ecological condition will be 
maintained. This condition may be largely achieved depending on adherence to the 
recommended distribution of flows. This component would support development of a decision 
support system to monitor the implementation of the IFRs and ensure an appropriate adaptive 
management framework that is able to modify operations to ensure sustainability of the 
downstream environment.  
 
Cultural Heritage: The ESIA identified 14 sites upstream of the proposed site of the Metolong 
dam. None have been identified within the dam's foundation area. These cultural and natural 
heritage sites include San rock paintings, stone and iron age tools, as well as skeletal remains, all 
of which are in various conservation conditions. Further investigations and conservation 
measures are required to determine and document the extent and distribution of these sites. This 
component would further support, as appropriate, the full excavation and/or preservation of 
notable sites in coordination with the appropriate agencies, such as the Department of Culture, 
within the Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture.  
 
EMP Implementation: The ESIA outlined an Environment Management Plan to be 
implemented during project implementation. This includes, among others, a monitoring program 
to provide information that would inform management decisions during implementation and 
subsequent operation.  
 
Environmental and Social Panel of Experts:  World Bank support to Phase 2 of the WSIP would 
trigger five (Environmental Assessment, Cultural Property, Dam Safety, Involuntary 
Resettlement & International Waterways) safeguard policies. These are outlined in the ESIA and 
would need to be addressed irrespective of whether or not the Bank financed the cost of 
compliance. Among these requirements is that the Borrower engage Panels of Experts - one on 
Safety of Dams under OP 4.37, and one on Environmental Assessment under OP4.01. The Dam 
Safety PoE would likely be comprised of three specialists with international experience on 
similar projects, and expertise in RCC dam design and construction, geology, sedimentation and 
hydrology and is to be funded under the Arab funds.  The PoE under OP4.01 would include a 
minimum of one environmental and one social specialist similarly experienced in projects of this 
nature to provide independent mechanism for review and advice to the Government during 
implementation. While the Bank would make available financing for the Environmental and 
Social PoEs it would remain the Borrowers obligation to propose PoEs with relevant and 
complementary skills for the Bank's no objection.  
 
Component 2:  (US$8m)   Component 2 would provide up to US$ 8 million in support of the 
Sefikeng Reservoir and Teyateyaneng extension.  The Sefikeng Reservoir (3ML), would be 
Page  4
supported under this component along with an estimated 28km of transmission mains. 
Teyateyaneng currently has 2,687 connections with an additional 98 government connections, 
including the local hospital.  
 
Component 3:  (US$ 2 m) Component 3 would contribute to the Institutional and Policy 
Support which is estimated to have a total cost of US$18.3 million. Proposed World Bank/Co-
finance Contribution would provide US$2.0 million in support of Institutional and Policy 
Support.  Implementation of the Metolong Dam and Water Supply Program under Phase 2 of the 
WSIP requires the participation of a number of government institutions and agencies. 
Component 3 would provide support for policy development and implementation, and 
institutional support to ensure adequate capacity to realize the objectives of the WSIP and ensure 
sustainability within the water sector. This support would continue the Bank's support to the 
water sector in Lesotho, building on previous projects such as Phase 1 of the WSIP and the 
LHWP. Potential support would be extended to other agencies and institutions, such as the 
National Environment Secretariat, and the new regulatory agency for urban water supply to 
ensure successful realization of the objectives of Phase 2 of the WSIP.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project area is situated between 270E and 280E longitude and 290N and 300N latitude. The 
Project will supply water to the capital city of Maseru and the towns of Teyateyaneng and Roma. 
The Metolong Dam site is 35km from Maseru on the South Phuthiatsana River (or Little Caledon 
River), which flows through the Lowlands of central western Lesotho. The catchment area at the 
proposed site for the Metolong Dam is 250km2 with the storage area spanning the districts of 
Maseru and Berea. The dam would store 52 million m3, have a crest length over  
 
210m
and a reservoir with an upstream reach of approximately  
 
16km. Full supply level will be at 1671mASL. Indirect effects from water abstraction from the 
South Phuthiatsana River may affect downstream water users as far as the confluence with the 
Mohokare (Caledon) River.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has a demonstrated capacity to address necessary safeguards of the scale and 
complexity envisaged under the project. The Borrower has successfully implemented large 
hydraulic infrastructure projects, notably the Lesotho Highlands Water Project, and have 
included a detailed environmental and social program for the proposed Metolong Dam. This 
environmental and social program builds up the national experience, drawing upon the lessons 
from the LHWP and addressing the specific needs of the Metolong site. Panels of Experts for the 
environmental and social and dam safety experts have been successfully applied in other projects 
in Lesotho.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Metolong Dam has been completed 
under Phase 1of the WSIP APL. This includes a detailed Environmental Management Plan and 
Resettlement Plan based on a comprehensive census and solid socioeconomic survey. The 
project includes a specific component to address the actions and activities outlined under this 
plan. This has been reviewed and approved by the Bank and a Record of Decision issued by 
authorities in Lesotho.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Fourteen sites of varying importance and condition have been identified within the general 
dam reservoir area.  A program of excavation and detailed recording has been recommended 
together with review and capacity building of the Department of Culture and implementation of a 
public extension program.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Plan has been prepared with reference to Government legislation and 
international best practice, as embodied in Banks involuntary resettlement safeguard policy. The 
project will require permanent acquisition of land as well as temporary occupation of land. 
However, there is no identified involuntary resettlement for any of the Project components, with 
the possible exception of the temporary relocation from existing road reserves of moveable 
facilities for the laying of transmission pipelines. Up to 10 households may request voluntary 
assistance in relocating to higher ground due to proximity to the reservoir. The ESIA has drafted 
an Entitlement Matrix for the proper compensation and rehabilitation of any households or 
businesses that may require relocation that would be supported under this component. This 
would address loss of land and other privately-owned assets, loss of community assets, impacts 
on subsistence/livelihoods and income-earning capacity, the restoration of access and the specific 
needs of vulnerable groups.  The first Phase of the WSIP has an approved Process Framework 
for Land Acquisition and Compensation which is being reviewed and revised to ensure that it 
meets the requirements for Phase II.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The current project design envisages a 68m high dam which is above the 15m threshold for 
triggering this policy. A Panel of Experts will be employed under the project to ensure that 
experienced and competent professionals design and supervise construction, and that the 
Borrower adopts and implements dam safety measures through the project cycle.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The South Phuthiatsana River flows into the Mohokare River which forms a boundary 
between Lesotho and South Africa and is a tributary of the Orange/Senqu system (Botswana, 
Lesotho, Namibia, and South Africa). Notification of possible further water extraction from the 
Mohokare was made to riparian states in 2002. The ESIA determined that detection of flow 
changes in the Orange/Senqu system would be very unlikely and that flow changes in the 
Mohokare itself will be of limited spatial and temporal extent. With the full feasibility studies 
completed the appropriate documentation will be presented to the Orange Senqu River.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Phase 1 of the WSIP APL supported the preparation of a detailed and comprehensive 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. This has produced an Environmental 
Management Plan, including determination of costs and institutional responsibilities. The 
ESIA included a Resettlement Plan, which did not identify the need for any involuntary 
resettlement for any of the Project components, with the possible exception of the temporary 
relocation from existing road reserves of moveable facilities for the laying of transmission 
pipelines. An Entitlement Matrix has been developed for the proper compensation and 
rehabilitation of any households or businesses that may require relocation.  All these studies, 
including the ESIA, RAP, RPF, will be reviewed for approval and disclosed prior to 
appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
05/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/28/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
05/28/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
