Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4044
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lesotho 
Project ID:  P108143 
Project Name:  Second Water Sector Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Marcus J. Wishart 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%);Water supply (40%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Regulation and competition policy (S);Corporate governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to support the GoL in: (i) developing and 
sustaining an environmentally sound, socially responsible, and financially viable 
framework for the MDWSP; (ii) an increase in the quantity of safe, bulk water supplied 
to Teyateyaneng; and, (iii) strengthening institutions and related instruments in the water 
sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Environmental and Social Management (US$10 million) will support the 
environmental and social management program for the entire Metolong Dam and Water 
Supply Program (MDWSP). The Bank’s Safeguard Policies have been adopted as the 
program standards and this component will finance activities aimed at addressing 
environmental, social and cultural heritage protection in accordance with the MDWSP 
Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) and Resettlement Policy Framework and 
Plan (RP).  
 
Page  2
2. Environmental activities will include (a) Environmental and Social Management, 
which will integrate activities into a single document under an overall ESAP that clearly 
articulates the framework adopted by the MDWSP, provide technical assistance for 
community outreach and consultations, and finance annual audits of the ESAP; (b) 
Integrated Catchment Management, which will develop initiatives aimed at reducing 
erosion within the catchment and sedimentation of the reservoir, including retention dams 
and pro-poor, community-based interventions in support of land and soil conservation; 
(c) Ecosystem Monitoring, which will monitor the ecological health of the catchment 
area and reservoir to inform the refinement of environmental flow requirements, and 
enable monitoring of compliance with adopted environment flow policies and 
procedures; and (d) Cultural Resource Management, which would preserve and promote 
cultural heritage resources in the reservoir area.  
 
3. Social activities will support implementation of the resettlement policy and action 
plan. This will include support to livelihood restoration measures and income-earning 
capacity, the acquisition of privately-owned trees, and cultivation land compensation 
measures in order to address the loss of land and other privately-owned assets, the loss of 
community assets and collective adverse impacts on groups/social categories who 
because of their social position may be vulnerable to changes brought about by the 
MDWSP, or who may be excluded from its associated benefits. Continued community 
access across the reservoir will be maintained through the construction of reservoir 
crossings. Given the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Lesotho, low levels of awareness in the 
area of the MDWSP and the risk of increased infections, this component will support 
implementation of the HIV/AIDS Education and Prevention Plan. A community water 
and sanitation program (WATSAN) will provide over 1,000 VIP latrines, refuse pits and 
the construction (10) and rehabilitation (14) of local water supply systems to 24 villages 
within the catchment area of the MDWSP.  
 
4. An independent Panel of Experts (PoE) will also be supported under this component. 
The PoE has been established under the PPF and includes one environmental and one 
social specialist with international experience in similar projects to provide independent, 
expert advice to the Metolong Authority on monitoring compliance with environmental 
and social safeguards aspects of project implementation. A PoE for Dam Safety has also 
been appointed with financing from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development 
and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa.  
 
5. Governance, sustainability and development effectiveness will be enhanced by 
embedding a series of inter-linked communications activities into the project cycle. These 
will, by definition, encompass pro-poor, pro-environment and governance reforms by 
strengthening the capacity to engage with locally affected stakeholders and better manage 
the communication, governance and sustainability aspects of the MDWSP. This 
component will include support to the development and implementation of a 
communications strategy within the MPIU, a community outreach strategy for the MPIU 
and public opinion research to explore stakeholder perceptions, power relationships and 
measures to enhance community participation and accountability. The Metolong 
Authority will also develop and implement a series of governance, anti-corruption and 
Page  3
sustainability measures to ensure integrity, transparency and accountability. These will 
focus primarily on a series of risk assessments, the development of an action plan and 
appropriate risk mitigation tools accompanied by regular auditing and assessment of the 
action plan by an independent, authorized authority.  
 
Component 2: Engineering Support and Transmission Line to Teyateyaneng (US$13 
million) will support the water supply works program through (i) the construction of an 
estimated 28km of transmission mains to supply the town of Teyateyaneng with water 
from the Metolong water treatment works, and (ii) financing the position of engineering 
manager within the Metolong Authority.  
 
7. The town of Teyateyaneng is located 47 kilometers north-west of Maseru, in Zone 3 
of the Lowlands. It was determined to supply Teyateyaneng through the MDWSP as the 
existing supply is inadequate and augmentation of supply from local resources is 
impractical. Detailed designs, including the preparation of tender documents, are being 
finalized as part of the Lowlands Water Supply Scheme, supported by the European 
Development Fund.  
 
8. Phase 2 of the WSIP will finance construction of a branch pipeline between the 
Metolong water treatment works and Teyateyaneng. When the water supply from the 
MDWSP comes on line in 2013 it will replace the existing borehole system. Works will 
include the construction of a pump station, a main command reservoir, and a storage 
reservoir which will flow under gravity to Teyateyaneng. Assuming a total loss from the 
system of 25 percent, a total of 6,000 m3 per day could be provided to Teyateyaneng. A 
further 1,500 m3 per day would be available for surrounding villages.  
 
9. The Engineering Manager for the Metolong Authority will also be supported under 
this component. This will be a senior engineer who will be responsible for representing 
the Metolong Authority in the management of all engineering aspects of the MDWSP. In 
addition, this position is responsible for planning and overseeing all pre-commissioning 
and commissioning activities; carrying out risk management activities and reporting; 
coordinating preparation of the scope of work for tender documentation; and, interfacing 
with stakeholders and government, development partners, consultants and contractors on 
engineering matters pertaining to the MDWSP. All other staff within the Metolong 
Authority are fully financed through the Government budget via the Ministry of Natural 
Resources.  
 
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Support (US$2 million) will extend the Bank’s 
support to the water sector in Lesotho and build on Phase 1 of the WSIP, continuing to 
support the CoW in policy analysis and capacity building. Activities would be focused on 
enhancing existing capacity within the water sector along with implementation of 
measures outlined in the 1999 Water Policy, the Water and Sanitation Policy of 2007, and 
the revised Water Resources Act of 2008. The CoW, through the PPSU, has developed a 
policy implementation plan that prioritizes activities required under the new legislative 
provisions that will be supported by Phase 2 of the WSIP.  
 
Page  4
11. The component will also provide support to the proposed Lesotho Electricity 
Authority, the mandate of which is to be expanded through an amendment to the LEA 
Act of 2002 (and as amended in 2006). While the LEA has been an established regulator 
since 2005, its authority has been limited to the Lesotho Electricity Company and issues 
in the electricity sector. Funds provided will assist to strengthen capacity to assume 
responsibility for the regulation of urban water supply services, including capacity 
building, training and technical assistance for LEA in water supply and sewerage issues, 
particularly with respect to economic regulation and service standards.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Components 1 and 2 will support the Metolong Dam and Water Supply Program. The 
Metolong Dam is intended to be a 71m-high roller-compacted concrete dam situated in a 
narrow, V-shaped valley on the South Phuthiatsana River, approximately 35kms from 
Maseru.  
 
The reservoir will have an upstream reach on the South Phuthiatsana River of 
approximately 16km. The South Phuthiatsana River has a catchment area of 250km2 at 
the proposed site of the Metolong Dam, with an average MAR of 53.67MCM. The full 
supply level is expected at 1671mASL with a total reservoir capacity estimated at 
52MCM, of which 10 MCM is allocated for dead storage volume.  
 
Along with an associated water treatment plant and conveyance infrastructure, the dam 
will increase the water supply of Maseru and nearby towns by 75 Ml per day. This will 
ensure a secure supply of 120 Ml of water per day, enabling Maseru to meet domestic 
and industrial requirements for at least the next 40 years.  
 
Component 2: The town of Teyateyaneng is located 47 kilometeres north-west of 
Maseru and will be supplied from the MDWSP.  
 
The project area has been significantly modified by land-use practices, including 
clearing, cropping, grazing and veld burning, which have resulted in an accelerated, non-
flow related supply of sediment to the river.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Cultural Heritage: While the ESIA has catalogued 14 sites, previous research indicates 
that there may be as many as 26 recorded archaeological sites in the area. Twenty-four of 
these have San rock paintings. None have been identified within the dam's foundation 
area. Sites are of three main types: i) San rock art sites; ii) rock-shelters that contain 
surface scatters of stone tools and/or preserve archaeological deposits from former 
hunter-gatherer occupation; and iii) open-air scatters of stone tools from both Middle and 
Later Stone Age traditions. A cultural heritage management and development program is 
updating the existing inventory prior to construction and recording key sites, with 
provisions to support excavations and activities to address aspects of living cultural 
heritage. An internationally acknowledged expert has been contracted under the PPF to 
implement the first phase, with further phases supported under the proposed WSIP2. All 
excavations and interpretations will be completed prior to innundation. Rock paintings 
will be photographed, with select paintings possibly extracted for placement in museums.  
Any special stone age sites identified will be excavated and preserved in appropriate 
institutions.  
 
Catchment Management: Current land-use practices in the Phuthiatsana catchment are 
largely non-sustainable due to issues related to livestock grazing, over-harvesting of 
medicinal plants, fuel wood collection and fires. These result in high sediment loads and 
nutrient enrichment of the Phuthiatsana River, particularly after rainfall events. These 
impact on water quality and have the potential to undermine the long-term storage 
capacity of the Metolong reservoir. An integrated catchment management program 
modeled on the experiences of the LHWP is being developed to address water quality 
issues in the catchment and limit erosion and the inflow of sediments to the reservoir. 
Interventions are aimed at promoting sustainable land-use, improving agricultural 
practices and implementing measures to control soil erosion, while providing livelihood 
opportunities to local communities.  
 
Page  6
Social Issues: The land around the Metolong reservoir has been set aside for public 
purposes through Legal Notice 161 of October 09, 2008. The Metolong Authority has 
requested the area be re-gazetted as a Selected Development Area (SDA) to better control 
and manage development within the catchment area. A resettlement policy framework 
and preliminary action plan was prepared. The preliminary action plan included an initial 
census and data of persons impacted by the reservoir, pumping station, water treatment 
works, and operational facilities. Once the final designs have been approved, a 
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared to cover all persons impacted by the 
conveyance system, dam construction and associated works, and reservoir containment as 
well as buffer zone surrounding reservoir. Resettlement plans and activities will focus on 
community involvement and livelihood restoration measures in an effort to promote an 
improvement in the current standard of living. Compensation measures address the loss 
of land and other privately-owned assets, along with community assets and collective 
adverse impacts on groups/social categories who, because of their social position, may be 
vulnerable to changes brought about by the MDWSP, or who may be excluded from its 
associated benefits. Preferential employment opportunities will be afforded to 
communities within the project area and continued community access across the reservoir 
will be maintained through the construction of reservoir crossings. Given the prevalence 
of HIV/AIDS in Lesotho, low levels of awareness in the area of the MDWSP and the risk 
of increased infections, a HIV/AIDS education and prevention plan is being 
implemented.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental Flow Requirements: The ESIA used the Downstream Response to 
Imposed Flow Transformations (DRIFT) methodology to determine the EFRs. The 
results of the assessment showed that sections of the Phuthiatsana River closest to the 
dam are likely to be most affected by alterations to the flow regime. These may be 
partially offset by the effect of reduced sediment load and reduction in flood events. With 
the feasibility allocation of 11% MAR released from the dam (consistent with the LHWP 
experience), the study indicates that the present ecological condition will be maintained. 
Provisions have been included under the project to support development of a decision 
support system to monitor the implementation of the EFRs and ensure an appropriate 
adaptive management framework that is able to modify operations to ensure 
sustainability of the downstream environment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The site of the storage reservoir, given its steep and rocky nature, and sparse population, 
was chosen as it does minimize adverse impacts. Validation of the MDWSP as the most 
appropriate, least-cost, long-term solution for water supply to the Lowlands was informed 
by a comprehensive options analysis that adequately reflected local and national needs. 
These plans have been discussed nationally and locally as part of the Lowlands Water 
Supply Scheme and the ESIA process.   
 
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The MDWSP has adopted the World Bank safeguard policies as the program standards 
and developed an Environmental and Social Action Plan that encompasses all of the 
recommendations from the ESIA.  
 
An Environmental and Social Panel of Experts will be supported through Phase 2 of the 
WSIP. The PoE has been appointed under the PPF and will continue under the credit. A 
Dam safety PoE has been appointed and is being financed by the KFAED and BADEA.  
 
Borrower Safeguard Capacity:  The Borrower has extensive experience dealing with 
World Bank safeguard policies due to previous dam projects in the Highlands. Past 
experience has provided strong foundation for ensuring World Bank policies are 
integrated into the planning process, properly implemented, impact mitigated and 
activities closely monitored to ensure no person is worse off as a result of this project.  
 
The Metolong Authority has retained a number of senior staff with previous experience 
on the LHWP and IDA-financed projects. All of the staff are knowledgeable on the intent 
and application of the safeguard policies and are requiring all program-related activities 
to adhere to the provisions contained therein. The Meetolong Authority is supported by 
the MPMU, an international, competitively recruited consulting firm which includes 
environmental and social specialists. In addition, the National Environment Secretariat 
and the Department of Culture have dedicated teams of experienced professionals who 
have gained significant experience through the development of the LHWP and other 
projects within Lesotho. Oversight of the MDWSP activities during implementation will 
be further consolidated through the Panel of Experts for environment and social aspects 
and the Maseru District Environment Officer under the NES.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Drawing on lessons from the LHWP, initial consultation with communities in the 
Metolong area began in 2002 between community members and a Dam Steering 
Committee which was facilitated by the Lowlands Water Supply Unit. The Dam Steering 
Committee consulted with District Administrations, Principal Chiefs, and government 
officials.  
 
In April of 2005 community representatives formed a Dam Committee with the 
assistance of a local NGO. Under new legislative structures, the Dam Committee reports 
to the Local Community Councilors who are responsible for representing community 
development concerns.  
 
During preparation of the ESIA in 2006 and 2007, public consultations and participation 
with potentially affected communities and other stakeholders was implemented through a 
Public Consultation and Disclosure Plan. This was based on the requirements of the 
Department of Water Affairs, the NES and the World Bank Operational Policy on 
Disclosure (OP 17.50) and made extensive use of existing institutions, such as the local 
Page  8
administration (Village Chiefs and Councilors), regional authorities (Local Government) 
and relevant NGOs.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework and Plan (RP) prepared as part of the ESIA 
established the foundation through which the MDWSP is ensuring ongoing community 
consultations. This is being refined by the Metolong Authority through preparation of a 
Community Outreach Strategy which consolidates guidelines to ensure effective 
community participation. The strategy is being developed under the Project Preparation 
Facility and identifies actions by which to empower individuals to actively participate in 
project planning and income restoration activities.  
 
A
Communications Strategy is also being prepared by which to ensure proper 
communication structures are in place to guide interaction among stakeholders. This 
includes communities, project planners, government agencies, NGOs and donor agencies.  
 
Two Community Liaison Officers are being recruited in anticipation of construction and 
a
Public Relations Officer has been appointed within the MPIU to ensure a flow of 
information between the project and stakeholders, including interested NGOs and 
stakeholders who are not directly impacted by the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/09/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/09/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/08/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/23/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/09/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  10
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcus J. Wishart 
03/04/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
03/16/2009 
Comments:   
