Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4656
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lesotho 
Project ID:  P116426 
Project Name:  EFA Fast Track Initiative Catalytic Fund Grant for Lesotho 
Task Team Leader:  Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (80%);Pre-primary education (20%) 
Theme:  Education for all (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to provide facilities at existing primary schools; 
expand access to pre-primary education and support improvements in quality of teaching.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components, which were designed in line with priorities defined in 
the Education Sector Strategic Plan 2005-2015, and the Medium Term Education Sector 
Plan 2009-2012.  
 
Component 1:  Improved facilities in primary schools  
 
This component will provide an additional 1,000 primary and pre-primary gender and 
disabled friendly classrooms at existing schools, rehabilitate at least a further 400 
classrooms, and provide furniture for at least 1,400 classrooms.  The capacity to construct 
will be increased by building on existing sites, making greater use of smaller contractors, 
and subcontracting of the work of technical supervision of civil works.  
 
Component 2:  Expanded pre-primary education  
Page  2
This component will provide support for the Government aim to expand access to 
reception classes for the poorest children, through the provision of support for the 
operating costs of 150 additional reception classes, with a capacity of 6,000 children. 
This expansion will contribute to the inclusion of an additional 10% of the age 5 
population in reception classes.  
 
Component 3:  Contribution to improvements in quality of teaching and learning  
 
This component will support the Government plans to improve learning outcomes in 
primary schools through (i) conducting analytical work to understand the conditions of 
teaching and learning through classroom-based observation, skills profiles and training 
needs, and assessment of student outcomes measurement; (ii) assisting in attracting more 
qualified teachers to difficult schools (these are schools located in the most remote and 
difficult to access areas of the country); (iii) providing additional in-service teacher 
training aimed at improving on literacy and numeracy teaching; and (iv) providing 
textbooks in core subjects and grades where there are deficits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in all ten districts of the Kingdom of Lesotho.  As construction will 
take place in existing schools, there are no relevant safeguards issues. The existing ESMF 
was updated and will be implemented.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will build and rehabilitated classrooms in existing schools.  There will be no 
construction on new sites.  A social assessment was carried out and it is integrated in the 
Page  3
PAD. The existing ESMF for the country was revised. There are no social and 
environmental safeguards issues expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As the project is only supporting construction in existing sites, no alternatives were 
considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government will be provided with the revised ESMF (original 2003 ESMF with 
addendum) which includes the implementation arrangements for the project with regards 
to environmental and social issues. Training will be provided to key stakeholders in line 
with the requirements in the revised ESMF.  
 
The project also includes funds for relevant consultancies associated to school 
construction which will help the Government in addressing any other issues that may 
arise.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The revised ESMF will be disclosed at the central, district and community level. School 
principals and committees, as well as district officers will be offered appropriated 
training.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos 
08/28/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
09/02/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
09/02/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
09/02/2009 
Comments:   
