Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4595 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/06/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Liberia 
Project ID: P117662 
Project Name: Fast Track Initiative Grant for Basic Education 
Task Team Leader: Nathalie Lahire 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTED 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (40%);Secondary education (40%);Public administration- 
Education (10%);Pre-primary education (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (80%);Gender (10%);Decentralization (10%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to support the implementation of the first phase (2010-
2012) of the ESP and will focus on the following three specific objectives:  
 
(i) 
Increase access and equity;  
 
(ii) 
Improve the quality of teaching and learning; and  
 
(iii) 
Strengthen management capacities and develop a framework for institutional capacity 
building at central and county levels.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be composed of the following components:  
 
Component 1: Increasing access and equity (US$20 million).  
 
The project would support the construction and rehabilitation of classrooms while taking into 
consideration the special circumstances of special needs children and support strategies for 
children out of school including scholarships.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Improving the quality of teaching and learning (US$12 million).  
 
This component would include provision of learning materials; support for in- and pre-service 
teacher training and school-level pedagogic support; provision of school grants; design of a 
national assessment and implementation of learning assessments instruments as a monitoring 
tool for reading and math performance; support to early childhood development and special 
needs education.  
 
Component 3:  Strengthening management capacities and develop a framework for institutional 
capacity building at central and county levels  (US$8 million).  
 
Under this component, support would be provided for monitoring and evaluation systems, and 
for sector management, with a strong focus on data management. The central administration and 
the deconcentrated services will benefit from training, technical assistance and provision of 
equipment. Currently, there is no clear delineation of those functions (e.g. pre-primary and 
primary education) for which county education officers will have responsibility and those which 
will be retained by headquarters and delivered as #national# programs   Authority over staff and 
budgets should be delegated in line with the reassignment of responsibility so that it is fair and 
reasonable to hold lower levels of management to account for the delivery of services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located country-wide in Urban and Rural areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Liberia through the LACE project has demonstrated its commitment to 
environmental and social safeguards issues. However, capacity is limited, and the EA study will 
help map out the main issues and provide recommendations to mitigate them. Consultations with 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and other allied environmental institutions in 
Liberia, local government institutions will be a main feature of implementation. To ensure 
further commitment and measurable targets, the project will ensure that monitoring and 
evaluation indicators reflect the environmental and social issues identified. In addition to this 
commitment, a capacity building through training by the EPA might be contemplated to further 
support implementation at the community level and government staff.  
 
The task team will, therefore, work closely with the Liberian experts to make sure all 
safeguards policies are consistent with Bank guidelines.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered due the construction and rehabilitation of schools to be funded 
under the project.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered due to the potential need for land acquisition which might lead 
to the lost of assets, loss of shelter, loss of access to economic assets or loss of livelihood, 
requiring that affected persons be compensated and/or resettled.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/13/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Assessment and the Resettlement of Population Framework will be 
carried out and completed before appraisal, by November 30, 2009.  They will be disclosed 
both in country and at the Bank InshoShop.  
 
The sector unit has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nathalie Lahire 
08/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/10/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel J. Welmond 
08/06/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
