Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/12/2008 
Report No.:  43592
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P107840 
Project Name:  Regional and Local Roads Program Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Andreas Schliessler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (5%);Central government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other trade and integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Regional and Local Roads Program Support Project (and 
of the broader Program) will be a reduced cost of access to markets and services for 
communities served by regional and local roads.  The project objective would be 
achieved mostly by improving the condition and quality of a part of the network of 
Regional and Local roads. The primary target group are road users in general, whose cost 
of using the roads will be reduced.  The project activities will include (i) physical works 
to improve road conditions, thereby reducing road user costs in the short term, and (ii) 
institutional support to improve road management, thereby reducing road user costs in the 
medium and longer term.   
 
3. Project Description 
The following three components have been defined:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Periodic Maintenance of Regional Roads (Euro 34.0 
million). This component will provide funding to cover about 330 km of paved road 
sections in the 2008 
–
2012 period (about 8.7% of all Regional roads). It will include civil 
Page  2
works which can mostly be characterized as localized repairs, periodic maintenance and 
light rehabilitation. It has been agreed that the road sections to be included in this 
component will be those which have been selected through a recent EC-financed study 
carried out by the consulting firm Hydroplan (for details see annex 4). The preparation of 
bidding documents and the 
supervision of works will be financed from FNRR’s regular 
resources as a contribution to the Program.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation and Periodic Maintenance of Local Roads (Euro 32.6 
million). This component would provide funding to cover about 420 km of paved and 
unpaved Local roads over the 2008 – 2012 period (about 5% of all Local roads) and 
would include mostly civil works for localized repairs or replacement of structural layers 
and drainage structures, followed by partial or full asphalt resurfacing or regravelling. It 
will also include the preparation of final bidding documents (based on the submissions 
from Municipalities) and the supervision of works.  
 
Component 3: Institutional support (Euro 3.4 million). This component aims at 
strengthening the Government’s capacity to manage and maintain the network of 
National and Regional roads. It would provide various types of institutional support, such 
as (i) an institutional analysis of the FNRR to identify weaknesses and define actions to 
overcome such weaknesses; (ii) based on the results of the institutional analysis, specific 
measures to address weaknesses within FNRR; (iii) actions related to the implementation 
of the National Road Transport Strategy and the new Road Law; (iv) financial and 
technical audits; and (v) training.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The location of all project roads is throughout the country.  Regional Road sections to be 
improved under the project have already been identified and are described in the Project 
Appraisal Document. Local Roads will be identified by each municipality.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
Mr Bekim Imeri (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will consist mainly of road rehabilitation and potential environmental impacts 
will be temporary and will cause only minor and localized negative effects (dust, noise, 
sourcing and disposal of materials, etc.)  which can be mitigated through well-established 
proper management methods.  For example, ).  However the project overall has been 
classified as Category A as a contingency because there is a possibility of some limited 
new construction in the case of local roads (to be identified at a later stage) under Projet 
Component 2 for Local Roads. This is also why certain safeguard policies are triggered 
for this project (Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural Resources and Involuntary 
Resettlement) - - only as a contingency for the case if any local road subproject may later 
be identified which may trigger those Safeguard Policies.  For the Regional roads (Project 
Component 1)which have now been identified, no new construction is planned.  
Therefore, Component 1 is a Category B component.  
 
Because the project will support a sectoral program of road rehabilitation a Sectoral 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) was prepared and serves as the environmental due 
diligence document for the project.  It includes an Environmental Management Plan 
which addresses all aspects of site management, off-site impacts (sourcing of fill 
materials), worker safety, equipment standards, etc.. and a Monitoring Plan which 
provides basic environmental and social performance indicators and timeframe, outlines 
implementing arrangements and responsibilities, and includes a budget covering all 
proposed measures.  These documents provide for the EA requirements for the already-
identified investments under Component 1.  The SEA also includes an Environmental 
Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) and Environmental Guidelines that 
establish environmental safeguard procedures to be followed for environmental screening 
and for preparing site-specific EIAs and/or EMPs for investments in local roads as 
required, once these are identified during implementation of the program.  Additionally, 
as the project might potentially support construction of new local roads which might 
require land acquisition (e.g. for addition of a short climbing lane at steep sections), the 
SEA contains also a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that will be applied in the 
case of such activities.  
 
The project will have positive indirect impacts on human health and safety through 
decreased number of accidents, reduced air pollution resulting from more constant rates 
of travel speeds on rehabilitated road sections, cleaning up of solid waste from roadside 
drains, and reduced water pollution resulting from rehabilitated drainage systems.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term negative environmental and social impacts are expected.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For rehabilitation and maintenance of already existing road sections no evaluation of 
alternatives is needed as the applicable standards are well defined.   Where new 
construction is considered associated with local roads (e.g. for new small road segments, 
climbing lanes, etc.) the site-specific EIAs will address any feasible alternatives of 
location, alignment, etc.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared a SEA that includes an EMP covering the rehabilitation of 
Regional Roads and an Environmental Assessment and Management 
Framework/Guidelines and Resettlement Policy Framework covering road segments to 
be defined later in the program. The World Bank reviewed the SEA report with the 
Borrower during Appraisal and made recommendations for minor revisions.  
 
The EA institutional capacity of the borrower was assessed during project preparation. It 
was concluded the MoEPP needs to strengthen its capacities, in particular to perform 
duties concerning reviewing EIA studies and enforcing EMP provisions. Currently within 
the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC) and the Fund for National and 
Regional Roads (FNRR) (the project implementing agency), there is no special unit or 
especially designated staff responsible for environmental issues in the road sector, and no  
analytical laboratories that might assist in ensuring compliance with the existing 
legislation, regulations and ecological norms. In this regard it was agreed to provide 
relevant TA to the MoEPP, MTC and NFRR to strengthen their capacity and to ensure 
the environmental requirements will be fully integrated into sectoral policies, and 
program design, as well as into design and implementation of the EIAs of the road 
subprojects. It was also agreed the FNNR will hire a local environmental specialist as 
permanent staff that will get relevant training in EA in the roads sector.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
All major stakeholders were consulted during the SEA study. These included 
representatives from national state institutions, environmental authorities, academia, 
private sector and NGOs. These consultations were conducted at both stages: (i) at the 
stage of scoping, - to discuss the main focus of the SEA and the TORs; and (ii) at the 
stage of finalization of the draft report. The stakeholders agreed with the main SEA 
approaches and recommendations and affirmed their commitment to the project and its 
environmental objectives. Meetings were also held in particular with representatives from 
MoEPP, MTC, MoH and from various environmental NGOs. Furthermore, a special 
workshop to present to the broad public and all interested parties the results and 
recommendations of the SEA was organized by the NFRR on February 15, 2008. The 
SEA summary was translated into Macedonian language and was widely distributed 
among all interested parties, as well as posted on the web site of the MTRI, along with 
the full report in English. A complete SEA (in English and Macedonian) will be kept at 
Page  5
NFRR in Skopje for review by interested parties, as well as for its further 
implementation.  
 
The draft SEA was sent to the InfoShop on January 28, 2008 for public consultation, 
while its final version was sent to InfoShop on March 3, 2008.  
 
The draft SEA was also publicly disclosed earlier in Macedonia on the website of MTC 
(http://www.mtc.gov.mk) on January 23, 2008 and on the website of the MEPP 
(hhtp://www.moepp.gov.mk) on January 29, 2008. A formal in-country consultation 
workshop was held on February 15, 2008. The SEA has been formally accepted by the 
Minister of Environment on March 5, 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/28/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Schliessler 
03/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
03/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bekim Imeri 
03/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
