Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2997 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/29/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID: P103974 
Project Name: Conditional Cash Transfers Project 
Task Team Leader: Snjezana Plevko 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (20%);Health (20%);Pre-primary education (20%);Primary 
education (20%);Secondary education (20%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Child health (P);Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed PDO of the project would be to tie various elements of FYR Macedonia's strategic 
human development agenda into a comprehensive effort to tackle persistent and intergenerational 
deprivation by building the human capital of the most vulnerable groups.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Conditional Cash Transfer Project (CCTP) would envisage four components:  
 
Component I: CASH BENEFIT SYSTEM STREAMLINING ($14.3m).  This component 
would assist Government of Macedonia's efforts to streamline the benefit system supporting the 
poor and vulnerable population groups, and to implement a conditional cash transfer (CCT) 
program.  The program would provide cash transfers to vulnerable families living in poverty to 
encourage them to invest in human capital.  The CCT program would attach conditions to 
existing benefits, and the benefit amount would possibly be increased for a better incentive.  
While the final design of the CCT program that would be implemented in Macedonia is yet to be 
identified, possible options include:  
Page  2
a) 
Education Conditionality on the Child Allowance for parents of 6-18 year olds.  The 
Child Allowance would be means-tested and paid to employed and unemployed parents, 
conditional on their children attending school.  
 
b)
Work Conditionality for adult Social Assistance recipients.  Conditioning the Social 
Assistance (SA) could build the human capital of recipients while at the same time fighting 
informality, by 'keeping beneficiaries busy'.  Empirical evidence proceeds from the UK 'New 
Deal', the similar Swedish and German ('Hartz') Reforms and CCT programs in Latin America.  
 
c) 
The Patronage Nurse Program.  The nurses would function as a 'mobile team' to reach out 
to and engage those who currently fall through the system.  This may involve 'holding people's 
hand' to get an ID, get children registered, register with an EB and gain trust in public services 
again.  They would also serve as key service integrators between the home, schools and social 
services. The project could support the nurses through a revised polyvalent protocol and referral 
map for services; as well as materials; and potentially additional staff contracted from the target 
communities.  
 
Component II: PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION AND CAPACITY BUILDING ($8m).  This 
component would focus on the development of an efficient administrative framework for the 
implementation of the conditional cash transfer program, as well as support the development of 
supply side capacities needed for successful implementation of the program (along with the 
support already provided through existing WB projects).  This would include development and 
implementation institutional framework and administrative infrastructure, identification and 
implementation of business processes needed for successful implementation of the CCTP, and 
capacity building.  In particular, this would involve:  
 
a) 
Oversight of compliance.  The project would review the current processes of eligibility 
verification and enforcement for all cash benefits, and develop and introduce new processes to 
introduce greater effectiveness.  
 
b)
Inter-agency cooperation.  The project would review the legal mandates of each of these 
institutions and develop new responsibilities and a referral map with all stakeholders, for greater 
effectiveness and efficiency.  
 
c) 
Program Administration.  The Program Administration component would support ample 
capacity building, including introducing EB and SWC staff to case management, new ALMP, 
inter-agency cooperation, new IT processes and modern benefit delivery.  It would also include 
training in the monitoring of the program, verifying and enforcing eligibility and preventing 
fraud.  
 
d)
Case Management.  Most SA recipients are unemployed and vary in their ability to work. 
A
modern case management system, centered in the "job seeker" as main client, and developing 
personalized ALMP plans in accordance with beneficiaries' distance to the labor market would 
be implemented under this component.  
 
e) 
Benefit Delivery.  The project would review the existing benefit delivery system, identify 
and options for its improvement (including the development of an alternative benefit delivery 
system), and implement the new system.  
 
Page  3
Component III: IMPACT EVALUATION ($2m).  This component would support the 
development of a sound plan for the introduction of the conditional cash transfers program and a 
rigorous impact evaluation mechanism for the social inclusion program to inform program 
design and report on program effectiveness.  This includes development of institutional capacity 
of the CCT program's implementing agencies to build and update targeting mechanisms and 
registry of beneficiaries, design and administer a system for verifying compliance of conditions 
and a system to track the program's physical and financial progress and monitor operational 
processes. The Project would also support the Government in development of a framework to 
undertake an externally contracted impact evaluation of the program.  
 
Component IV:  PROJECT MANAGEMENT (US$0.7m).  This component would support the 
operation of the PMU, which would be responsible for overseeing project implementation on a 
day-to-day basis in the areas of procurement, financial management and Project monitoring and 
evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
TBD   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A.  No safeguards policies are expected to apply to the proposed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECAVP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/25/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N.A.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Snjezana Plevko 
10/25/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arup Banerji 
10/25/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
