Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3280 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID: P107840 
Project Name: Regional and Local Roads Program Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Andreas Schliessler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (5%);Central government administration (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other trade and integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary objective of the proposed Regional and Local Roads Program would be to reduce 
the cost of access from municipalities throughout Macedonia to markets and services, by 
improving the condition and quality of the network of Regional (=Secondary) and Local roads. 
The Program would also help to create an adequate institutional and financial framework for the 
sustainable investment in Regional and Local road infrastructure. Both objectives are closely 
linked to the objectives stated in the CSP, which is the guiding framework for cooperation 
between the Government and the Bank.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The World Bank sees itself as a partner in a Government Program for Regional and Local Roads 
in Macedonia. The Bank would support the Government in the preparation of such a Program, 
and then participate in its financing, t
ogether with one or several other IFI’s and the 
Government’s own funding.  
 
The following three Program components have been identified at this stage:  
Page  2
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Periodic Maintenance of Regional Roads (â‚¬35.0 million). 
This component would provide funding to cover about 160 km of paved roads in 2008, 2009, 
2010 and 2011 and would include (i) civil works, mostly for repair or replacement of structural 
layers and drainage structures, followed by full asphalt resurfacing; (ii) preparation of bidding 
documents for civil works; and (iii) works supervision and technical audits. Although the 
construction of completely new roads is not foreseen at this time, it cannot be totally excluded, at 
a
very small scale.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation and Periodic Maintenance of Local Roads (â‚¬32.0 million). This 
component would be similar as Component 1 except that the roads would be local roads under 
the jurisdiction of Municipalities. The allocation of project resources to municipalities will be 
based on a formula approach with additional safeguards to ensure that poorer and more remote 
municipalities benefit most. Under the formula to be adopted, each municipality would thus be 
entitled for a specific amount of funds for the rehabilitation and improvement of road located in 
that municipality. Although the construction of completely new roads is not foreseen at this time, 
it cannot be totally excluded, at a very small scale.  
 
Component 3: Institutional support (â‚¬3.0 million). This component would providevarious 
types of support, such as (a) support to the setup and management of the Government’s Regional 
and Local Roads Program, (b) support to the implementation of the National Road Transport 
Strategy. Even though the National Road Transport Strategy has still not been concluded 
(expected in 2008), it is likely that it would include (i) the creation of an institutional and 
financial system for sustainable road network management and maintenance; (ii) the 
modernization of transport sector legislation; (iii) training and capacity building for persons 
working in the road sector (staff of the MoTC, FNRR, municipalities, and road design and 
construction firms); and (iv) specific support to bring Macedonia’s transport system closer to EU 
standards, and to help mobilize EU funding. The component would also finance annual technical 
and financial audits of the entire Program for Regional and Local Roads, and technical assistance 
as needed for the management and monitoring of the Program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All of the road candidates will be identified and analyzed during the design stage. The location 
of the project roads is in various parts of the country, based on the Government's prioritized road 
investment Program for Regional and Local Roads for 2008-2015.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The country has its own EA legal framework that is in line with the WB EA rules and procedures 
as well as with European Union Environmental Impact Assessment Directive (EIA Directive 
85/337/EEC as amended by 97/11/EEC and 2003/35/EC). The approved laws and regulations 
specify relevant requirements for undertaking environmental assessments of potential 
environmental impacts of public and private projects that are likely to have a significant impact 
on the environment before development consent is granted in the form of approval for project 
implementation. Impacts on environment could include impacts on human beings and biological 
diversity; soil, water, air and other natural resources and climate; historical and cultural heritage 
as well as the interaction between these elements. Hence, it is required that before development 
Page  3
consent is granted for certain types of projects in the Republic of Macedonia, an EIA has to be 
carried out. The EIA process is expected to anticipate potential environmental harm and to avoid 
or mitigate such harm while balancing environmental, social and economic objectives. 
Preparation of the Environmental Impact Assessment for specific activities and projects is 
required to be carried out in accordance with the articles 76 to 94 of the Law on Environment. 
The practical implementation of the Law is enabled by adoption of the whole set of the 
secondary legislation that is providing necessary technical details and procedures and officially 
published in Official Gazette No. 74/2005; No. 33/2006).  
 
The Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning has the prime responsibility for 
environmental management, setting and enforcing policies and standards, including the EA 
process. The Ministry has several divisions: of Environmental Management, National Eco-
legislation and Standardization, and Republic Environmental Inspectorate playing key roles 
related to EIA policy making, management, monitoring, and enforcement.  
 
While Macedonia made impressive progress in developing legislation on environmental 
protection and EA, more effective environmental management requires progress with: (i) 
promoting increased use of strategic and sectoral environmental assessments to mitigate any 
serious unanticipated environmental consequences; and (ii) further strengthening of the capacity 
of Ecological Inspectorate to supervise the implementation of environmental monitoring plans 
(EMPs). The institutional capacity of the borrower will be further assessed during project 
preparation and ensuing measures included in the EMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project activities are essentially road rehabilitation and periodic maintenance. It is 
expected that there will be little or no impact on erosion, stability of slopes or 
sedimentation/siltation of rivers. Instead, the rehabilitation of the roads will decrease the erosion 
rate along the roads compared to existing conditions. It is also expected that 
Rehabilitation/Maintenance works will not have any effects on the water resources and water 
quality along the road routes. The impact on natural vegetation associated with operating the 
quarry and borrow areas, and constructing detour and access road to the borrow material pits and 
quarry sites, will not be applicable here - because there will be use of only existing 
borrow/quarry sites.  
 
If any new road sections are to be built, the safeguards relating to environmental and social 
impact will be fully applied. For all new construction activities, a full EIA and EMP will be 
prepared.  
 
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) 
will be prepared for all individual road sub-projects before works start. In addition, a Sectoral 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) that would include an EA Manageme
nt Framework (EAMF) 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
as well as Environmental Guidelines (EG) will be prepared and applied for those road sub-
projects which are not yet identified (second- and third-year works), which will address 
safeguard policies 4.01 and 4.04. The SEA would also include an assessment of policy, legal and 
administrative framework; an institutional strengthening plan in this area; and recommendations 
for sector-wide regulatory changes as well as mitigations measures. The EAMF would describe 
the screening process for identifying subprojects having potentially significant issues that would 
need to be addressed in a sub-project EIA. The Environmental Guidelines would include a 
general assessment of potential impacts along with the proposed generic mitigation measures to 
be undertaken for identified sub-projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
At this stage the road subprojects are not yet identified. The SEA (including EAMF) 
mentioned above will cover the safeguard procedures to be applied for road works in Natural 
Habitats, should they occur.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
At this stage the road subprojects are not yet identified. The SEA (including EAMF) 
mentioned above will cover the safeguard procedures to be applied for road works which could 
affect Physical Cultural Resources, should they occur.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The works under the project would consist in principle of periodic maintenance and light 
rehabilitation only within the existing right-of-way of roads (ROW). However, new road 
construction cannot be totally excluded. If any new road sections are to be built, or any other 
works be done which would require land-taking or involuntary settlement, this safeguard policy 
will be fully applied.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/24/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
SEA to be prepared in late 2007 / early 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Schliessler 
12/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/18/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
12/19/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
