Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3847
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P106675 
Project Name:  MG-Sustainable Health System Development, Phase 2 
Task Team Leader:  Maryanne Sharp 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 8, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 19, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance 
(P);Population and reproductive health (P);Nutrition and food security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
20.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of Madagascar SHSDP II is to contribute to strengthening of 
the national health system and support the MOH’s efforts to increase utilization of 
maternal and child health services and those focusing on communicable diseases.   
 
3. Project Description 
Based on the challenges facing the health sector, SHSDP II will support the following 
components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Delivery of Health Services (US$30 million IDA 
equivalent): The objective of this component is to strengthen the delivery and availability 
of health services at the primary and first referral levels in districts, especially in remote 
areas. To this end, this component will support the strengthening of the capacity of the 
regions, districts and health facilities to better organize, manage and deliver health goods 
and services to all, especially those living in rural and remote areas, but with continuing 
technical support and stewardship from the center. Efficient logistics and sustained 
availability of pharmaceuticals, medical and laboratory equipment and supplies, so 
Page  2
critical for effective delivery of basic health services will also be supported by this 
component. As such, this component would seek to address offer-side bottlenecks to 
access and use of basic services through (i) performance-based grants to regions, districts 
and health centers; (ii) strengthening the distribution and management of the 
pharmaceutical logistical supply chain; (iii) performance-based contracting of basic 
health service delivery; and (iv) support to the functionality of health centers. The 
expected result of this component would be the improvement of delivery of basic health 
services at regional, district and facility level.  
 
Component 2: Pilot Demand Side Interventions for Basic Health Services (IDA 
financing: US$15 million equivalent): The objective of this component is to pilot 
different mechanisms and approaches designed to increase the utilization of basic health 
services by stimulating demand. To do so, this component will support the pilot testing, 
on a reasonable scale, of a few different approaches designed to tackle financial and 
geographical barriers to access and to seek to bridge the information gap and increase 
awareness to maximize utilization of cost-effective interventions for mother and child, 
including family planning, maternal and reproductive health services, childhood illnesses 
and other critical public health domains, such as malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS. 
These mechanisms will target the poor and most vulnerable population in the areas with 
the poorest indicators, typically the most remote and rural areas. The component includes 
activities aimed at (i) improving physical access to health services; (ii) removing 
financial barriers to access; (iii) ensuring universal access to maternal and neonatal 
emergency care; and (iv) promoting behavioral changes to increase demand at the 
community level.  
 
Component 3: Development and Management of Human Resources (IDA financing: 
US$3 million equivalent): The objective of this component is to improve human resource 
management in the health sector, with particular emphasis on rural areas, and strengthen 
capacity of the Human Resource Department of the MOH. To this end, this component 
will finance the development of a Health Sector Human Resource Development Plan as 
well as career plans for medical personnel. In addition, innovative and performance-
based mechanisms will be developed and implemented to provide incentives to rural-
based personnel and promote enhanced performance of such personnel. Some such 
mechanisms have been developed and are being piloted under SHSDP I and others will 
be developed. Lessons from the pilot will be incorporated into the scaling up and 
implementation phase of these mechanisms. This component will also support selective 
training of health personnel on priority areas of health service delivery, and in 
management for results. The expected results of this component would be a more 
equitable distribution of qualified medical and paramedical personnel in specified rural 
regions.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Monitoring and Evaluation (IDA 
financing: US$7 million equivalent): This component will continue to support a number 
of system development and institutional strengthening activities at the central and 
decentralized levels, including the following sub-components: (i) supporting the central 
level in areas such as public expenditure management and governance, procurement, 
financial management, internal auditing, and program oversight, which will complement 
and increase efficiency of the continuing support provided through PGDI; (ii) 
strengthening the regional and districts levels, including better defining roles and 
Page  3
responsibilities and strengthening capacities in planning, programming and budgeting; 
(iii) strengthening the MOH and its decentralized levels on medical waste management; 
and (iv) consolidating the progress in operationalizing the integrated health M&E system 
for the whole sector (public and private providers and all sources of funds) as well as 
improving capacity in data collection, management, dissemination and use of data for 
decision-making at all levels of the system.  This will include direct support to the 
national Health Management and Information System (HMIS) and statistical capacity 
building. The principal expected result of activities financed by this component would be 
the improvement of planning, budgeting, management, implementation, and monitoring 
capacity at the central, regional, district and community levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will take place throughout Madagascar.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Sector Investment Loan will support four components which will 
contribute to the strengthening of the health system and enhance the institutional capacity 
of the Ministry of Health to improve access and utilization of health services. No 
negative environmental impacts will be provided by the proposed project. However, the 
improvement of access and utilization of health services could increase the production of 
medical waste in the different types of health facilities which could adversely affect the 
environment and infect the local population if not managed and eliminated appropriately.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The National Policy on the Medical Waste Management was adopted in September 2005 
by an interdepartmental decree No 2006-680 of the September 12, 2006 and approved by 
the Ministry of the Environment. The analysis of this policy shows that there is 
ownership by the health sector of the problems and management of medical waste. The 
National Policy has developed the medical waste management protocol standards that 
must be adapted for each health center depending on location. Moreover, the Ministry of 
Health has demonstrated clear ownership of the problems related to management of 
medical waste.  
 
In fact, the health sector has put in place three departments to implement the policy: (i) 
Service d’assainissment et de Genie Sanitaire (SAGS), (ii) Service des Vaccination (SV); 
and (iii) Sous Programme Precaution Universelle (SPPU). The SPPU is in charge of the 
characterization of the sorting and collection system of medical waste following the 
medical waste management template in Appendix 1 of the National Policy. The SAGS is 
in charge of designing and providing the elimination equipment for each health center, 
and since January 2007, has already put in place several removable incinerators 
(Montfort) as well as simple incinerators. The SAGS has been an integral player in the 
development of the policy as well as information, education and communication activities 
and training conducted at various levels. However, much more work needs to be done on 
ensuring that the norms outlined in the policy are applied to each type of health center. 
The most recent supervision mission developed an action plan in collaboration with the 
SAGS to prepare a detailed plan and timetable to reinforce the implementation of 
technical medical waste norms for different types of health centers, along with 
performance indicators and budget. This plan will be completed by appraisal and will 
serve as input into the project appraisal document.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The waste management plan will be re-disclosed in country and at the InfoShop. 
Stakeholders were involved in the development and updating of the plan and participate 
in the regular supervision of activities linked to the Medical Waste Management Plan.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/23/2007 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/16/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryanne Sharp 
10/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
10/15/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
10/15/2008 
Comments:   
