Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3154 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P102135 
Project Name: Madagascar Transport 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Graftieaux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (75%);Roads and highways (25%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
58.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project supports (i) the CAS objective to remove constraints to investment and 
growth and (ii) the Madagascar Action Plan commitment to connected infrastructure. By 
building upon the achievements of the on-going APL II and III, the proposed project will meet 
the following specific objective: reduce transport costs, in particular in the Antananarivo 
–
Antsirabe – Tamatave – Lake Alaotra area, through preserving and consolidating transport 
infrastructure assets.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To meet the Project Development Objective, three main components have been identified:  
 
Component 1: Rail Sector, Northern Rail Network rehabilitation (US$ 37 million)  
 
This component, which would use two thirds of the loan amount, would finance the completion 
of the rehabilitation of the Northern Railway Network and will include:  
 
•
Replacement of wood sleepers by metallic or concrete sleepers  
Page  2
•
Rehabilitation and renewal of 70 kilometers of rail track.  
 
•
Construction of rail access sidings to large industries such as a cement factory, 
agribusiness factories and storage facilities, which are future and/or existing important users of 
rail transport.  
 
•
Rehabilitation and fencing of the urban sections of the line going through Antananarivo 
and Manjankandriana (city located approx. 50km east of Antananarivo) for safety reasons.  
 
•
Rehabilitation of eleven metallic bridges.  
 
•
Improvement of the drainage of the rail embankment  
 
•
Signaling and railroad crossings to improve safety, especially in Antananarivo and 
Toamasina.  
 
Once these works are completed, all the key rehabilitation works needed on the Northern 
Railway Network will be done and no further heavy investments should be needed in the 
short/medium term. It will make it possible for the rail to reach an expected annual freight 
volume of 675,000 tons in 2012, a 186% increase since the first year of the concession (236,000 
tons).  
 
Component 2: Road Sector (US$ 15.5 million)  
 
2.1 Axe Load Control on the National Road Network (US$ 3.5 million)  
 
This component aims at equipping the national road network with the required infrastructure to 
make possible the enforcement of the current axle load legislation for approximately 80% of the 
truck trips in Madagascar. It will finance stationary and mobile weighing facilities, and technical 
assistance as needed, in order to preserve Madagascar’s road assets and make possible an 
eventual re-involvement of the World Bank and other partners in Madagascar’s road sector.  
 
2.2 Provision for cyclone-related damages on the road network (US$ 3.5 million)  
 
Madagascar is regularly hit by severe cyclones during the rainy season which often affect 
bridges and roads, cutting vital links to areas that become totally isolated until traffic is restored. 
This component would be used “on call” as needs arise on various sections of the national 
network.  
 
2.2 Jetties for the APL3-financed ferries (US$ 1.5 million)  
 
APL3 financed 29 ferries, most of which are located along the national road network, on the 
wide rivers along the East Coast, and which make it possible to travel from Maroansetra to Fort-
Dauphin by road for cars and trucks up to 25 tons. Some jetties have already been built but more 
are needed to provide for safe and smooth decking/mooring, especially in bad weather 
conditions, in order to avoid an early deterioration of the ferries and to ensure the sustainability 
of the investment made under APL3.  
 
2.3 Urban Works (US$ 7 million)  
 
Four key pieces of key infrastructure will be rebuilt / rehabilitated under this component:  
 
•
The 2 tunnels of Antananarivo (built some 70 years ago, these two tunnels arecrucial road 
links in the capital city). Their overall structure is very vulnerable, showing signs of structural 
fatigue, worsened by serious water infiltrations. Any serious problem with one of these tunnels 
that would entail closing them down for some period of time would simply paralyze the city 
traffic):  
Page  3
•
The bridge of Manakara (35.000 inhabitants) and the bridge of Maroantsetra. (30.000 
inhabitants)  
 
The bridge in Manakara is about to collapse while the one in Maroansetra has collapsed 
already, forcing the inhabitants either to use pirogues or to make a long detour.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance, Institutional Development and Capacity Building (US$ 5.5 
million)  
 
This component will assist the Government to continue the ambitious transport sector 
organizational reforms supported under the three APLs, through support to the:  
 
3.1 APMF (US$ 3.0 million)  
 
This component will finance:  
 
•
Technical assistance for carrying out studies key to the development of the port sector 
such as (i) a National Master Plan for Ports, and (ii) engineering studies and definition of 
institutional arrangements for the dredging of existing port basins to increase/maintain water 
depth and for draft monitoring. If so requested by the Government, the credit will finance 
technical studies needed to complete those carried out under JBIC funding for the extension of 
the port of Toamasina and/or the airport of Ivato-Antananarivo.  
 
•
Training for APMF ship inspectors and port administrators, as well as institutional 
strengthening in areas such as regulation, handling of emergency/distress situations, etc.  
 
•
Some complementary  investments needed to make Malagasy ports comply with 
theMARPOL and SOLAS conventions, and with the ISPS Code (on minimum security 
arrangements for ships, ports and government agencies in the port sector).  
 
3.2  ARM (US$ 1.0 million)  
 
This component will finance continued support to the ARM (operating costs, which will be co-
funded with the EU and the AfDB, feasibility/engineering studies).  
 
A
gradual withdrawal of donors is sought and over time the ARM is expected to cover their 
operating costs.  A set of options to make this possible has recently been presented by the 
Ministry of Public Works upon request from the donors, including the establishment of a tax on 
ARM-managed contracts, and direct budget support from the Ministry and/or the Road 
Maintenance Fund. While this issue is being debated and before the Ministry comes to a decision 
on this, donors support is needed to ensure the durability of a new and still fragile institution.  
 
3.3  Ministry of Public Works and Meteorology - Ministry of Transport (US$ 1.5 million)  
 
The re-focusing of the Ministries on their core responsibilities, including regulation and 
strategic planning, while operational aspects are to be gradually delegated to ad hoc agencies 
such as the ARM or the APMF, makes necessary a retraining of the Ministries staff and technical 
support to smooth the transition towards this newly-implemented institutional set-up.  
 
Institutional Arrangements  
 
Component 1 would be under the responsibility of MT. Components 2 would be under the 
responsibility of MPWM, through the ARM, while component 3 would be under shared 
responsibility of the two ministries.  
 
Page  4
The estimated cost for all the above components including contingencies is US$ 58 million over 
an implementation period of four years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
As mentioned in the project description, specific sites to the project are the northern railway 
network (Antananarivo-Toamasina, Moramanga-Ambatondrazaka, Antananarivo-Antsirabe), axe 
load control facilities to be installed on various points of the national road network, urban works 
in Antananarivo and in two east coastal towns ( Mananara and Maroantsetra).   
 
E.  Borro
wer’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In the railway sector, a strong environmental unit is operational, composed by eight fulltime 
technicians. This unit has adequate experience to implement and monitor the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). Currently, under the railway component which is part of the ongoing  
Transport Infrastructure Investment Project - APL3: (i) the EMP of the Northern Railway 
Network prepared in 2003 is implemented in a manner satisfactory to the Bank, (ii) the 
Resettlement Action Plan approved by the Bank in July 2007 is implemented in compliance with 
the RAP, but with one year of delay due to the administrative issues slowing down the delivery 
of building permits by the Municipality of Antananarivo. In this regard, the PAPs are informed 
monthly on the status of RAP implementation and are an active actor of the project. It is 
expected that the railway component will continue to provide: (i) employment in routine track 
maintenance and slope stabilization, and (ii) further opening-up of the rural areas to spur and 
sustain the development of agricultural activities. During the last field visit, the Bank team 
observed the participation of villagers associations and of the population, who are working along 
the rail-track, successfully fighting erosion through slope stabilization activities.  
 
In the road sector, the Road Authority of Madagascar has an Environmental and Social Unit in 
charge of formulating, implementing and monitoring safeguard aspects. This Environmental and 
Social Unit of the ARM has the sufficient tools and capacity to manage the safeguard aspects and 
also has adequate experience on the implementation of the safeguard instruments in the road 
sector in a satisfactory manner.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTTR) 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed IDA project has a category B rating with partial assessment. Components 1 
and 2 will finance civil works. Component 1 on the Northern rail network will finance the 
rehabilitation of existing railway lines within the existing right-of-way with no alignment 
modification. Component 2 will finance the rehabilitation of 2 existing tunnels in Antananarivo, 
the reconstruction/reinforcement of 2 bridges in Manakara and Maroansetra, the construction of 
truck weighing facilities on the national roads and the construction of jetties for ferries.  
 
As far as the Northern rail network is concerned, the rehabilitation of existing railway lines 
may entail potential environmental impacts such as the erosion of slopes, obstruction of water 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
flows, noise and dust.  The rehabilitation of the infrastructure of the Northern Railway Network 
is expected to have positive indirect effects on the national and local economic development, 
particularly for isolated areas. No protected areas or cultural sites will be affected by such works. 
As far as the bridges are concerned:  
 
In Maroansetra, the bridge collapsed already a few years ago. It will be rebuilt with a 
prestressed concrete deck on the same spot as the old one, but using cyclone-proof norms. The 
existing bridge abutments may be reused and/or reinforced. The remains of the old bridge will be 
removed.  
 
In Manakara, the metallic bridge is severely corroded. The metallic structure will be either 
reinforced or, more likely, replaced by a prestressed concrete deck that will be laid on the 
existing abutments, and additional piers to provide intermediate support between the two shores.  
 
The potential environmental and social impacts of the above-described works are minor and 
can be mitigated easily. The actions envisaged to minimize negative impacts will include: 
elimination of the remains of the old bridge, proper construction waste management, etc.  
 
Due to the fact that the exact locations of the weighing facilities for the national roads are 
still unknown and since the detailed engineering studies for the bridges in Manakara and 
Maroantsetra and for the jetties will not be completed before mid-2009, an ESMF will be carried 
out with the objective to (i) establish clear procedures and methodologies for environmental / 
social review, (ii) specify an appropriate approach to manage, possibly eliminate, and otherwise 
mitigate negative impacts, and (iii) indicate  roles and responsibilities and outline the necessary 
reporting procedures, for managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related to 
these activities.  
 
A
national awareness campaign against AIDS has been carried out under the APL 2 and 
APL 3 transport projects since 2005. These activities have been conducted with the assistance of 
PSI Madagascar (International NGO against AIDS). The Ministries have adopted a National 
Strategy against AIDS approved by the CNLS (national secretary in charge of coordinating the 
AIDS program). The above-described components will benefit from the very same measures and 
programs as those already executed by the Ministries.  
 
Madarail, the private railway company, is and will continue implementing a comprehensive 
HIV/AIDS education campaign for its workforce and the local communities living along the 
railtrack.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Northern Rail Network rehabilitation under component 1, the jetties and the urban works 
under component 2 do not require any resettlement. But since the exact location of the truck 
weighing facilities is still unknown, the safeguard policy on the Involuntary Resettlement OP 
4.12 is triggered. In this respect, the Transport and Public Works sector has adopted a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on July 18, 2002.  If the RPF is applicable, a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) acceptable to the Association, giving details of a program of 
actions, measures and policies consistent with the RPF, will be elaborated and implemented 
before launching the civil works for the weighing facilities.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/12/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA) will be prepared with its Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) for the Northern Railway Network rehabilitation in addition to an 
ESMF for the reconstruction-reinforcement of bridges/tunnels, construction of jetties, and of 
truck weighing facilities for the National roads. To prepare these environmental tools: (i) the 
Railway Company Madarail has contracted a consultant firm to support its Environmental 
and Social Unit in the elaboration of the required EIA (ii) the environmental unit of the Road 
Authority of Madagascar is preparing the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework. The EIA for the railways component and the ESMF will be submitted for the 
Bank’s approvalprior to appraisal. The ESMF, the EIA and the approved EMP will be 
disclosed in the country and at the Infoshop, and the RPF will be also redisclosed prior to 
appraisal.  
 
The Sector Management Unit (SMU) has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard 
responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Graftieaux 
11/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
11/13/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
