Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3717 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P111984 
Project Name: Rural Development Support Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Paavo Eliste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Irrigation and drainage 
(30%);Agricultural extension and research (20%);Animal production (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) of the additional financing credit would remain the 
same as for the original project.  The objective of the project is to increase incomes and reduce 
poverty in rural areas, while preserving the natural resource base.  The target population is poor 
rural communities and producer organizations who are involved in agricultural production.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The RDSP additional financing credit has four components: (A) Productive Investments; (B) 
Support Services; (C); and (D) Project Administration and Monitoring.  
 
(A) Productive Investments (US$15.0 million).  The component would support investments for 
demand-driven productive sub-projects for the same beneficiaries as the original project (i.e. 
small farmer associations and producer organizations) and finance the same menu of productive 
activities (rural economic infrastructure, productive agricultural investments, nonagricultural 
rural productive activities and capacity building support to producer associations).  The 
component would finance both: (i) inclusive sub-projects (investments and related support 
services) and (ii) support services, such as advisory services, training or market studies to rural 
communities and producer organizations.  The focus would be on food security and natural 
Page  2
resource management in isolated areas which are not well linked to markets, and on the 
development of value chains in areas well connected to markets.  The main difference from the 
original PSDR credit will be that the level of matching grant contribution from beneficiaries is 
not fixed any more, but will be tailored by the specific nature of the sub-projects and the 
characteristics of the beneficiaries.  A particular attention would be given to the design and 
screening of sub-projects (economic, social and environmental impacts) and to the provision of 
implementation support to beneficiaries and building synergies with on-going private sector and 
micro-credit activities.  
 
(B) Support Services (US$0.7million).  This component would support applied agricultural 
research.  Specifically the component would provide funding to: (i) support the efforts of the 
FOFIFA and FIFAMANOR to disseminate new technologies developed under the RDSP to 
producers organizations; and (ii) support FRDA to develop adaptive, on-demand, research 
programs as identified by producer organizations and private sector.  The component is expected 
to further improve the relevance of FOFIFA and the FRDA research programs and strengthen 
their internal efficiency in dissemination their research results on the ground.  
 
(C) Capacity Building and Policy Development (US$ 0.9 million).  The component would 
support the following activities: (i) assistance to the MAEP for the developing and 
operationalizing its proposed Agricultural Sector Program (ASP); (ii) strengthening of MAEP's 
Policy Planning Department (UPDR) and its Regional Directorates (DRDR) to ensure 
satisfactory implementation and monitoring of ASP implementation; (iii) strengthening of 
MAEP's main partners in the planning and implementation of the ASP, in particular the regional 
Rural Development Committees (GTDR); and (iv) assistance to the main  "inter-professional"  
crop associations to develop their capacity to participate in policy analysis/making and to 
improve the management of their respective value chains as it relates to the public goods and 
services.  
 
(D) Project Administration and Monitoring (US$3.4 million).  This component would support: 
(i) incremental operating costs of the project management and administration, including the 
Project Support Unit at the National and Regional levels (i.e. repair and replacement of vehicles 
and equipment, staff and non-staff operating costs); (ii) consulting services for sub-projects 
preparation, appraisal, implementation and monitoring; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation, 
including project's financial audits and external impact evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The RDSP is the only donor-financed project in the sector that has a nation-wide scope - it 
operates in all the country's 22 regions, either its own or in close collaboration with other donors 
supporting similar activities.  The original RDSP was active in 72% of rural communes, 51% of 
which were located in remote areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project implementation arrangements include environmental units at regional levels which 
are staffed with an environmental specialist.  There is an environmental coordinator at the central 
office of the NPIU.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The PSDR additional financing credit has the same scope and activities as the original PSDR.  
Therefore it is expected that additional financing credit will not raise any new safeguard issues.  
 
The project’s environmental safeguards performance has been satisfactory.  No new 
environmental risks are expected to arise under additional financing credit.A full environmental 
assessment (EA) for the rural development sector has been carried out in 2001. This assessment 
(together with the accompanying Environmental Management Plan), provides a systematic 
analysis of all potential environmental and social adverse impacts of the implementation of the 
sub-projects supported under the PSDR and fully meets the Bank’s safeguard requirements.  
Specifically,it provides: (i) a diagnostic of each sub-sector (forestry, fisheries, research, 
agriculture, livestock) in terms of policy, institutional, regulations, conventions relevant to 
environment preservation; (ii) the analysis of typical sub-projects' impacts on the environment; 
and (iii) mitigation measures to limit the identified negative impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The main issues identified by the EA were related to soil fertility and erosion, forest 
degradation and watershed protection and use of chemical inputs.  On the basis of the EA's 
typology of sub-projects, the PSDR established mechanisms for the screening, supervision and 
monitoring of sub-projects with regard to potential negative impacts.  Potentially 
environmentally sensitive sub-projects have been subjected to an additional environmental 
screening, which identify appropriate mitigation measures.  The agriculture research component 
(Support Services) would continue to pay specific attention to: (i) technologies which sustain 
natural resource base and avoid environmental degradation, including deforestation, loss of soil 
fertility and soil erosion; and (ii) Integrated Pest Management (IPM) to reduce pesticides use.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No further safeguard-related studies are needed for the Additional Financing as it has the 
same scope and activities as the original PSDR. The original Environmental Assessment for 
the RDSP was disclosed January 31, 2001 and was again submitted to Infoshop on June 9, 
2008.  
 
The Sector Management Unit has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paavo Eliste 
05/27/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
06/01/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
