Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3942 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P111120 
Project Name: Madagascar Education for Growth 
Task Team Leader: Michel J. Welmond 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (35%);Secondary education (35%);Vocational training (30%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will closely support the MAP and the government’s strategy for post-basic 
education. The proposed Project Development Objective is as follows:  
 
Support reforms in post-basic education for improved quality and relevance, equitable access, 
and better system governance, management and efficiency.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be selective in its approach. Although it will cover all three sub-sectors, it will 
focus on building the policy and regulatory framework for supporting sustainable development 
of post-basic education, launching reforms in governance, financing and human resource 
management and targeted investments to improve quality, diversify access and enhance equity.  
The project will have the following four components.  
 
Component 1: Equitable access to quality senior secondary education (estimated cost: US$ 14.0 
million)  
Page  2
This component supports the government’s secondary education reform program, which aims to 
graduate more students who master a core set of competencies and are better prepared for further 
learning and labor market entry.  It includes the following four sub-components:  
 
1.
Curriculum reform that ensures a common core set of competencies to all secondary school 
graduates and a flexible range of elective courses to prepare students for further learning and the 
workplace.  
 
2.
A
competitive school development fund, which finances initiatives that encourage schools 
(existing and new) to increase the quality, efficiency and relevance of instruction.  
 
3.
A
scholarship program to increase access for students from poorer households and from 
selected regions/districts.  
 
4.
New secondary schools, which adopt innovative models of provision and will meet criteria 
established by competitive school development fund, in order to receive financing.  
 
Component 2: Provision of demand-driven Technical and Vocational Education (US$ 2.5 
million)  
 
This component supports efforts to improve the link between TVET and the needs of the 
economy and labor market.  It establishes mechanisms for regulating and financing demand-
driven vocational training provision. In this first phase, the TVET component will focus on 
selected sectors, rather than the whole economy.  It has two sub-components:  
 
1.
A
National Training Agency (NTA) which oversees the quality and relevance of TVET 
provision, starting with selected economic sectors.  
 
2.
A
competitive fund for vocational training, which finances initiatives that promote the 
provision of demand driven TVET, in the above selected sectors.  
 
Component 3: Equitable access to quality tertiary education (US$ 39.0 million)  
 
This component supports government efforts to implement a full-scale reform of tertiary 
education.  It aims to catalyze the reforms under implementation. Furthermore, it will create 
incentives for the improvement of the quality and relevance of tertiary education institutions.  
Finally, it establishes tertiary education institutions of reference.  It includes four sub-
components.  
 
1.
Regulatory frameworks and agencies to benchmark, finance, and promote better quality and 
relevance of tertiary education, as well as to accompany the tertiary education reform process 
(e.g., an Agency for Quality Assurance and Accreditation; a funding mechanism and formula to 
promote cost-effectiveness).  
 
2.
A
competitive fund, which finances initiatives that encourage tertiary education institutions 
to improve their efficiency, adopt strategic managerial reforms, and focus on quality of training  
 
3.
An International University of Madagascar (IUM) that will serve as reference for the rest of 
the Malagasy tertiary education system and help establish partnerships with overseas 
universities.  
 
4.
Institutes of Science and Technology (IST) that provide diverse types of tertiary education 
provision (e.g., short-cycle degree programs) that are closely linked to the labor market.  
 
Component 4: Strengthened governance of post-basic education (US$ 4.5 million)  
 
1. A Malagasy Qualification Framework that provides a road map for life long learning and 
greater recognition of post-basic education certification.  
Page  3
2. A restructured and reorganized Ministry of Education (MEN) that better manages the tertiary 
education reform process and oversees a more decentralized and flexible tertiary education 
system.  
 
3.
Project operations and monitory capacity to ensure a timely, results-based implementation of 
the post-basic education strategy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Urban and rural - nation wide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The MEN will be the main implementing agency. Over the last three years, the MEN has built 
capacity to develop and implement the basic education reform and lead donor alignment. This 
effort has been strongly supported by the Bank’s education team and other donors. Support from 
the Bank’s Governance project (PGDI) has strengthened budget management capacity in the 
sector as a whole, but has been more successful in basic education.  This capacity is being 
developed for post-basic education. The MEN has constituted a Technical Working Group 
(TWG), comprising national specialists from outside the Ministry and supported by international 
consultants. The TWG is responsible for project preparation and is expected to become the 
project coordination body. It works within the Ministry and reports to the Program Nodal 
Officer, the Director General of Higher Education, who assures the coordination with the 
Director General of TVET.  Other instances will be created to oversee the implementation of the 
project and ensure that it remains in phase with the overall Post-Basic education reform (e.g., a 
Steering Committee and an Advisory Committee).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Category is B.  The Madagascar Education for Growth Project has four 
components including increasing access to quality secondary education through the construction 
of schools of reference as well as increasing vocational training through the construction of 
institutes of sciences and technology (ISTs). The schools and ISTs construction could generate 
potential negative impacts on the environmental and social but are well understood, unlikely to 
be significant, and readily manageable. The main potential environmental issues associated with 
the sub component include health effects to construction workers during construction, land 
disturbance / erosion or land acquisition  (construction), waste management for the schools, 
noise (primarily during construction), pressure to the forest resources for the needs of woods for 
the construction and goods like tables for the classrooms.  Therefore an ESMF should be 
prepared with an annex that contains the general environmental and social clauses that will bind 
the building contractors/project officials towards respecting environmental and social diligence 
during the civil works. The final ESMF will be available before appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition, compensation and resettlement of people seem inevitable for certain new 
secondary school and IST (Institutes of Sciences and Technology) constructions. This is a social 
issue of critical concern to Government and the World Bank as its impact on poverty if left 
unmitigated, is negative immediate and can be wide spread. The new secondary schools and ISTs 
constructed in several localities could result on involuntary resettlement and lands acquisition. 
Actually, the Ministry of National Education could use the National Law on the Land 
Acquisition which is different with the Bank Policy on the Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12. 
Therefore, it is proposed here to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework for the proposed 
Madagascar Education for Growth project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/04/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Ministry of Education of Madagascar will prepare and submit an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prior to appraisal. The ESMF and RPF will be 
disclosed at HQ (InfoShop) as well as in the Country Office (PIC).  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): In compliance with the World Bank OP 4.12 
on Involuntary Resettlement, the Ministry of National Education shall implement the 
following principles: (i) Wherever possible, avoidance or minimization of resettlement and 
land acquisition, through investigation of all viable alternative sites or designs of new 
institutions, (ii)  Where land acquisition or impacts on livelihoods cannot be avoided, 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
affected people must be assisted to improve or at least restore their livelihoods to their pre-
project levels with a particular attention shall be paid to vulnerable groups, (iii)  
Compensation shall be based on full replacement value, and (iv) Affected people must be 
consulted with, and have opportunities to participate in all key stages of the preparing and 
implementing involuntary resettlement and compensation activities. For new schools 
constructions entailing displacement of people, resettlement plans will be prepared by the 
MEN in conformity with this prepared Resettlement Policy Framework, submit for Bank 
clearance, disclosed, implemented before the new schools construction will be financed by 
the proposed project.  
 
The PAD will outline specific criteria for sub-projects with major resettlement or 
environmental impacts (and which will then require prior review and clearance of RAPs or 
EAs by the Bank), assess the governments capacity to conduct prior review and clearance of 
sub-projects with minor impacts (while sub-projects with minor impacts, without prior 
review, will be audited by the Bank rather than reviewed prior to implementation), and 
specify which auditing indicators will be used.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel J. Welmond 
11/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
11/03/2008 
Comments:   
