Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3919
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P113134 
Project Name:  Madagascar - Emergency Food Security and Reconstruction Project 
Task Team Leader:  Philippe Auffret 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: November 25, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (35%);Primary education (20%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (15%);Roads 
and highways (10%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P);Social safety nets (P);Social risk mitigation 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Natural disaster management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.40
0.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objectives of the Project are to (i) increase access to short-term 
employment in targeted food-insecure areas; and (ii) restore access to social and 
economic services following natural disasters in targeted communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
The Project would comprise the following four components:  
 
•
Component 1: Social safety net (cash-for-work) (US$12.3 million). This 
component would finance a cash-for-work program to increase access to short-term 
employment in targeted food-insecure areas.  By providing employment, this component 
would raise disposable income, and thus improve food consumption of vulnerable groups 
including women.  This component would also provide training to the agencies involved 
in its implementation.  
 
Page  2
•
Component 2: Community-driven basic infrastructure (US$8.0 million).  This 
component would finance community-based infrastructure sub-projects in order to 
increase access to social and economic services among participating communities.  The 
Project would finance anti-erosion sub-projects, water points, feeder roads, small 
irrigation schemes, etc.   This component would also provide training to the agencies 
involved in its implementation.  
 
•
Component 3: Rehabilitation and reconstruction in response to natural disasters 
(US$12.8 million).  This component would restore access to social and economic services 
(schools, health centers, small roads, water systems, etc.) in the aftermath of catastrophic 
events including cyclones.  This component would also provide training to the agencies 
involved in its implementation.   
 
•
Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation, and audit 
(US$6.9million).  This component would provide support in the form of technical 
advisory services and other material assistance for the benefit of the FID to facilitate 
efficient Project management, monitoring and evaluation and audit.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Poor rural and urban communities nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The community-based infrastructure (the anti-erosion sub-projects, water points, feeder 
roads, small irrigation schemes, etc.) and the rehabilitation and reconstruction in response 
to natural disasters (sub-projects schools, health centers, small roads, water systems, etc.) 
Page  3
could have adverse environmental impacts. The sub-projects financed by the Project will 
be small in scale. Consequently their potential adverse impacts will be limited.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to 
future investments.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this project is part of the Government's local development program, alternatives 
were not discussed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower under FID project is familiar with WB safeguard policies as they have 
managed the implementation of safeguard tools for all projects developed for the past 8 
years. This capacity would be maintained under the proposed Project.  Due to the fact 
that the exact locations of the types of investments are still unknown, an Environmental 
Assessment of the sub-projects potentially to be financed with an analysis of the 
institutional capacity on the environmental management has been prepared in 1999 and 
an Environmental Manual has been adopted. This manual has been further refined to 
incorporate the lessons learned from on years of accumulated experience with the 
implementation of the Community Development Project.  More recently, the manual was 
revised to incorporate the lessons from an ex-post environmental impact assessment of 
sub-projects recommended by the September 2007 Quality at Entry Assessment (QEA) 
for the second additional financing to the Community Development Project. The 
Environmental Manual includes an assessment of environmental impacts and mitigation 
measures of sub-projects.  More specifically, this manual describes: (i) the screening 
procedures and classification process of sub-projects; (ii) the required mitigation 
measures; (iii) the monitoring and evaluation system to follow-up on the environmental 
impact of sub-projects and on the implementation of mitigation measures.  It also defines 
the roles and responsibilities of the entities involved in sub-project preparation and 
implementation including community associations, local consulting firms, construction 
firms, etc.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The revision of the Environmental Manual is being undertaken through a consultative 
process involving all stakeholders and in partnership with the seven existing inter-
regional Directorates of previous FID project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/11/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  5
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe Auffret 
11/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
11/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
11/10/2008 
Comments:   
