Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3799
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P111984 
Project Name:  Rural Development Support Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Paavo Eliste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Irrigation and drainage 
(30%);Agricultural extension and research (20%);Animal production (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
6.10
6.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) of the additional financing credit is the same as 
for the original project. The objective of the project is to increase incomes and reduce 
poverty in rural areas, while preserving the natural resource base. The target population 
are poor rural communities and producer organizations who are involved in agricultural 
production.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will fund productive investments under Component A, and support 
continuation of critical agricultural research and policy development activities under 
Components B and C.  
 
(A) Productive Investments (US$28.2 million).  The component will finance the same 
menu of demand-driven productive activities for the same beneficiaries as the original 
project. Specifically, the component will finance the following types of sub-projects: (i) 
investments in productive rural infrastructure; (ii) productive agricultural activities; (iii) 
productive non-agricultural activities; and (iv) provision of advisory services and 
Page  2
capacity building support to POs.  It is expected that the AF credit will finance about 
2,200 sub-projects of the types (i)-(iii) and about 3,800 capacity building activities. In 
remote areas, not well linked to markets, particular attention will be given to increasing 
producer’s on-farm productivity and food security. In areas that are well connected to 
markets, the focus will be on the development of value chains where POs participate. The 
main change from the original RDSP will be that the level of matching grant contribution 
for sub-projects will no longer be uniform but tailored to the specific nature of the 
activity (i.e. infrastructure or productive activities), the characteristics of the beneficiaries 
(i.e. degree of integration into agricultural markets), and their access to financial services.  
Greater attention will also be given to the provision of more effective implementation 
support to POs and better linkages to micro-finance institutions for increased access to 
savings and credit services.  
 
(B) Support Services (US$ 1.5 million). This component will provide support for the 
strengthening of the capacity of main agricultural research institutions in the preparation 
of the Government’s forthcoming SWAP and better dissemination of the stock of new 
and promising technologies. The component will finance: (i) preparation of the National 
Agricultural Research Strategy; (ii) the institutional audit of the National Center for 
Applied Research for Rural Development (FOFIFA) and the Competitive Agricultural 
Research Fund (FCRA), to identify the reforms necessary for improving their 
organization, staffing, internal processes and financing mechanisms; (iii) establishment of 
on-farm demonstration plots and dissemination of new technologies; (iv) production and 
multiplication of improved seed and planting material for the distribution to POs; and (v) 
implementation of priority on-demand adaptive research programs.  
 
(C) Capacity Building and Policy Development (US$2.1 million).  The component will 
support the following activities: (i) support to the MAEP for the operationalization of the 
ASP; (ii) strengthening the policy, planning and monitoring capacity of MAEP's Policy 
Planning Department, Regional Directorates, and its main partners at regional level – i.e. 
Regional Governments and stakeholder groups such as Regional Rural Development 
Committees (GTDRs) – to ensure satisfactory implementation and monitoring of the 
ASP, at national and regional levels; (iii) support to the establishment of ASCs and 
RADFs; and (iv) assistance to the main ‘inter-professional’ crop-specific associations to 
develop their capacity to participate in policy analysis/making and improve the 
management of their respective value chains.  
 
(D) Project Administration and Monitoring (US$4.3 million).  The component will 
support: (i) the operating costs of the project management units, at national and regional 
levels; (ii) activities related to the information/mobilization of POs, screening of sub-
projects, mobilization of the technical assistance necessary for detailed preparation/ 
implementation of sub-projects; and (iii) project’s monitoring and evaluation, including 
project's financial audits and external impact evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The RDSP has a nation-wide scope - it  
Page  3
operates in all the country’s 22 regions. The original RDSP was active in 3/4 of rural 
communes, 1/2 of which were located in remote areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The AF financing credit has the same scope and activities as the original project.  No new 
environmental risks have been identified.  Therefore, the safeguards category “B” 
remains unchanged, since it is expected that AF credit will not raise any new safeguard 
issues.  A full Environmental Assessment (EA) for the rural development sector has been 
prepared in 2001. This assessment, together with the accompanying Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP), provides a systematic analysis of all potential environmental 
and social adverse impacts of the implementation of sub-projects supported under the AF 
and fully meets the Bank’s safeguard requirements.  Specifically, it provides: (i) a 
diagnostic of each sub-sector (forestry, fisheries, research, agriculture, livestock) in terms 
of policy, institutional and regulatory framework, and conventions relevant to 
environment preservation; (ii) the analysis of typical sub-projects' impacts on the 
environment; and (iii) mitigation measures to limit the identified negative impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main issues identified by the EA were related to soil fertility and erosion, forest 
degradation and watershed protection and use of chemical inputs.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No project alternatives are considered.  The project has established mechanisms for the 
screening, supervision and monitoring of sub-projects with regard to potential negative 
environmental impacts.  Potentially environmentally sensitive sub-projects supported 
Page  4
under Component A are subjected to an additional environmental screening, which 
identifies appropriate mitigation measures. Furthermore, the Component B (Support 
Services) of the AF credit will continue to pay specific attention to: (i) technologies 
which sustain natural resource base and avoid environmental degradation, including 
deforestation, loss of soil fertility and soil erosion; and (ii) Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) to reduce pesticides use.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The RDSP has sufficient tools and capacities to manage the safeguard aspects. The 
project has established mechanisms for screening, supervision and monitoring of sub-
projects with regard to potential negative impacts. Potentially environmentally sensitive 
sub-projects have been subjected to an additional environmental screening, which 
identify appropriate mitigation measures. Special attention is given to the environmental 
sustainability of rural development activities and the preservation of the natural resource 
base. For example, the RDSP has collaborated closely with the Bank supported Third 
Environmental Program in promoting sustainable development activities for communities 
living around protected areas. Access to sub-project grants would be subject to 
commitment by beneficiaries not to engage in practices that harm the environment. The 
sub-project funding agreements include MOUs with beneficiaries, which specify 
measures to mitigate environmental impacts and agreed changes in natural resource use 
during implementation. Since 2008, environmental mitigation costs of the approved 
activities are included in sub-project budgets.  
 
The project implementation arrangements include an environmental specialist.  The AF 
credit will continue to provide training and capacity building for project beneficiaries to 
ensure the proper consideration of environmental and social dimensions in the sub-
project design and implementation.  It will continue to reinforce the environmental 
education programs to improve the environmental sensitivity and knowledge of the 
project beneficiaries and to reinforce the monitoring system of sub-projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The safeguard policies were discussed and disclosed during the original project. The AF 
credit will continue to provide training and capacity building for the project beneficiaries 
to ensure proper consideration of environmental and social dimensions in the sub-project 
design and implementation. The project will reinforce environmental education to 
beneficiaries, as well as environmental monitoring of sub-projects.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/09/2008 
 
Page  5
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
In country disclosure was carried out during original project phase.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  6
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paavo Eliste 
07/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
08/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/05/2008 
Comments:  Approved by Acting Sector Manager Francois Le Gall 
