Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/22/2008 
Report No.:  AC3427
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P109607 
Project Name:  ACGF - Madagascar Financial Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Korotoumou Ouattara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (94%);Central government administration (6%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Rural markets (P);Gender (S);Debt management and fiscal sustainability (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
15.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to sustainable financial 
services, particularly to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), and households 
in Madagascar. This will be achieved by providing technical assistance, capacity 
building, and matching grants to financial sector actors and stakeholders to ultimately 
improve competition, and diversification in the sector.  
 
The 
PDO supports the Government’s Financial Sector Strategy whose key objectiveis to 
improve access to financial services by: (i) Improving access to term finance through 
pension and insurance reform and the development of the capital market, starting with 
development of the public debt market; (ii) Expanding access to microfinance services 
through viable and sustainable institutions; and (iii) Strengthening financial sector 
supervision, especially of non-bank financial institutions including insurance, private 
pension plans, postal financial services, and microfinance institutions. The project 
supports implementation of the Government’s strategy by addressing the obstacles to 
providing better access to formalfinancial services.  These obstacles are related to 
Page  2
financial sector infrastructure, quality of financial and credit information, and a 
conducive legal and regulatory environment.  
 
The proposed outcome indicators for the PDO are:  
 
•
Increase in credit to the private sector  
 
•
Increase in the percentage of adult active population with access to formal 
financial services  
 
•
Increased number of sustainable microfinance institutions  
 
•
Improved supervision of non-bank financial institutions   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support activities that would play a catalytic role in achieving the 
objective of increased access to financial services for firms and households in 
Madagascar. Support will focus on areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage, 
i.e. technical assistance, and where there is a track record of successful interventions. 
Project support will, thus, be provided for two main technical components summarized 
below:  
 
Component 1:  Creating an Enabling Environment (US$2 million)  
 
1. 
This component would seek to address the poor financial infrastructure and 
operating environment that constrains the development of the financial sector in 
Madagascar.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1:  Improving Financial Sector Infrastructure and Legal Environment 
(US$1million)  
 
2. 
Support will be provided for the following activities: (i) Assistance to draft 
legislation and the regulatory framework to improve access to credit including secured 
transactions, and commercial registers; (ii) Partnership with IFC to develop a legal 
framework for housing finance; (iii) Technical and legal assistance for appropriate 
legislation on private pension plans and improving the Insurance Act; and (iii) Support 
for improvements in the public credit information system and removing legal obstacles to 
the creation of a private credit bureau.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2:  Strengthening Supervision of the Financial Sector (US$1 million)  
 
3. 
This component will support activities required to improve monitoring and 
supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions in Madagascar. These include: 
(i) Capacity building for the Central Bank and Banking Commission (CSBF) to 
strengthen prudential regulation, monitoring and supervision of the microfinance sector; 
(ii) technical assistance to resolve the issue of efficiently regulating and supervising other 
non-bank financial institutions such as insurance and pension funds by either the Central 
Bank or an independent regulator; and (iii) Technical assistance to the Central Bank for 
strengthening monitoring and supervision of the financial sector and especially Non-Bank 
financial Institutions (NBFIs).  
Page  3
Component 2:  Improving Access to Finance and the Diversity of Financial Products 
(US$10.3 million)  
 
4. 
The Madagascar financial sector is stable but remains shallow and undiversified. 
The dominance of a few major players and the concentration of risks within the narrow 
banking sector inhibit competition and innovation. The banks offer only very basic 
savings and credit products to a select clientele, and access to SME finance is very 
limited. The nascent microfinance industry is growing rapidly, but needs substantial 
capacity building and better oversight if it is to play a significant role in reaching more 
clients and offering a larger array of financial services. This component will address these 
issues through three sub-components focusing on (i) promoting the expansion of SME 
finance by commercial banks, (ii) improving the capacity of microfinance institutions to 
better serve their clients, and (iii) encouraging the adoption of innovative financial 
products and instruments.  
 
Sub-Component 2.1:  Increasing Access to SME Finance (US$5.5 million)  
 
5. 
This sub-component will support activities aimed at scaling up the highly 
successful IDA/IFC partial credit guarantee scheme piloted under the Madagascar 
Growth Poles Project. Scaling up will involve partnering with a number of commercial 
banks to extend credit to SMEs beyond the three growth poles areas. Activities to be 
financed include: (i) a risk-sharing program to be proposed to commercial banks and 
managed by IFC to provide guarantees to commercial banks for SME finance; the 
guarantee will cover portfolios of SME loans originated by partner commercial banks for 
new SME loans; (ii) providing technical assistance to banks to appraise and grant loans to 
new SME clients; and (iii) financing education and business development services to 
enterprises, especially SMEs, to enhance their creditworthiness. Support for these 
activities will be provided through the provision of goods, services and Matching Grants.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2:  Increasing Access to Microfinance (US$3.5 million)  
 
6. 
This sub-component will focus on scaling up the results and impact of the 
ongoing IDA microfinance project aimed at helping MFIs achieve greater outreach and 
sustainability. Support will be provided through the provision of goods, services and 
Matching Grants for the following activities: (i) Strengthen the capacity of MFIs and 
their Apex organizations to operate professionally and efficiently, increase their outreach 
and sustainability and comply with licensing requirements; and (ii) Support the 
establishment of a sustainable training program for microfinance providers.  
 
Sub-Component 2.3:  Developing Financial Products and Instruments (US$1.3 million)  
 
7. 
The focus of this sub-component will be on activities that would help diversify 
the supply of financial services through the adoption of innovative financial products and 
instruments adapted to the dem
ands of the marketplace as per the Government’s request. 
The project will undertake a number of diagnostic and feasibility studies whose findings 
Page  4
and recommendations could be immediately implemented by the project or financed later 
with support from other stakeholders. These include: (i) a feasibility study on the 
development of mobile banking (M-banking) including the definition of the appropriate 
legal and regulatory framework; (ii) A diagnostic and demand survey to design and 
disseminate agricultural loan products; (iii) Diagnosis of financing of selected priority 
sectors and supply chains (tourism, mining, and agri-business), and (iv) FinScope 
demand survey on access to financial services.  
 
Component 3:  Project Implementation, Monitoring & Evaluation (US$1.5 million)  
 
8.       This component will provide administrative support to a project coordinating unit 
and the Central Bank (BCM) for project implementation and conducting monitoring and 
evaluation activities. The ACGF FSP will keep the same implementation arrangements 
established under the IDA microfinance project with some modifications to reflect the 
broader financial sector focus of the project.  Thus, the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) 
for implementation of subcomponent 1.1 and component 2 as well as overall coordination 
of project activities will be  the same as the current Executing Agency for the 
Microfinance Project (AGEPMF).  This non-profit organization created to specifically 
implement the IDA microfinance project will have to be renamed and its by-laws or 
Articles of Association updated to reflect its broader responsibilities which will cover 
more sectors than microfinance. Implementation of project subcomponent 1.2: 
“Supervision of the Financial Sector”, will be the responsibility of the Central Bank 
(BCM) through the General Secretariat of the Banking Commission (CSBF).  Support for 
activities under component 3 will be provided through the provision of services and 
operating cost.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Antananarivo, Madagascar   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Korotoumou Ouattara 
05/22/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
05/22/2008 
Comments:   
