Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3906 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P114350 
Project Name: Madagascar EFA Plan - Catalytic Fund 
Task Team Leader: Patrick Philippe Ramanantoanina 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (85%);Secondary education (15%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
85.10
85.10 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the CF grant is to contribute to increasing the enrolment and 
completion rates in basic education, especially in rural and remote areas. A series of indicators 
outlined in the 2007 revised EFA plan will be used to monitor program and sector performance 
as well as the CF grant performance. These indicators are outlined in the sector Results 
Framework and focus on monitoring resources, processes and outputs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The grant will finance innovative approaches and mechanisms as well some targeted activities in 
junior secondary education in addition to filling the gap in the implementation of the EFA Plan. 
Indicative allocations by component and by activity will be made for the grant period; however, 
allocations will be adjusted based on the Annual Work Plan presented at the second bi-annual 
Joint Donor Education Sector Review.  The revised EFA plan includes five components of which 
the CF grant will support the four following components:  
 
Component 1: Improving access to primary education  
 
Page  2
Recent analyses in the current preparation of the Country Status Report have shown that 
distances to school as well as teacher availability are key determinants of student enrolment. 
Therefore, the objectives of this component are to ensure that primary schools are located at most 
2
km
from student homes, and that teachers are available in schools. To that end, the grant will 
be used to finance school construction, contribute to payment of community teacher salaries, and 
support the school nutrition program.   
 
With respect to school construction, priority will be given to (i) primary schools with 
incomplete cycles, (ii) Fokontany, or communities, without primary schools, and (iii) new 
classrooms for the new grades 6 and 7 in primary education. Furniture will be purchased for new 
classrooms and schools will be equipped with latrines and access to drinking water. Since 
Madagascar is at high risk for natural disasters, the CF grant will also be used to respond to 
cyclone damage.  
 
Regarding community teacher salaries, the CF grant will continue to contribute to the payment 
of the community teacher salaries. In 2005, Government decided to gradually assume 
responsibility for payment of community teacher salaries in line with its objective of providing 
free primary education and to ensure sustainability over time. The CF grant has thus been used to 
pay a certain proportion of these salaries while the remaining portion is financed by the ME
N’s 
budget.  Regarding sustainability, during the EFA plan appraisal in February 2008, donors had 
agreed with the proposed plan for progressive integration of community teacher salaries in the 
MEN’s budget.  
 
Finally, with respect to the school nutrition program, this component will continue financing 
the on-going school nutrition program in the five districts with the most severe nutritional 
indicators, implemented by WFP, as well as an impact evaluation of the program. In parallel, the 
GOM will prepare a national strategy for school nutrition to ensure the sustainability of this 
action.  
 
Component 2:  Improving quality for primary education  
 
The CF grant will be used to support the implementation of the education reform and in 
particular, the reform of curriculum and the lengthening of the primary education cycle from five 
to seven years, in line with the new legislation on education. The implementation of the 
curriculum reform will spread over five years and the introduction of the new curriculum for 
grades 1 and 6 is scheduled for the school year 2008/09.  Thus, this component will finance: (i) 
the production and purchase of new textbooks and teaching and learning materials; (ii) teacher 
training on the new curriculum, new teaching methods as well as on the use of the new 
textbooks; and (iii) technical assistance.  
 
The CF grant will also finance the pre-service training of the new semi-specialized teachers for 
the new grades 6 and 7. In-service training will be provided for community teachers to ensure 
higher professional standards and qualifications and decrease teacher turnover.  A new policy on 
teacher training, which links teacher trainings with teacher career development, is being 
developed.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Improving quality and access for junior secondary education  
 
The CF will support junior secondary education as the final cycle of basic education. Given the 
important gap in terms of capacity and resources, the strategy for increasing junior secondary 
education in the endorsed EFA plan is based on the development of school networks. For each 
school network, one college (called College Of Excellence in the MAP- COE) will be equipped 
with qualified human resources, modern teaching/learning materials and equipments. Each COE 
will provide support to a certain number of satellite schools in its network.  The implementation 
of the junior secondary reform will be synchronized with the introduction of the new grade 7 
curriculum.  School networks will be first established in the initial 20 CISCOs that will 
implement the new 7 grade curriculum in 2009/10. Thereafter, school networks will be 
established in additional CISCOs following completion of primary education reforms in the 
CISCO.  The school networks will also develop open school programs to provide another 
alternative for those students who have completed primary education but who cannot attend the 
regular junior secondary education program. It is expected that shifting the two first grades of 
junior secondary education to primary schools would likely lead to an increase of student 
enrollment in junior secondary education and thus, more places in existing junior secondary 
schools will be freed up to accommodate more new intakes.  
 
The CF grant will finance the countrywide curriculum reform for junior secondary education 
and related activities. For the creation of the school networks, the CF grant will finance school 
grants for equipment, teaching and learning materials, textbooks and teacher training.  The CF 
grant will not finance construction of junior secondary schools; rather this will be financed by 
Government and other donor projects.  
 
Component 4:  Institutional development  
 
To address disparities across districts and the high degree of remoteness of the most vulnerable 
districts, the CF will support regional and local education structures to address specific local and 
regional issues in those areas that have not previously been able to raise enrolment and retention 
rates.  These persistent difficulties with respect to student enrolment and retention suggest the 
need for introduction of a demand-driven approach to foster locally-grown alternative and 
solutions to address these specific issues. To this end, this component will continue to finance 
“Local Catalytic Funds”, which are small grants to finance sub-projects and action plans initiated 
by regional education directorates, districts and public primary schools.  In addition, this 
component will finance the development of key functions such as budget management, human 
resources management, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the EFA plan, and 
CF grant management.  
 
Implementation Arrangements: The second CF grant will be managed directly by the MEN and 
specifically, the General Directorate for Basic Education (DGEFA).  The technical unit currently 
in charge of managing the first CF grant and providing technical assistance to the MEN will be 
fully integrated in the structure of the DGEFA.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National level   
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The environmental classification of the project is Category B partial.  
 
As the project is expected to fund the school construction and rehabilitation, the environmental 
impacts for the proposed EFA-FTI are minors and the impacts could be well mitigated and 
minimized. The proposed EFA-FTI will allow to contribute to increasing the enrolment and 
completion rates in primary and junior secondary education, and especially in rural and remote 
areas.  
 
In Madagascar, the Ministry of the Environment Forests and Tourism has a National 
Environmental Action Policy and a National Environmental Management Authority which is 
National Office of Environment (NOE).  It ensures the review and the analysis of Environmental 
Impact Assessment of the projects on the environment. It conducts the review of the impact 
environmental study and validates the Environmental Management Plans.  The Ministry is 
represented at the local level by directions or districts of the Environment, Forestry and tourism 
according to the level.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has a category B rating. The proposed EFA 
–
FTI will focus on the contribution 
to increasing the enrolment and completion rates in primary and junior secondary education, and 
especially in rural and remote areas through the implementation of four components: improving 
access to primary education, improving quality for primary education, improving quality and 
access for junior secondary education and Institutional development. The school construction 
and rehabilitation under the component on the improvement of access to primary education could 
generate potential negative impacts on the environmental and social but are well understood, 
unlikely to be significant, and readily manageable. The main potential environmental issues 
associated with the sub component include health effects to construction workers during 
construction, land disturbance / erosion or land acquisition (construction), waste management for 
the schools, noise (primarily during construction), pressure to the forest resources for the needs 
of woods for the construction and goods like tables for the classrooms.  Therefore an ESMF 
should be prepared with an annex that contain the general environmental and social clauses that 
will bind the building contractors/project officials towards respecting environmental and social 
diligence during the civil works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition, compensation and resettlement of people seem inevitable for certain new 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
school constructions. This is a social issue of critical concern to Government and the World 
Bank as its impact on poverty if left unmitigated, is negative immediate and can be wide spread. 
The new schools constructed in several localities could result on involuntary resettlement and 
lands acquisition.  It will be able to occur during the construction of new schools or adding of 
new classrooms for the new grades 6 and 7 in primary school ... etc.   Actually, the Ministry of 
National Education could use the National Law on the Land Acquisition which is different with 
the Bank Policy on the Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.  Therefore, it is proposed here to 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework for the proposed EFA- FTI CF Grant.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/27/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF): the new schools  
construction or rehabilitation of the proposed EFA 
–
FTI are demand driven and can only be 
known once the programming under the Ministry of National Education have set their 
priorities. Hence, at the time of the preparation of the proposed EFA - FTI now in the 
offering, these new schools constructions have not yet been identified. The Environmental 
Assessment Operational Policy 4.01 of the Bank requires the Government of Madagascar 
represented by the Ministry of National Education to prepare an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF). An ESMF will be developed and will establish a 
mechanism that will determine and assess future potential environmental and social impact of 
the new school construction under the proposed EFA – FTI. It further helps to establish 
mitigation, monitoring andinstitutional measures to be taken during the planning and 
budgeting, of the new schools construction. This will help to eliminate or minimize adverse 
environmental and social impact to acceptable levels.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): In compliance with the World Bank OP 4.12 
on Involuntary Resettlement, the Ministry of National Education shall implement the 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
following principles: (i) Wherever possible, avoidance or minimization of resettlement and 
land acquisition, through investigation of all viable alternative sites or designs of new 
schools, (ii)  Where land acquisition or impacts on livelihoods cannot be avoided, affected 
people must be assisted to improve or at least restore their livelihoods to their pre-project 
levels with a particular attention shall be paid to vulnerable groups, (iii)  Compensation shall 
be based on full replacement value, and (iv) Affected people must be consulted with, and 
have opportunities to participate in all key stages of the preparing and implementing 
involuntary resettlement and compensation activities. For new schools constructions entailing 
displacement of people, resettlement plans will be prepared by the MEN in conformity with 
this prepared Resettlement Policy Framework, submit for Bank clearance, disclosed, 
implemented before the new schools construction will be financed by the proposed EFA-FTI.  
 
The Ministry of National Education is further required to disclose these both documents 
(RPF and ESFM) in-country as a separate and stand alone document so that it is accessible 
by the general public, local communities, NGOs and other stakeholders. It will also be shared 
at the Infoshop of the World Bank. The date for the disclosure of the ESMF and RPF will 
precede the date for appraisal of the EFA-FTI.  
 
The PAD will outline specific criteria for sub-projects with major resettlement or 
environmental impacts (and which will then require prior review and clearance of RAPs or 
EAs by the Bank), assess the governments capacity to conduct prior review and clearance of 
sub-projects with minor impacts (while sub-projects with minor impacts, without prior 
review, will be audited by the Bank rather than reviewed prior to implementation), and 
specify which auditing indicators will be used  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer on the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Patrick Philippe Ramanantoanina 
10/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
10/24/2008 
Comments:   
