Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3313
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P110157 
Project Name:  Second National Water Development Project - Additional Financing 
(ACGF) 
Task Team Leader:  Midori Makino 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 12, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (37%);Central government administration (37%);Sanitation (26%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Other human development (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
25.00
25.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) Project is to increase access 
to sustainable water supply and sanitation services for persons living in cities, towns, 
villages, and market centers in Malawi.   
 
3. Project Description 
The activities proposed to be financed by the ACGF grant would include investments and 
capacity building for: (i) rural/village water supply and sanitation (point water sources); 
(ii) rural piped water supply and sanitation; (iii) market center water supply and 
sanitation; and (iv) town water supply and sanitation. The main change from the IDA 
NWDP II is the addition of capacity building for district based village water supply and 
sanitation and point water sources investments in three focus districts. The three focus 
districts will be selected by MIWD on the basis of gaps in water supply coverage, 
geographical balance, and their suitability as training centers to which personnel from 
other districts could come for training. An important pre-requisite for being selected as a 
focus district would be to have sufficient capacity in procurement, financial management, 
Page  2
and general project management to implement the water supply and sanitation 
investments in their communities. This will be confirmed through an assessment carried 
out by MIWD and cleared by IDA about six months after project effectiveness. Through 
supporting GOM in building the capacity of the districts to plan and begin to implement 
their District RWSS Programs, the ACGF funding will make it possible for other donors 
to invest in rural water supply, so that Malawi’s goals in water supply and sanitation can 
be achieved.  
 
Specific outputs of ACGF support include improved water supply to an additional 
400,000 people and improved sanitation to an additional 150,000 people in the rural areas 
and in low income areas of the towns in Malawi. In addition, district village water supply 
programs will be established in three focus districts using the second contribution of 
funds, and the planning and capacity building activities carried out in some of the 
remaining districts would leverage an estimated amount of $25-30 million from other 
donors serving an additional 500,000 people.  
 
COMPONENT A: 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation  
 
Capacity Building: During the first year, the ACGF grant would finance technical 
assistance to the three focus districts to prepare district rural water supply and sanitation 
plans and to build their capacity to implement them. By working with the districts and by 
consolidating lessons learned from other district managed water supply and sanitation 
projects supported by other development partners, MIWD would refine the existing PIM 
and related training materials for districts and communities. The main areas to be refined 
in PIM include planning and management, accounting and procurement, monitoring and 
evaluation, and social/environmental safeguards. With this experience, technical 
assistance would be extended to other districts to similarly prepare their RWSS Plans and 
begin implementation. Investments and supplemental capacity building would be 
financed from other donors including AfDB and CIDA.  
 
1. 
The specific activities to be supported under the capacity building sub-sector 
include:  
 
(i) assistance to prepare district water supply and sanitation plans; (ii) establishment of 
community water and sanitation management committees and community facilities and 
management plans; and (iii) development of efficient district water offices with well 
qualified core personnel (financed by the Government), infrastructure, and equipment. 
These offices would receive a package of basic equipment and tools such as computers, 
vehicles, motorcycles, and water quality monitoring kits to support the effective 
operation. The key personnel will include the District Coordinating Team, District 
Tender Committee, District Water Officer, District Sanitation Officer, Water Monitoring 
Officers, and district accountants.  Human resource capacity building support will be 
provided in the areas of program planning and management, procurement, financial 
management, environmental management, and community mobilization and participatory 
approaches such as PHAST methodologies etc.  
 
Page  3
2. 
To facilitate implementation, a National Training Team (NTT) will be hired by 
MIWD to manage implementation in the three focus districts and to build capacity in 
other districts. In accordance with the district planning and implementation guidelines in 
the PIM, this NTT will prepare introductory information materials, hold orientation 
meetings/workshops, assist districts to prepare their RWSS plans during Step One, and 
train community facilitators. Once the capacity and District Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation Plans are successfully appraised by MIWD, the NTT will provide on-the-job 
training in the three focus districts in implementing their water supply and sanitation 
activities. NTT will also initiate Step One phase of the program in other districts that 
other donors (AfDB, CIDA etc.) will support. The implementation plan is attached at 
Annex 6.  
 
3. 
An MOU will be signed between the MIWD and the three focus District 
Assemblies setting out the responsibilities of both entities. This MOU will be signed only 
when the financial management and procurement capacity assessments of the focus 
districts are successfully completed, confirming that financial management and 
procurement responsibilities can be  transferred from MIWD to the districts.  
 
4. 
Rural (Village) Water Supply Investments: In addition to assisting districts to plan 
and manage their RWSS Programs, ACGF would fund planning, design, and 
rehabilitation / construction of district water supply facilities in villages in three focus 
districts. The works in this component would be limited to point sources like boreholes 
fitted with handpumps and small piped systems serving individual villages. These 
activities will be guided by the District Coordinating Teams, and managed by the district 
water and sanitation officers. To ensure compliance with the fiduciary policies, financial 
and procurement audits will be carried out for the activities funded under this component 
on an annual basis. Technical audits will also be undertaken.  
 
5. 
Rural Sanitation: The ACGF grant would fund the improvement of access to 
sanitation and hygiene promotion in the three focus districts. Activities under this sub-
component will include:  
 
(i) Development and implementation of Strategic District Sanitation and Hygiene 
Promotion Plans:   Focus will be on sanitation marketing, per the approach being used by 
UNICEF in other NWDP funded districts. The strategy will be to generate demand for 
improved sanitation services and to support the development of a viable supply system 
for sanitation services. The ultimate aim of these plans will be to provide for activities 
that will increase the number of people with access to and using adequate sanitation 
facilities and hygiene services through (a) provision of sanplats, provision of 
technological options for which households would be willing and able to pay, and setting 
up of demonstration projects (b) stimulation and or enhancement of local private sector 
participation through provision of training for existing local artisans, masons, builders etc 
and where possible, socially franchising their service delivery (c) development of a 
financing mechanism that would allow provision of sanitation services on a sustainable 
basis, whilst at the same time providing mechanisms for necessary and justifiable subsidy 
systems (d) development and implementation of communication programs to promote 
Page  4
improvements in hygiene behavior and stimulate increased demand for sanitation services 
(e) enhancement of implementation capacity at all levels through  training of trainers, 
training of sanitation and hygiene promotion services providers, training of communities-
the program will promote Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) approaches in order 
to maximize the benefits from community mobilization and training of staff in district 
and central government agencies (f) supporting the MIWD to undertake a review of all 
rural sanitation activities in the NWDP funded districts in order to draw lessons for 
further interventions.  
 
(ii) School Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion:  The ACGF would fund the School 
Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Program (SSHP) in the 3 focus districts, to promote 
safe use of water, gender sensitive sanitation and hygiene promotion. Promoting children 
as the key agents of change is one of the fundamental principles of this program. The 
District Education manager will select the target schools in liaison with the DCT. The 
selection criteria will take into account demand created by previous WASHE programs. 
The SSHP will include (i) construction of latrines, urinals and handwashing facilities in 
each selected school. A participatory approach will be used in selection of sites and 
technological options (ii) Hygiene Promotion: The ACGF will fund training of children 
on safe hygiene behaviors through such programs as Child Hygiene and Sanitation 
transformation (CHAST) in order to promote behavioral change. Each district will 
identify 'change agents' such as PTA members, school teachers and school sanitation club 
members who will be targeted for training on use and application of relevant Information 
and education and communication (IEC) materials to be used in the training of the 
children.  The program will utilize IEC materials designed under the NWDP, but will also 
finance as necessary, the elaboration of new materials or refinement of existing materials.  
 
(iii) Sanitation in Health Centers: The ACGF will support delivery of health surveillance 
services including (a) training of Health Surveillance Assistants (HSA), (b) development 
of hygiene promotion materials, and (c) provision of requisite tools, equipment and 
materials. Physical investments will not be carried out under this sub-component as the 
Health Sector Support Project and the Multi Sectoral AIDS Project are already supporting 
such activities.  
 
COMPONENT B: 
Town, Market Center, and Rural Piped Water Supply and 
Sanitation  
 
6. 
While this component will be implemented by the Regional Water Boards 
(RWBs) on behalf of MIWD and the districts, market center and rural piped schemes 
water supply and sanitation investments are categorized as part of the rural water supply 
and sanitation sub-sector.  
 
7. 
Town water supply and sanitation: This component will be implemented by the 
three RWBs, which are the Northern Regional Water Board (NRWB), Central Regional 
Water Board (CRWB), and Southern Regional Water Board (SRWB). The component 
will fund water supply connections and service reservoirs in the low income areas of 
Mzuzu, Mzimba, Kasungu, Mponela, Likuni, Zomba, Mangochi, Ekwendeni, Chitipa, 
Page  5
Chilumba, Rumphi, Nkhata Bay and Chintheche while the investments under IDA 
NWDP II focus on construction of priority rehabilitation, upgrading, and extension works 
for water supply facilities in these towns. In addition, rehabilitation and extension of 
treatment works and pipelines in the additional towns not included under IDA NWDP II 
will also be financed (list of the towns covered by ACGF are attached at Annex 5). To 
qualify for investments, business plans (for the target towns and consolidated for each 
RWB) that include management arrangements with a performance agreement between 
the utility and the town management, proposed tariffs, financial projections, and phased 
expansion plans as well as social/environmental safeguards will be required. Business 
plans and investment proposals will be appraised by the MIWD based on pre-determined 
criteria that includes the cost effectiveness of the proposed design, the long term financial 
viability of the scheme, and ability to avoid / mitigate negative social/environmental 
impacts.  
 
8. 
All monies will be provided to the RWBs on a grant basis. Possible activities 
include: (i) yard taps and public standpipes through an “output based aid” approach in 
which the RWBs pre-finance connections and are reimbursed on a cost per connection 
basis; (ii) implementation of sanitation plans that address the priority concerns of the 
town; and (iii) capacity building.  
 
9. 
Market center and rural piped water supply and sanitation: The ACGF grant will 
finance the development of community-managed water supply and sanitation schemes in 
market centers and rural piped water schemes that are not covered under IDA NWDP II 
(Subprojects).  The three RWBs and MIWD in consultation and collaboration with the 
individual district assemblies will: (i) prepare pre-feasibility studies and introduce the 
market centre and rural piped water supply and sanitation project to short listed market 
centers and/or rural piped schemes; (ii) establish water user associations and contract 
consultants to provide technical assistance in participating communities; (iii) arrange and 
supervise works contract to expand their water facilities; and (iv) assist the water user 
associations to hire a local utility operator.  
 
The consultants will: (i) provide capacity building and assist the water user associations 
to plan their water supply facilities; (ii) provide technical inputs to the water user 
associations when hiring the local utility operator and core operating staff, and learn to 
oversee operations; and (iii) train local utility operators to handle routine operations and 
maintenance. The water supply facilities and sanitation interventions will be financed on 
a
grant basis, but communities are expected to pay all recurrent costs and part of 
expansion costs. The ACGF grant would finance (i) Subproject related costs including 
the planning, design, local capacity building and construction supervision of market 
center and rural piped systems, or their rehabilitation and expansion, (ii) initial recurrent 
cost of water user associations and local utility operators until revenue from water sales 
covers cost, and (iii) incremental costs of the RWBs to facilitate and manage the 
implementation process for market center and rural piped water supply.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the towns, market centers, and rural villages in the 
southern, northern and central regions of the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project will not have large-scale, significant environmental and social impacts. 
Likely adverse impacts will include soil and water pollution, soil erosion, loss of land 
and/or economic assets, loss of vegetation, increased generation of waste water, noise, air 
pollution, and traffic accidents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not incur any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts as a result of its 
planned investment activities because appropriate steps have been taken to address 
potential adverse environmental and social impacts at the planning stage.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this project has been prepared in the context of Malawi's Water Sector Strategy, 
and is building on a previous successful Bank operation, alternatives were not discussed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In an effort to identify, assess and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts of future investments, the Borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and 
Page  7
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) for the NWDP II project. The ACGF project will (i) use the ESMF and RPF that 
were prepared for the NWDP II project, and (ii) benefit from the environmental training 
provided under the parent project. Such training under the NWDP II project will support 
a
Training Program for the Training of Trainers. Training topics include the screening 
process, the use of checklists, preparation of terms of reference, Malawi's environmental 
policies and laws as well as the Bank's safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders include the Regional Water Boards, Blantyre and Lilongwe Water 
Boards, District Executive Committee Members in the targeted cities, towns and districts; 
Water User Associations, Local Operators, Ministry of Irrigation and Water 
Development, Ministry of Energy, Mines and Natural Resources/Environmental Affairs 
Department; and villagers. The ESMF was prepared during field visits in consultation 
with officials from the Water Boards, Town and District Assemblies, members of 
fishermen associations, villagers, land officers, and potentially affected persons. They 
viewed the project as very beneficial to their quality of life. Their suggestions have been 
reflected in the ESMF which was disclosed in Malawi on November 28, 2007, and at the 
Bank's Infoshop on November 29, 2007. The ESMF makes provisions for stakeholder 
consultations as part of the environmental and social screening process for sub-projects.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/29/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/29/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Midori Makino 
01/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
01/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
01/30/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sumila Gulyani 
01/30/2008 
Comments:   
