Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/14/2008 
Report No.:  AC3609
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P110446 
Project Name:  Malawi Third Social Action Fund (MASAF 3) APL II (LDF Mechanism) 
Task Team Leader:  Nginya Mungai Lenneiye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (40%);Sub-national government administration 
(40%);Central government administration (15%);Micro- and SME finance (5%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Decentralization (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Local 
Communities 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective is to improve the livelihoods of poor households within the 
framework of improved Local Governance at community, Local Assembly, and National 
levels.   This will be achieved by using processes developed during the last twelve years 
when MASAF spearheaded community funding and Central Government developed a 
comprehensive decentralization policy framework.  Using experiences from APL I, the 
proposed project will aim to reach the poor with productive cash transfers, savings 
mobilization, public and social accountability tools, etc. in the context of increased local 
governance and public sector management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will finance Community-level Livelihoods Support for poor 
households and develop a framework for the reform of the public sector (especially with 
respect to Local Development) as a way of anchoring the needs of poor households in 
Government expenditures at National and District levels.  
Page  2
The Project will have three components: (1) Community Livelihoods Support (CLS) 
Fund; (2) Local Assembly Capacity Enhancement (LACE) Fund; and (c) National 
Institutional Strengthening Fund.  
 
CLS:  This component will have two sub-components to finance (a) Public Works Cash 
Transfers (PW-CTs), and (b) investments for Improving Functionality of Existing 
Facilities.  
 
LACE: This component will focus on developing a comprehensive framework for 
addressing capacity needs for Local Assemblies in the effective management of grants 
they are already receiving, performing the functions allocated to them under this project, 
and preparing them to perform anticipated responsibilities as devolution proceeds and 
more resources are available under the LDF or any other longer-term GoM grant 
arrangement.  The component will systematically assess current capacities and establish 
capacity benchmarks within government systems for regular assessments, provide 
capacity building support to LAs to prepare them for the tasks noted above, and support 
the design and piloting of a grant mechanism.  
 
National Institutional Strengthening Fund:  This component will finance national-level 
cross-cutting issues aimed at improving accountability and transparency in the use of 
project resources.  It will have two sub-components: (1) MASAF Technical Support 
Team to oversee project implementation, and (2) Knowledge Generation and Application 
to strengthen community participation in project implementation and to document 
community experiences with service delivery.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
While the exact location of future subprojects are not known at this time, future 
investment activities are expected to take place in rural communities across Malawi.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential adverse environmental and social impacts such as loss of vegetation, increased 
water pollution, increased respiratory infections from dust and cement as well as loss of 
livelihoods due to the implementation of sub-projects are expected to be limited.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In light of the scope of future sub-projects and steps to be taken to mitigate any potential 
adverse environmental and social impacts, no indirect and/or long term impacts resulting 
from sub-projects are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to the proposed MASAF APL II were not discussed as this project is part of 
an overall government program. Alternatives to the locations of future sub-projects will 
be discussed as part of the environmental and social screening process outlined in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address potential adverse environmental and social impacts of sub-projects, the 
borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF outlines the environmental and 
social screening process to be applied to future sub-projects, and provides guidance on 
integrated pest management. To ensure effective implementation of the ESMF and the 
RPF and to strengthen environmental and social management capacity, the proposed 
project will fund environmental training at the district and local levels.  
 
Page  4
The Resettlement Policy Framework will assist sub-project implementers in ensuring 
that any person whose land or assets are impacted will receive appropriate compensation 
to ensure that they are not worse off as a result of project activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include communities, members of the Local Assemblies, Village 
Development Committees, District Environment Sub-Committees, Area Executive 
Committees, and relevant sector ministries. Consultations with potentially affected 
persons will be carried out in the context of the environmental and social screening 
process and the results will be publicly available following Malawi's guidelines in this 
regard. The ESMF and the RPF have been publicly disclosed in Malawi and at the Bank's 
Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nginya Mungai Lenneiye 
05/07/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
05/07/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
05/07/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 05/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
05/07/2008 
Comments:   
