Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/27/2008 
Report No.:  43530
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P105256 
Project Name:  Malawi Agricultural Development Programme - Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  David Rohrbach 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P106671 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
32.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.60 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.90 
 Local 
Communities 
2.20 
 
NORWAY, Gov. of (except for Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 
10.00
15.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Agriculture Development Programme Support Project 
(ADP-SP) is to improve the effectiveness of investments aimed at food security and 
sustainable agricultural growth. The global environmental objective is to strengthen the 
natural resource base in agricultural lands through doubling the area under sustainable 
land management as a basis for securing ecosystem services and sustainable agricultural 
productivity. The project will (i) strengthen institutional capabilities necessary to further 
develop, and implement, a harmonized and aligned investment framework leading 
towards a full-fledged SWAp in the agricultural sector; (ii) increase the land, water and 
nutrient use efficiency of maize based rainfed cropping systems targeted by the 
Government’s Agricultural Development Programme; and (iii) increase the resilience of 
the maize supply system to cope with climate induced risks and shocks.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Institutional development and capacity building in preparation for a SWAp 
in agriculture.  
Page  2
The objective of this component is to strengthen capacities essential to prepare for and 
implement the Agricultural Development Programme, and its main objectives of food 
security and agricultural-led economic growth  
 
Component 2: Sustainable food security.  
 
The objective of this component is a sustainable increase national and household food 
security. The project will contribute to three priority targets of the Agricultural 
Development Programme 
–
maize productivity growth, sustainable land management, 
and improved resilience in maize supply systems.  
 
Component 3: Project coordination  
 
The objective of this component is to manage the use of resources in accordance with 
the project’s objectives and procedures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nation-wide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The ESIA report has identified potential adverse environmental and social impacts such 
as loss of vegetation, soil erosion, siltation, water and soil pollution, and adverse impacts 
on human health due to increased use of agro-chemicals. None of these impacts will be 
large scale or irreversible.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any indirect and/or long-term impacts as the potential 
impacts are limitd and can be easily mitigated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project supports Malawi's Agricultural Development Program. Hence, the discussion 
of alternatives was not relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
Report. This report includes (i) an Environmental and Social Management Plan; (ii) a 
Monitoring Plan; and (iii) a Pesticides Management and Control Plan. The capacity 
building recommendations of the ESIA Report were discussed during appraisal.  It was 
decided that MoAFS will support sensitization seminars and in-depth training activities 
for relevant stakeholders.  These activities will focus on the implementation as well as 
safe management of pesticides and integrated pest management at the district and 
community levels.  The training modules will be prepared and implemented by MoAFS.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders consulted during ESIA preparation included staff at the relevant 
ministries, the Environmental Affairs Department, the Pesticide Control Board, members 
of District Development Committees, agricultural extension staff, local leaders and 
chiefs, and farmers in the selected districts throughout Malawi. Their views have been 
incorporated into the ESIA Report.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  5
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Rohrbach 
03/14/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
03/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
03/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
03/14/2008 
Comments:   
