Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3431 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P110446 
Project Name: Malawi Third Social Action Fund (MASAF 3) APL II (LDF Mechanism) 
Task Team Leader: Nginya Mungai Lenneiye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);Sub-national government administration 
(40%);Central government administration (15%);Micro- and SME finance (5%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Decentralization (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Local 
Communities 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objective is to promote the delivery of services through an improved Local 
Governance framework.  This is in line with the objective stated in the PAD (“Phase II will 
continue with the delivery of community service packagesand promote accountability and 
measurement of MDG outputs”).  This will be achieved by using processes developed during the 
last twelve years when MASAF spearheaded community funding and Central Government 
developed a comprehensive decentralization policy framework.  Using experiences from APL I, 
the proposed project will aim to reach the poor and ultra poor with productive cash transfers, 
savings mobilization, etc.; while contributing to improved local governance and public sector 
management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
There are two program components planned for this project.  
 
Page  2
1) Responding to community demands  
 
In line with the purpose of APL II, this component will be characterized by a flexible design 
that gives Central Government the ability to respond to evolving needs from communities and 
Local Assemblies.  An output-based reporting system will be implemented using the Local 
Assembly MIS developed under MASAF, to report on two types of local investments financed 
from:-  
 
(a) Small demand-driven Community Investments window: These will be small investments, 
for example, teachers’ houses, community water and forest projects (defined as high priority for 
2008-09 and implemented through public works), classroom blocks, community roads, small 
community irrigation schemes, water points like boreholes, etc.  This will be a continuation of 
what MASAF has successfully done for 12 years and will contribute to the closing of remaining 
community-level service gaps.  
 
(b) Larger supply-driven Local Assembly investments window: These will be investments 
whose implementation is beyond the capacity of communities, but whose financing will enhance 
the impacts of community investments and give Local Governments a broader revenue base – 
such as district roads, electrification, business incubation centres, markets, large water reservoirs, 
rehabilitation of water catchment areas, etc. (similar to what MASAF financed under Local 
Assembly-Managed Projects – LAMPs – during APL I).  
 
Elected Local Assembly Councilors (once in place) and MPs will be integrated into the needs 
identification and prioritization processes put in place to support Government response to 
demands from communities; and thus remove the need for a separate CDF alongside local 
development funds managed under Local Assemblies.This component will be the primary 
mechanism for providing communities with interventions that improve the lives of the poor 
within the broad Social Protection framework developed and adopted by the government in 
2007.  
 
(2) Improving public sector management  
 
This will be a Capacity Enhancement Component with a focus on:  
 
(i) developing a robust Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer Systems with a streamlined M&E 
system to meet current and anticipated needs of Malawi consistent with the envisaged 
decentralization framework (and other ongoing initiatives), and piloting its implementation; and 
(ii) developing local government capacity for Human and Financial Resource Management, 
Project Implementation and Management and Service Delivery consistent with its 
responsibilities.  Sub-components will include:  
 
(a) 
Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer Systems: Evaluate and coordinate various ongoing 
GoM and donor initiatives to finalize the design and pilot implementation of an IGFTS that 
promotes efficiency and accountability in the provision of local public services and 
infrastructure, and provides for equity, predictability and performance incentives through a 
transparent rule-based grant mechanism. This sub-component will also focus on clarifying 
Page  3
functional assignments and the institutional arrangements including the role of various 
government ministries and agencies in the decentralization architecture.  
 
(b) 
Capacity Development of the Local Assemblies: Leverage grants (or the prospect of 
grants) to make effective use of a combination so supply- and demand-driven capacity 
development instruments to develop local government capacity for meeting their constitutional 
responsibilities. This will include:  
 
i. 
PEM/PFM: Planning, budgeting, execution, accounting, reporting and audit.  
 
ii. 
 HRM: To ensure that LAs are able to attract and retain staff with suitable qualifications 
and skills for discharging their functions.  
 
iii. 
Training for Councilors/decision/policy makers and professional staff.  
 
iv. 
Provision of basic infrastructure and office equipment as might be needed for performing 
assigned function.  
 
v. 
Supporting the development of revenue raising capabilities of the LAs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
While the exact locations of future sub-projects are not known at this time, future investment 
activities are expected to take place in the rural communities across Malawi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has experience with the implementation of environmental and social management 
frameworks in various sectors. Under the proposed APL II, provisions will be made for further 
strengthening the environmental and social management capacity for MASAF sub-projects, 
taking into account experiences to-date. For example, lessons learned include: (i) the need for 
more IEC on EMM for communities at all subproject cycle levels so that communities appreciate 
the need to implement mitigation measures (EPRA, pre 
–
launch training and launch 
ceremonies);(ii)  EMM components should be itemized in BOQs so that PIAs should be 
reminded about this component; (iii) available EMM budgets should be in line with the 
magnitude of degradation caused by a particular intervention; (iv) need to consider the funding 
of afforestation projects for a period of 3 years to ensure survival of trees – this can be solved by 
ensuring that afforestation subprojects are included in the Medium Term Expenditure 
Framework (MTEF); and (v) the need to develop an Environmental Handbook in future phases.  
This handbook is being prepared under Phase II and will include an environmental and social 
screening process for subprojects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered due to the potential adverse environmental impacts (loss of vegetation, 
soil erosion, siltation, pesticide poisoning, traffic accidents) related to the new construction 
and/or rehabilitation of existing subprojects such as small-scale irrigation, water supply and 
sanitation, feeder roads and bridges.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
OP 4.09 Pest Management is triggered because MASAF support for agricultural sub-projects 
is likely to increase the use of agro-chemicals which will need to be managed safely.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP/BP 4.12 is triggered since the project will support civil works sub-projects which may 
require acquisition of land.  As sub-project investments will not be known during project 
preparation a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the GoM, approved by 
the World Bank and disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
During the pre-appraisal mission, the project team will ascertain the extent to which national 
and/or international water resources will be affected by future MASAF sub-projects.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/22/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The proposed project will prepare (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
for sub-projects, including guidance on safe pesticides management, as part of an 
Environment Handbook; and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The Resettlement 
Policy Framework will assist sub-project implementation in ensuring that any person whose 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
land or assets are impacted will receive appropriate compensation to ensure that they are not 
worse off as a result of project activities.  
 
MASAF 3 APL II will not provide capital grants for large investments in areas of irrigation, 
water, transport, communication and energy.  Large capital grants will be funded from other 
ongoing projects such as NWDP 2, ISP, IRLADP, and ADP projects.  
 
Both documents will be available by April 28, 2008, for review and clearance by the 
Government of Malawi and the World Bank. Subsequently, both documents will be disclosed 
in Malawi and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept the responsibility for review and clearance of the requisite 
safeguards documents.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nginya Mungai Lenneiye 
04/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
04/25/2008 
Comments:   
