Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3254 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P105256 
Project Name: Malawi Agricultural Development Programme - Support Project 
Task Team Leader: David Rohrbach 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P106671 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.70 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.92 
 
NORWAY, Gov. of (except for Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 
10.00
12.92 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Malawi Agricultural Sector Development Project is to improve 
the effectiveness and sustainability of investments in the agricultural sector aimed at food 
security and agriculture-led economic growth.  
 
The associated global environmental objective related to GEF funding is to strengthen the 
natural resource base in agricultural lands as a basis for securing ecosystem services including 
sustainable agricultural productivity.  
 
The project will strengthen (i) institutional capabilities necessary to further develop and 
implement a harmonized and aligned investment framework leading towards a full-fledged 
SWAp in the agricultural sector; (ii) land, water and nutrient use efficiency of maize based rain-
fed cropping systems supported by the Government’s input subsidy program; and (iii) resilience 
of the maize supply system to cope with climate and market induced risks and shocks. Success in 
achieving this objective will be measured by: (a) progress in establishing identified government 
managerial and technical systems; (b) increased sustainable productivity of maize based 
Page  2
cropping systems resulting from improved management of land, rainwater and nutrients; and (c) 
achievement of benchmarks in market-based efforts to improve risk and shock management 
related to extreme weather conditions and maize markets.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project has two complementary components that will be jointly funded by IDA and GEF 
support contributing to the development of a sector wide program in agriculture. One strengthens 
the capacity of the country to develop and implement an agricultural SWAp, and the second 
supports the implementation of priority components of the Ministry’s program which have 
alreadyattracted investment partnerships.  
 
Component 1: to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security to 
design and implement a harmonized investment program.  
 
This component will strengthen systems in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, and 
in related district authorities, for investment planning, budgeting, procurement and financial 
management, human resource management, program administration, monitoring and evaluation. 
Support will be provided to establish a public expenditure analysis and tracking system that can 
improve understanding of investment trade-offs, and improve accountability for investment 
targets. This will be linked to an annual public expenditure review for the agricultural sector. 
Related support will strengthen the collection and timely analysis of national agricultural 
statistics. Currently, major questions have arisen about such basic data as the number of 
smallholder farmers, and level of production statistics. Better agricultural data are critical for 
better investment decision making.  
 
Priority technical skill gaps will be addressed through national and international training and 
technical assistance. To confirm the details for this support, the project will carry out a capacity 
needs assessment followed by a capacity building plan. Professional training will emphasize the 
resolution of skills gaps most constraining the identification and transfer of technologies 
essential for achieving environmentally sustainable improvements in food security.  
 
Component 2: to increase the food security of poorer households through improved resource 
use efficiency, and strengthening of the capacity of national markets to cope with major grain 
shortfalls commonly associated with flooding or drought.  
 
Two sub-components underlying the national food security agenda outlined in the ADP 
synthesis framework call for improved maize productivity and strengthened risk management.  
 
2.1. Improving the sustainability of maize productivity growth  
 
More than one-half of the current budget of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security is 
allocated to an input subsidy program. However, the distribution of a standard package of seed 
and fertilizer to the majority of farmers in the country remains a blunt instrument for achieving 
sustainable productivity growth. The payoffs to such investments can be increased through the 
pursuit of greater resource use efficiency.  
 
This component will support a technology development and transfer program to better target 
seed and fertilizer made available through public subsidies to the variable resource environment 
of poorer smallholder farmers. A first step is to resolve the question of how best to target small 
Page  3
quantities of nutrients in the cropping systems of poorer households. If a farmer can only afford 
two bags of fertilizer, what nutrient mix offers the highest and most sustainable payoff in 
different parts of the country, and how can this be most efficiently applied.  
 
This will be backed by a national conservation farming initiative targeting complementary 
investments aiming to achieve nutrient and water use efficiency through the adoption of more 
sustainable production practices. These include efforts to increase soil organic matter through 
reduce burning of crop residues, incorporation of these residues, encouragement of the use of 
manure and compost, and efforts to reduce rainwater runoff (particularly in drier areas) through 
the use of planting basins, ridging or infiltration pits. This will be backed by efforts to promote 
the use of early maturing or more drought tolerant seed varieties, or varieties offering greater 
nitrogen use efficiency. The largest share of GEF support will be targeted to these activities.  
 
In each case major emphasis will be placed on linking applied research into a technology 
transfer program. This will require strengthening on-farm research through the pursuit of 
thousands of on-farm, farmer-led demonstration trials, as well as the strengthening of joint 
research-extension monitoring systems for measuring technology adoption.  
 
2.2  Improving the capacity of commodity markets to cope with weather induced risk  
 
The Bank has provided technical assistance for the establishment of a series of pilot programs 
targeting the establishment of more market based instruments for mitigating the impacts of 
production risk, and improving adaptation to climate change. These range from micro-weather 
insurance which offsets the risks of default on agricultural loans, to macro-weather insurance 
which offers a payout that can be used to import grain in the event of severe drought. Advisory 
assistance on price hedging has encouraged the government to test call options locking in grain 
supply contracts as an alternative to holding larger grain stocks. A pilot program on warehouse 
receipts aims to reduce storage losses, and deepen private investment in holding grain stocks.  
 
This program will extend these pilot activities, draw lessons from these experiences and 
institutionalize the results. The program will support extension of the micro and macro weather 
insurance pilots by completing the upgrading of national rainfall stations in the country.  
 
The project will support multi-year training for public and private sector personnel on 
alternative methods of risk mitigation including price hedging and weather insurance.  
 
The project will support a broad extension of the warehouse receipts system to encompass 
outlying villages where grain banks need to be strengthened in order to reduce storage losses, 
and these need to be linked with national markets. This will include refurbishment of facilities 
and widespread training on grain grading, stockholding and price management.  
 
In complement, the project will support a strengthening of the national early warning system by 
improving the quality of agricultural statistics (as cited above), improving the capacity of rainfall 
index based crop models to predict grain harvests, and linking these data into a decision process 
for stock management and grain imports.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This will be a national project for all of Malawi.   
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has limited capacity in the agriculture sector to implement the Bank's safeguard 
policies. Therefore, the project will provide appropriate capacity building support to the relevant 
implementing agencies/institutions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 might apply because the planned agricultural activities are likely to contribute to soil 
erosion, siltation, as well as water soil pollution due to the unsafe management of pesticides and 
fertilizers.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
OP 4.09 might apply because the intensification of agricultural production most likely will 
include the use of pesticides to reduce crop losses.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The Safeguard studies have been initiated following a review of project commitments with 
the government and the drafting and review of the terms of reference for this in coordination 
with the safeguard policy specialists and the government. The initial draft of the 
Environmental and Social Assessmemt (ESIA) report was provided on 10 January 2008. The 
final ESIA report will be disclosed in Malawi and in Infoshop prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to a transfer of the responsibility for the review and clearance of 
safeguard documents.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Rohrbach 
02/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
02/19/2008 
Comments:   
