Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3198
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Maldives 
Project ID:  P107981 
Project Name:  Maldives Mobile Phone Banking Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sriyani M. Hulugalle 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Payment systems, securities clearance and settlement (90%);Banking (10%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.70 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.35 
 
Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest 
1.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.85 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to significantly increase the use of banking system 
transactions for effecting or receiving payments for labor, goods and services nationwide 
through the implementation of a national inter-operable payments system that facilitates 
access to financial services and allows users access to any bank account using any mobile 
phone operator and cashing through any agent.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two main components:  
 
Component 1 - The creation, establishment and operationalization of the Maldives 
Interoperable Payments System (MIPS) : (US$ 6.00 million). The payment system is a 
single currency system operating in Maldivian Rufiyaas (MRF) that will be capable of 
interoperating with all local mobile network operators and integrating all the banks.  The 
system will offer a set of mobile telephone based accounts that include: (i) Mobile 
payment accounts, (ii) Mobile agent accounts, (ii) Mobile card accounts, (iii) Mobile 
Page  2
loyalty, (iv) Mobile airtime reseller accounts, and  (iv) a Customized account type - for 
introduction of new banking/payment products in future.  
 
The payment system will enable subscribers to transfer funds to and from bank accounts 
held in any bank to and from the telephone based accounts. The telephone accounts will 
be accessible from the handset. New customers will be able to enroll through the mobile 
handset and withdrawal and deposit functions will be performed by a network of agents. 
The project aims at having at least one agent in each of the 200 inhabited islands, 100 
resorts, 30-40 industrial/agricultural islands, and in Male. Each agent will have a direct 
contractual relationship with the bank for which he/she performs cash functions.  For the 
pur
pose of supporting the “Know Your Customer” qualification the system will be 
integrated with the National Registration System for validation of subscriber identity 
during the enrolment process.  
 
Component 2 - Building capacity so that the interoperable payments system can work 
well; designing and implementing a legal and regulatory framework and supporting a 
promotion/public education campaign – (US$ 1.00 Million)  Capacity must be built in 
several ways to ensure that the system is properly regulated, works for clients and is well 
managed.  It will be necessary to develop and implement regulations to cover all aspects 
of the system as well as build the capacity of regulators to supervise the system.  To help 
ensure that people and businesses understand the benefits of the system and adopt and 
trust it, a promotion/ public education campaign will be conducted.  Finally, a mobile 
phone banking unit will be established under the MMA that has the capability to 
implement MIPS.  At the same time, this unit will be established keeping in mind the 
longer term objective of transitioning into a competent, viable MIPS Business Unit after 
transaction volumes reach a reasonable level.  
 
CGAP will provide parallel funding to cover the costs of: (i) specialized external 
technical expertise required to design and implement the system including employing a 
Technical Advisor who will report to the MMA and assist the Project Director  to lead 
and manage the development of the project from the beginning as well as put in place the 
system and the team for the MIPS Business Unit; (ii) developing a road map for all the 
legal and regulatory work that is to be done and drafting the  framework regulation; and 
(iii) assist in conducting market research and impact studies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Existing inhabited islands of chosen atolls of the Maldives.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Considering the scope and activities financed under this project, there would be no 
adverse environmental impacts arising as a result of direct or indirect project activities.  
There will be no construction of buildings or any other form of civil works undertaken 
from the proceeds of this project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
An alternative analysis is not applicable since the project will not result in any adverse 
environmental or social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Republic of Maldives has very stringent environmental laws which are enforced 
strictly as the country's economy is dependent on tourism which is directly tied to the 
country's pristine ecology. However, this project would not result in any adverse 
environmental impacts due to the nature and the scope of the project and activities 
financed under the project.  There will be no construction of buildings or any other form 
of civil works undertaken from the proceeds of this project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
There are no safeguard policies triggered as a result of activities to be financed under this 
project.  Therefore, there has been no consultation of stakeholders with regard to 
safeguard issues.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is a Category C project with no adverse environmental and social impacts. No 
safeguard policies have been triggered. Therefore, no environmental or social safeguards 
assessments have been conducted.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sriyani M. Hulugalle 
01/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
01/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
01/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
01/03/2008 
Comments:   
Page  5
