Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/10/2008 
Report No.:  AC3412
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Maldives 
Project ID:  P108078 
Project Name:  Maldives Environmental Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Damania 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (50%);Central government administration (50%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (S);Climate change 
(S);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.24 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.50
2.74 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
This project has two development objectives.  The first Project Development Objective is 
that a solid waste management system is established and that inhabitants on selected 
islands use solid waste management facilities, reducing the risks of contamination 
associated with accumulated wastes and sea dumping. The second Project Development 
Objective is to build human and technical capacity for environmental management so that 
the environmental dimension is integrated in the planning process using information and 
expertise developed in the Project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would have four components: (1) a regional solid waste 
management program for the North Central Region; (2) capacity building for 
environmental management; (3) Technical Assistance for Strengthened Environmental 
Management and a pilot Regional Strategic Environmental Assessment (RSEA) and (4) 
project management and communications.  
 
Component 1: Regional Solid Waste Management Program.  
Page  2
Recognizing the Maldives' uniquely dispersed geography and its fragile ecology, the 
program will would operate at multiple levels. First, the construction of Island Waste 
Management Centers (IWMCs) would provide facilities for island communities to reduce 
the volume of waste requiring final disposal by sorting, recycling, and composting.  
Communities would be consulted and determine the level of sorting that would occur on 
each island. The residual waste would be temporarily stored in a safe and 
environmentally responsible manner in the IWMC.  Second, a Regional Waste 
Management Facility (RWMF) built on an uninhabited island or an island with 
compatible land uses (e.g. an industrial island), would serve as the destination for residual 
waste from the IWMCs and participating resorts.   Third, these would be supported by 
allied services such as community programs, waste transfer and transportation facilities, 
technical assistance and financial systems, all of which would be subject to government 
regulation and guided by stringent environmental criteria.  The facilities would be 
designed and built to the highest appropriate standards that are economically viable to 
reduce the risk of contamination from solid wastes.  Special attention would be paid to 
medical wastes and toxic wastes that would require special handling and management.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Environmental Management.  
 
The environmental agencies and regulators in the Maldives have a broad mandate, but 
their capacity to manage growing environmental pressures does not match the needs of a 
fragile environment on which the economy depends.  The proposed project is designed to 
at least partly fill the staffing gaps and capacity needs in the environment sector. Priority 
would be given to developing: (i) a core of competent generalists and specialists in the 
Ministry of Environment, Energy and Water (MEEW), other relevant ministries 
(Planning, Fisheries, Tourism, and Construction) and in the private sector (particularly 
NGOs and the tourism sector) to guide the environmental assessment and decision-
making process; (ii) a cadre of service providers to carry out monitoring and field 
surveillance activities making full use of modern technology; and (iii) a network of 
private citizens and stakeholders (e.g. fishermen, hotel and dive operators, boat operators 
and others) with the training needed to serve as the "eyes" and "ears" of the Ministry and 
also provide inputs for monitoring activities in the Project.  The emphasis would be on 
training existing government staff and others for whom there is a reasonable expectation 
that their skills could be utilized in the near or medium term.  
 
Training will be delivered through five modalities, namely: (a) community training and 
awareness raising; (b) specialized training leading to a certificate for roles not requiring 
academic credentials; (c) specialized training for technical tasks leading to an award such 
as a diploma or certificate; (d) undergraduate training of a new course in Environmental 
Management delivered by the Maldives College of Higher Education; and (e) 
scholarships for degree programs abroad (undergraduate and post-graduate).  
 
All training modalities with the exception of modality (e) would be carried out in-
country. Limited support will be provided for study abroad under modality (e) in 
universities in non-OECD countries, in areas that are of strategic environmental 
importance.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance for Strengthening Ennvironmental Management 
and Monitoring and a pilot Regional Strategic Environmental Assessment.  Sparse 
Page  3
information and the absence of baseline data remain one of the key impediments to 
improved environmental management in the Maldives. The primary objective of this 
component is to expand the knowledge base regarding critical natural resources on which 
the Maldives ecosystem and economy depend. In addition to filling major data gaps this 
component will also promote activities designed to stimulate discussions and policy 
deliberations that would lead to greater community awareness and better decision 
making. It will support activities of strategic significance; the problem of erosion that is 
projected to worsen with climate change, promoting natural adaptive capacity to climate 
change through improved stewardship and sustainability of the bait fishery, which is also 
linked to reef health.  The modalities through which this would be achieved include 
monitoring and assessments of terrestrial resources (i.e., mangroves and coastal erosion), 
marine resources (i.e., coral reef status and bait fisheries) by communities and 
professional scientists and support for satellite imagery with the aim of integrating the 
environmental dimension in planning.  Community monitoring is supported since it is an 
effective way of creating awareness and also of collecting basic data in a systematic 
fashion from a large number of sites.  The capacity to monitor and acquire data would be 
enhanced by the acquisition of a research vessel appropriately outfitted with and other 
necessary research instruments.  To bring together these activities and generate 
community awareness, this component would support a pilot Regional Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (RSEA) to (i) integrate and synthesize the assessments in 
ways that would inform policy and (ii) demonstrate the utility of incorporating 
environmental parameters in development decisions.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Communications.  This pertains to the day-to-
day operations of the project including project management, liaising and coordinating 
with other agencies and programs, financial management, procurement, monitoring and 
evaluation and project communications. The effective design and management of the 
latter aspect would be key to achieving the desired project outcomes, particularly in what 
regards to the solid waste management and the RSEA components.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project would focus primarily on the North Central Region of the Republic of 
Maldives comprised of the following atolls: Baa, Raa, Noonu and Lhaviyani. The atolls 
are considered a marine fragile ecosystem.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (ENV) 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the proposed project activities would result in improved environmental 
management in the Maldives.  The project is classified under Safeguards Category "A", 
primarily to reflect the risks involved in the Regional Solid Waste Management (RSWM) 
component.  Current systems of waste disposal in the Atolls of the North Central Region 
are highly unsanitary with open burning and ad-hoc dumping of wastes on the shorelines 
a
common practice on many islands.  This is environmentally damaging and especially 
destructive to coral reefs with growing quantities of plastics and lubricants in the waste 
stream that often end up contaminating the sensitive reef floor.  
 
Project-supported IWMCs are not expected to generate significant and/or irreversible 
adverse environmental or social impacts. Community-level waste recycling and resource 
recovery as well as composting of the organic fraction of the waste may take place at the 
IWMC level.  Recyclable material would be separated and stored in IWMCs for transport 
to the regional waste management facility (RWMF) for subsequent sale.  Medical and 
toxic wastes generated in the islands would be stored securely for transport and disposal 
at the RWMF.  The largest component in the waste stream is the organic fraction, which 
can be composted at the household level or at the IWMC.  The residue to be sent to the 
RWMF would be non-recyclable and non- degradable waste and would be transported to 
the RWMF on a periodic basis so that there would be no significant waste accumulation 
in the IWMCs.  There is potential for adverse environmental impacts at the RWMF, 
especially during the construction and operation period, although the net environmental 
impact of this component would be strongly positive.  
 
The type of regional waste management facilities, including the technology choices, can 
be decided only after communities develop their Island Waste Management Plans that 
would serve as the basis for identifying the amount and nature of the waste being 
transported to the RWMF(s).  The level of engineering required for containment of 
contamination would depend on the pollution potential of the waste arriving at the site.  
The possibility of incineration or waste-to-energy through steam recovery would 
similarly depend on the calorific value of the residual waste transported to the RWMF(s).  
The fragile ecosystem in the Maldives poses a challenge for the selection of appropriate 
Page  5
locations for siting the RWMF (s).  These problems are unique to the Maldives - a 
country where land is scarce, the population is highly dispersed and islands are invariably 
surrounded by coral reefs that serve as a protective barrier against erosion and storms.  
 
Selection of an island for the proposed RWMF(s) is highly constrained by social and 
environmental factors  (see below).  
 
It is highly probable that OP/BP 4.04, Natural Habitats may be triggered depending on 
the final site selection, facility design, and the specific activities that would be carried out 
at the facility. During the operation phase, poor design or improper management could 
result in leakage of wastes or leachate into the immediate habitat.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since the project would result in an effective solid waste management system for the 
Atolls in the North Central Region of the Maldives, the long term impacts of this 
intervention would be environmentally beneficial. The Government has awarded leases 
for several new resorts in the North Central Region and the improved regional solid waste 
management system would reduce sea dumping of waste and contamination of reef 
ecosystems, which are the main tourist attraction in the Maldives.  The reef monitoring 
and other environmental monitoring programs supported under this project would guide 
the land use planning process to help ensure better management of the environment and 
natural resources in the Maldives.  The RWMF could have indirect and/or long term 
impacts depending on the location of the site.  Currently there is insufficient information 
on the environmental dimension to generate a short list of potential sites for a RWMF.  
This will be done during project implementation making extensive use of data generated 
from Component 3 (Technical Assistance for monitoring and RSEA) and other sources.  
As there is inadequate baseline information on key environmental and geographical 
parameters, the site for the RWMF cannot be identified at this stage, hence the 
environmental impacts cannot be anticipated.  However, a full environmental assessment 
(EA) would be conducted as per OP/BP 4.01 once a shortlist of potential sites has been 
identified.  The EA would identify any potential and/or indirect impacts due to future 
activities in the location.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The following alternatives have been considered for locating the RWMF:  
 
a. 
Using an inhabited island to locate the RWMF: This is highly constrained by 
social and environmental factors.  Public opposition would likely preclude the selection 
of an inhabited island as a site for the RWMF.  The high population density on most 
inhabited islands would further detract from siting a RWMF on an inhabited island.  
 
b.
Using an uninhabited island:  Siting the RWMF on one of the 180 uninhabited 
islands in the North Central Region is also problematic.  Most uninhabited islands are 
densely vegetated and surrounded by contiguous reef systems, both likely to contain 
biodiversity.  Furthermore, location of an RWMF  in the North Central Region could 
require excavation of a navigation channel to provide access for waste transfer barges or 
Page  6
landing craft with potential impacts on the reef, the lagoon and possibly also on beach 
erosion.  Such a decision would need to be based on a careful environmental assessment.  
 
c. 
Using an inhabited island with compatible land uses:  There are prospects for 
using islands with more compatible land uses such as industrial islands site for a RWMF, 
but this is uncertain since data on land availability and use patterns is sparse.  
 
d.
Using more than one island: While conventional wisdom argues for economies of 
scale, where one site is better than several, in this instance the ecological costs would 
need to be given precedence over financial considerations.  
 
Although disposal of residual waste in an engineered, controlled landfill with organic 
matter being removed from the waste stream for composting, may be the most viable 
solution for solid waste management in South Asia, the unique characteristics of the 
Maldives ecosystem calls for the inclusion of a wider variety of waste management 
options such as incineration and waste to energy systems to be considered.  While the 
calorific value and quantity of waste available for such applications is a concern, removal 
of the biodegradable fraction of the waste for composting could result in making the 
residue more combustible with higher calorific values than mixed waste.  Although 
incineration and waste-to-energy technologies are often associated with adverse 
environmental impacts, the use of fragile island ecosystems with potential damage to 
coral reefs could result in environmental and ecological damage of even greater 
significance.  This calls for all available waste management options to be carefully 
assessed in the context of the unique constraints in the Maldives.  
 
An Environmental and Social Assessment Framework has been prepared by the 
Government of Maldives, it has been publicly disclosed on February 17, 2008 in the 
Maldives and has been sent to the INFOSHOP.  The selection of the preferred regional 
waste management option would be based on a detailed analysis, guided by the 
Framework, which would be undertaken during project implementation. The analysis 
would include potentially suitable technology, selection of which would be influenced 
significantly by the characteristics of the site.  These attributes would be evaluated 
through a weighted process known as the Best Practical Environmental Option (BPEO) 
that would select both the most appropriate waste management technology and the most 
appropriate site. The analysis would be conducted in two phases.  The first phase would 
(i) consider potentially suitable waste management system options (including sensitivity 
analysis);(ii) conduct a scoping investigation of short listed islands on which the 
proposed Regional Waste Management Facility (-ies) may be located and (iii) identify the 
most appropriate technology for each shortlisted site.  The second phase would involve 
undertaking (i) selection process for the preferred regional waste management system 
option; and (ii) a detailed technical and financial feasibility study for the preferred 
regional waste management option at the finally selected site.  
 
If the BPEO for the RWMF points to an uninhabited island, where establishment of the 
facility would result in adverse impacts to the island ecosystem such as loss or damage to 
terrestrial and marine biodiversity, the project would specify measures to offset the loss 
of biodiversity and island habit
at, should this occur.  In keeping with the Bank’s OP 4.04 
on Natural Habitats, biodiversity offsetscould be a part of the regional solid waste 
Page  7
management component.  In case where damage is unavoidable, an area with an 
unspoiled coral reef and marine environment could be identified based on the work 
undertaken in the Technical Assistance component, and protected under the project.  This 
would be done through the creation of a program for focal island ecosystems for 
community based environmental management.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given that the location of RWMFs, the catchment area, participating islands and 
technology for the RWMF cannot be determined without thorough investigations, 
detailed assessments and studies, the environmental assessment cannot be carried out 
during project preparation.  Therefore, an Environmental and Social Assessment 
Framework has been prepared by the Government, in lieu of a project-specific EA. This 
would serve as a template for undertaking project specific EAs once the specific works 
have been identified.  The Framework is: (i) comprehensive, (ii) highly detailed and (iii) 
contains precise time-bound action plans to assure compliance.  Compliance with the 
Framework requirements of EAs for the RWMFs and EMPs for the IWMCs to the 
satisfaction of IDA would be a disbursement condition for these activities.  
 
The Maldives has a reasonably sound track record of implementing the Environmental 
Impact Assessment process.  The proponent of a project requiring EIA under Maldives 
regulations is required to prepare a project brief, based on which a scoping meeting 
would be held by Ministry of Environment, Energy and Water (MEEW)/ERC and Terms 
of Reference (TOR) for the EIA.  Two independent reviewers (anonymous to the 
proponent) who are considered experts in the field of the relevant project are invited to 
submit a report with comments on the quality of the EIA prepared in accordance with the 
TOR issued by ERC.  The review comments of the independent experts form the basis of 
the EIA evaluation and consent is granted (or declined) with environmental mitigation 
conditions by the Minister of MEEW.  
 
While technical capacity at ERC is reasonably good, the proposed project would 
provide training to improve this capability further. The EIA review process appears to be 
adequate at this stage because independent reviewers used to review the EIA appear to 
have the required technical expertise to evaluate the EIA satisfactorily.  ERC has the 
responsibility of monitoring implementation of the EIA clearance conditions.  In addition 
to supporting strengthening monitoring of EIA clearance conditions in the Project, there 
would be rigorous compliance scrutiny and monitoring.  The project would support two 
independent environmental compliance reviews in the first two years of operation of the 
regional waste management facility and one in the final year during project closure.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders for the regional solid waste management program are the island 
communities in the North Central Atolls of Raa, Baa, Noonu and Lahviyani.The primary 
social issues to be dealt are related to the strong need for community participation and 
ownership in the Project. Public participation in waste management issues is critical, 
Page  8
especially on less populated islands where participation by the local population in the 
separation, collection, management and disposition of wastes is essential.  Previous 
experiences in the Maldives have shown that participation is crucial to the success of 
SWM on outlying islands with small populations.  This would depend not only on 
effective communication but also on getting the incentives right, which is a focus of this 
project.  In addition, the resorts are key stakeholders as they would benefit from 
improved solid waste management.  Other stakeholders are the Island officials, Atoll 
administrations, and MEEW.  
 
The project would be based on a strong participatory approach. Therefore, the RWMF 
Operator, Atolls Office and ERC would make all reasonable efforts to consult relevant 
stakeholders in the preparation and implementation of the RWMF activities prior to the 
finalization of the project design, during construction and throughout the life of 
operations. The consultations would be carried out in a way that is appropriate for 
cultural, gender based and other differences among stakeholders. These consultations 
would be initiated as early as possible, and provide relevant material in a timely manner 
prior to consultation. The views and needs of the vulnerable groups would be given due 
consideration.  The public consultation process would be a continuous process throughout 
the life of the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/20/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/25/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
There is no need for a Resettlement Action Plan, because there would be no resettlement 
under the Project.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Damania 
02/26/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
02/28/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
02/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
03/10/2008 
Comments:   
