Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3366 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P108440 
Project Name: Mali Energy Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Koffi Ekouevi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to expand energy access in Mali and improve the 
availability, reliability and efficiency of electricity supply and utilization.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project (as currently configured) will finance the activities and components 
tentatively identified as follows:  
 
Component 1:  Institutional strengthening and preliminary engineering studies.The energy 
sector reform experience over the last five years indicates that more work is needed to strengthen 
the institutional, legal and regulatory environment to foster a lasting competitive business 
environment attractive to private investors and operators. This component is intended mainly to 
help GOM in its restructuring efforts of EDM SA. A minimum platform of operational and 
financial performance targets will be set for EDM SA with monitoring indicators. In addition key 
sector institutions will be strengthened to improve sector planning, knowledge dissemination, 
monitoring and impact assessment. The component will also finance preliminary engineering 
studies towards the construction of the high voltage transmission line Sikasso-Bougouni-Bamako 
Page  2
to facilitate Mali’s access to gas-fired power from Cote d’Ivoire/Ghana. This line is intended to 
complement the Ferkessedougou-Sikasso-Segou-Bamako line, helping Mali to fully capitalize on 
the gas-fired power available from Cote d’Ivoire.  
 
Component 2: Urgent transmission and distribution  reinforcement investments. Assessment of 
the Mali power systems have revealed that the current medium voltage feeders in the Bamako 
area inadequate to serve the rapidly growing urban conurbation and distribution networks in 
many areas are already overloaded.  This prevents the country from benefiting from the 
additional power supply expected in 2008-9 from increased thermal generation capacity and 
from regional interconnections thereafter. This component is intended to finance urgent 
rehabilitation and reinforcement of the networks mainly around Bamako to ensure adequate 
infrastructure to distribute the expected increase in the supply of power.  
 
Component 3: Expansion of rural energy services delivery initiatives.   This will be a 
continuation of the on-going Household Energy and Universal Access Project. Additional Bank 
financing in this area will help the Government continue without interruption the implementation 
of its rural electrification agenda. Particular emphasis will be placed on ensuring that energy 
services are impacting the competitiveness of small and medium size   enterprises and social 
programs, thus facilitating the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.  
 
Costs (IDA)  
 
Component 1: Institutional strengthening and preliminary engineering studies - (US $10 
million)  
 
Component 2: Urgent transmission and distribution  reinforcement investments (US $35 
million)  
 
Component 3: Expansion of rural energy services delivery initiatives (US $30 million)  
 
Total IDA US$ 75 million   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The precise locations of project sites and specific activities will be confirmed during project 
preparation. To date, it is known that the project activities will be in urban areas of Bamako and 
rural areas throughout Mali.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has experience from the on-going Bank-financed Household Energy and 
Universal Access project. Through this project an Environmental Social Management 
Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework are in place.  The scope and the nature of 
activities planned under Component 3 of the proposed project are the same as those under the on-
going Household Energy Access Project. Similarly, the specific environmental or social impacts 
resulting from these activities, and or their exact location will only be known during project 
execution.  The Borrower will address these issues through the existing safeguards frameworks.  
During project preparation, an assessment of their implementation will be carried out to ensure 
the provisions of the existing safeguards instruments are still appropriate and are being properly 
implemented.  Further to that critical review, necessary updates to the existing frameworks, 
Page  3
including their implementation set up will be made and adequate actions towards Borrower’s 
capacity strengthening will be undertaken.  
 
The activities identified under Component  2 (Urgent transmission and distribution 
reinforcement ) are not yet defined.,The scope, nature, and exact location of these impacts will 
be known after the pre-appraisal mission. Required impacts assessments will be activated 
accordingly.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 applies because the project activities are likely to result in negative 
environmental impacts. The existing ESMF will cover the entire project, Specific EAs will be 
prepared along with feasibility studies related to specific investments. The ESMF will cover 
activities where sites are not identified before project appraisal, and specific EAs will cover 
activities where sites are known.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Disturbance of natural habitats could occur if the project were to intervene in sensitive 
ecosystems.  The triggering of OP 4.04 and the significance of the impacts will assessed in the 
context of EIA study, as well as mitigation measures commensurate with those impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
If the project were to intervene in forestry areas, it is likely that this may cause destruction of 
trees and vegetation, with construction of high voltage transmission lines and they ROW. The 
EIA study will determine if OP 4.36 is triggered along with mitigation measure commensurate 
with identified impacts   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To date, it is not anticipated that the sub-projects will adversely affect sites having 
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined under the 
OP 4. 11.The Environmental Assessment will determine whether OP4.11 is triggered. In addition 
if necessary, a screening mechanism will be incorporated into the existing ESMF to account for 
the identification of such sites and to ensure that impacts are mitigated, in line with the cultural 
resources policy.  This plan will be elaborated in collaboration with responsible local authorities.  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and other economic 
resources and on livelihoods. The existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
reviewed and updated. The RPF covers the entire project, and specific RAPs will be prepared 
along with the feasibility studies for specific investments .   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
None of the project activities will require a dam.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
None of the project activities will take place on international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
•
The review and updating of the existing ESMF and RPF will take place during project 
preparation.  Updated framework documents will be submitted for Bank approval, and 
disclosed before project appraisal per the Bank procedures on disclosure.  
 
•
Specific RAP and EAs for the first 18 month of civil works will also be prepared as 
required, on the basis of the available feasibility studies, and disclosed prior to project 
appraisal.  
 
During project implementation, subsequent RAPs and EAs will be prepared and disclosed 
along with the technical studies of specific investments, and per the guidance of the approved 
safeguards frameworks.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsabilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Koffi Ekouevi 
11/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
11/25/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
