Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3713 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P095091 
Project Name: Fostering Agricultural Productivity in Mali 
Task Team Leader: Olivier Durand 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P099709 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (35%);Agricultural extension and research (30%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (15%);Animal production (15%);General public 
administration sector (5%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Administrative and civil service reform (P);Public expenditure, financial management 
and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.32 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.60 
 
UN Development Programme 
0.43
1.03 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
In the framework of the GoM’s growth and poverty reduction strategy, the proposed operation 
will contribute to the specific objectives of ensuring food security and enhancing shared 
agricultural growth. The PDO will focus on increasing agricultural production and productivity 
of key selected production systems, based on a sustainable land and water management. To 
achieve this objective, the proposed operation will address the bottlenecks to agriculture 
modernizations identified earlier (lack of productive infrastructures, low farmer productivity and 
lack of sector coordination) by working along the following axes: (i) investing in productive 
infrastructures and equipment (large and small scale irrigation); (ii) enhancing service provision 
to farmers (research, training, advisory services, financing, input supply, etc.); and, (iii) enabling 
the policy and institutional environment for productivity increase, while ensuring a stronger 
Page  2
sector monitoring for better policy decision making. Investments will pay particular attention to 
promoting sustainable land and water management (SLWM).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be organized along the following components:  
 
Component 1: Productive investments  
 
This component will finance the development of infrastructure with a focus on agricultural 
water management, post-harvest operation and livestock production. It will build upon the 
lessons learned from PNIR and further enhance the participatory process under a demand-driven 
and market-led approach. Adequate focus will be given to the long term financial sustainability 
with proper management, operation and maintenance of the infrastructure by professional 
operators in partnership with POs. It will include funding for public infrastructures (with possible 
use of public-private partnerships) and credit / matching grants for private infrastructures.  
 
Component 2: Technology transfer and service provision to producers  
 
This component will address the weak capacities of all stakeholders, with a specific focus on 
producer organizations, and help producers tackle key constraints to productivity increase 
through the provision of packages of agricultural services. This will include technical advice and 
access to inputs, training and access to information, farm management advice and access to 
markets, as well as financial services. The component encompasses the provision of efficient 
public services to producers, as well as the private delivery of agricultural and financial services 
through POs, input suppliers, banks and micro-finance institutions. Strategic and demand-driven 
research will constitute another critical area of investments. The component will invest in 
disseminating research results on new varieties, diversification, mechanization or innovative 
practices, including environment-friendly agricultural practices, water conservation techniques, 
invasive plant control, and SLWM technologies in general. Seed production will be a strong area 
of investments to increase availability of improved varieties.  
 
Component 3: Comprehensive programmatic approach and sector monitoring  
 
Interventions will support the dialogue between key Ministries, POs, private sector 
representatives and donors, to achieve a better organization and coordination of the agricultural 
sector. It will forge a shared vision among all stakeholders towards a comprehensive / 
programmatic approach to agricultural productivity and around the implementation of the LOA. 
This component will also support key policy or institutional reforms within Ministries and key 
public entities, such as Office du Niger, for a stronger efficiency of public services. Beyond the 
usual M&E system for the project, this component will strengthen existing monitoring and 
evaluation services. Within the framework of the Statistical Master Plan, it will restore the 
regular production of reliable agricultural statistics and expand existing market information 
services. Thanks to GEF inputs, this component will also support the development of tools to 
closely monitor land degradation and ecosystem evolution. It will develop and use specific tools 
and indicators to monitor SLWM up-scaling and impact of field investments through a dedicated 
geographic information system.  
Page  3
Component 4:Project coordination and implementation  
 
Overall project implementation will be under the direct oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
but the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries, the Food Security Commissariat and the Ministry of 
Environment will be fully in charge of implementing activities in their specific field of 
responsibilities. POs will play a key role in project implementation, especially for field 
investments in infrastructure and in delivering advisory services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
By definition, only the third component related to the programmatic approach will have a nation-
wide coverage but activities will consist of institutional support, capacity-building and 
monitoring and evaluation. The two other components on productive investments and 
agricultural services provision to farmers include concrete field investments that will be 
concentrated on targeted production systems with regional scope.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Thanks to predecessor projects in the agricultural and rural development sector, the Borrower 
knows and has a long experience of Bank safeguard policies. However, institutional capacities 
remain weak for Safeguard Policies implementation and supervision. Current capacities and 
institutional arrangements will be assessed during project preparation. Then key actions and 
capacity building activities will be identified to ensure a sound monitoring of the agreed 
environment and social framework and a full compliance with Bank Policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environment and social impact assessment will be conducted and will include a review of 
the existing safeguards plans and frameworks that have been used under predecessor projects, 
namely PNIR and PASAOP, and that is currently guiding the implementation of the Ag. 
Diversification and Competitiveness Project (PCDA). Revisions and adjustments to existing 
safeguards management plans and frameworks will be agreed on and disclosed prior to appraisal.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
As this is promoting undefined public infrastructure, with large and small scale irrigation, 
water management and demand driven investments can't be known yet at this stage.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged under the project, it is anticipated that 
the intensification of production systems will lead to an increased use of pesticides, as well as 
that of inorganic fertilizers. The existing Pest Management Plan and its application will be 
reviewed and recommendations will be provided for further actions and capacity building 
activities. Thanks to the complementary GEF financing, the pr
oject will also promote the use of 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
alternative crop protection techniques (biological and integrated control techniques), as well as 
sustainable land and water management practices.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Resettlement Policy Framework prepared in conjunction with PCDA appraisal will be 
revised based on the identification of locations for investments in large and small-scale irrigation 
under this new project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
As this is promoting undefined public infrastructure, with large and small scale irrigation, 
water management and demand driven investments can't be known yet at this stage.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
As irrigation investments will use water resources from the Niger River, notification to 
riparian countries will be required through the River Niger Basin Authority.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/05/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environment and social impact assessment, as well as the revised Pest Management Plan 
and the Resettlement Policy Framework, will be prepared, reviewed and cleared for 
disclosure in-country and at the Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier Durand 
11/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/29/2008 
Comments:  Safeguard responsibilities were transferred to SMU. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
11/20/2008 
Comments:   
