Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/14/2008 
Report No.:  AC3636
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mali 
Project ID:  P111018 
Project Name:  Additional Financing Mali Household Energy and Universal Access 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Koffi Ekouevi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 28, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (70%);Renewable energy (25%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Climate change (P);Land 
administration and management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.86
3.86 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing would support the initial  development objective of 
the Household Energy and Universal Rural Access (HEURA) Project which is to support 
the Government of Mali's efforts to increase the access of isolated low income 
populations to basic energy services to help achieve economic growth and poverty 
reduction targets, including those linked with the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs).   
 
3. Project Description 
The original Project Design with its three components remains unchanged. The 
Additional Financing would support the original development objective of the current 
project and would be implemented using the same framework and implementation 
arrangements as the original project.  
 
Component 1: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening ( US$2.76 
million)  
Page  2
The Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening component will finance the 
Water and Electricity Regulatory Commission (CREE), the Directorate of Energy (DNE), 
the National Directorate of Nature Conservation (DNCN), and the Rural Energy Agency 
(AMADER). The World Bank Institute will provide technical assistance in the design of 
capacity development activities based on project objectives and sector objectives as 
outlined in the CAS.  
 
Sub-component A: Support to the CREE. This Additional Financing will help the CREE 
redefine its mandate, reinforce its technical capacities in the area of contract oversight, 
monitoring and compliance more effectively. This is particularly important in view of the 
recently failed privatization experience of EDM SA and the need to eventually establish a 
more formal regulatory oversight mechanism once the rural electrification initiatives are 
sufficiently scaled up. Therefore tailor made capacity building activities and on-the job 
training will be a priority. A limited number of equipment (hardware and software), 
strategic studies and workshops will also be financed.  
 
Sub-component B: Support to the DNE.  The DNE is still a relatively fragile institution 
with a weak administrative authority. Sector strategy and policy formulation, monitoring 
and evaluation, and impact assessment mandates of to DNE are still not being adequately 
met. This Additional Financing will help the DNE conduct an institutional audit to 
identify its strengths and weaknesses and to develop an action plan towards a reinforced 
administrative and technical authority. A capacity building program for staff, equipment, 
sector strategic studies, and workshops will be financed. Particular areas of focus include 
knowledge and tools in policy formulation, monitoring, evaluation, and impact 
assessment, demand side management and energy efficiency, biofuels project 
development, energy and climate change issues, and generation, transmission, and 
distribution master plans.  
 
Sub-component C: Support to the DNCN- The DNCN is playing an important role in 
the supervision of woodland energy management activities of the household energy 
component. In particular, the DNCN is ensuring that the control and monitoring systems 
of the fuelwood rural markets are efficient and effective. Continuous efforts are needed to 
strengthen the DNCN to be more efficient in policy and strategy development; and 
monitoring and evaluation of activities in the forestry sector. In particular, the Additional 
Financing will help finance the implementation of existing forestry legislation intended to 
regulate the production, trade, and utilization of woodfuels. A capacity building program 
mostly for regional staff, equipment, strategic studies and workshops will be financed.  
 
Sub-component D: Support to AMADER. The original project financed capacity 
development of AMADER and equipment to enable it to become an operational Agency. 
This Additional Financing will finance AMADER (i) to improve on its monitoring of 
local private sector operators involved in energy services delivery; (ii) to develop more 
innovative technical and managerial schemes to promote lower cost electrification 
solutions; (iii) to promote additional productive uses of energy services in partnership 
with the local banking system; (iv) to continue to remove barriers to the development of 
Page  3
renewable energy in line with the objectives of the GEF co-financed activities of the 
original project; and (v) to reinforce output based mechanisms related to the energy 
services delivery component.  This subcomponent will also finance outreach and 
partnerships initiatives at the national, regional, and global levels to attract more 
financing for scaling up in a sustainable manner energy access expansion in Mali. A 
strategic capacity development program will be financed as well as technical studies, 
equipment, and workshops.  
 
Component 2: Energy Services Delivery ( US$30.41 million)  
 
The Energy Services Delivery Component will finance the scale up of rural 
electrification projects. The experience of the spontaneous bottom up projects has 
demonstrated the potential of a large scale energy access project in Mali. Following the 
bottom up rural electrification approach spontaneous private initiative projects are 
selected based on promoters’ ability to develop and operate a viableproject with a fixed 
investment subsidy (between 75-80% , $500,000 max). Subsidies are established on the 
basis of (i) number of customers to be connected during the first two years (ii) the 
average tariff (iii) subsidy by customer connected (total investment/number of 
customers).  
 
Sub-component A: Scale up of Rural Electrification Projects. Through the Additional 
Financing the Energy Services Delivery investments will be scaled up through the 
extension of existing bottom up projects, the development of new bottom up projects,  
and the development of one top down project. It was estimated by the original project that  
some 5-7 larger top down decentralized schemes, including two ongoing decentralized 
schemes prior to the project will be developed. It turns out that the development of these 
top down projects was difficult and very slow. In addition, they required the participation 
of foreign private sector investors that are slow to engage in deals in rural areas of Mali. 
It was rather the extension of two existing larger decentralized concessions that was 
implemented. The original project attracted an impressive number of local private sector 
operators through small scale projects. The Additional Financing will scale up the bottom 
up small scale projects with the implementation of only one top down larger project. 
Through a separate financing from KfW, AMADER is developing the implementation of 
two other top down larger projects.  
 
Sub-component B: Scale up of Multi-Functional Platforms Investments. The original 
project has demonstrated that the Multifunctional Platforms are helping communities 
have access to basic pre-electrification and helping to develop productive uses of energy. 
This Additional Financing will finance a scale up of the Multi-functional platforms in 
remote communities. A particular emphasis will be placed on partnerships with the local 
banking system to develop micro-financing schemes to support the women’s associations 
managing the Multifunctional Platforms.  
 
Sub-component C:  Information, Education, and Communication (IEC). Implementation 
experience with IEC through the original project indicated that a deepening of the 
initiatives, their relevance to local communities, and demonstration workshops are 
Page  4
important. The Additional financing will support tailor-made IEC initiatives mostly in 
remote communities to support energy services delivery initiatives.  
 
Component 3: Household Energy ( US$ 1.76 million)  
 
The speed of physical progress of the woodland management initiatives of the original 
project is slow as many actors both local and central are involved and considerable 
amount of time is needed to build consensus. Moreover, sustainability of these initiatives 
is linked to the enforcement of forestry legislation, participatory approaches that are 
elaborate in design and implementation. A strategic choice has been made to consolidate 
initiatives of the original project and to scale up only those that have proven satisfactory 
in their implementation.  
 
Sub-component A: Community-based Woodland Management. This sub-component  
will finance (i) the consolidation of woodland management plans; (ii) small woodfuels 
management activities by local communities and private operators; and (iii) a forestry 
information system. This sub-component will also finance specific activities initiated in 
partnership with the DNCN to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework sustaining 
the woodfuel sector. In particular: (i) the delegation of tax collection to credible and 
equipped communal institutions; (ii) guaranteeing a significant tax share to local 
communities with proper village woodland management schemes; (iii) defining clearly 
the roles and responsibilities of communes, the private sector, and NGOs in the 
production, control, and trade of woodfuels; (iv) encouraging price incentives for the 
development of alternative fuels to wood energy; (v) ensure that control and monitoring 
systems of fuelwood rural markets are efficient and effective; and (vi)  diversification of 
productive activities in rural communities.  
 
Sub-component B: Interfuel Substitution and Household Energy Efficiency. This sub-
component will finance: (i) the scale up of improved stoves; (ii) the scale up of compact 
fluorescent lamps; and (iii) an information system on energy efficiency. A review of the 
implementation of the original project indicates that initiatives on kerosene stoves, LPG, 
wood briquettes, and evaporative air-coolers did not get an adequate response from users. 
These initiatives will not be scaled up by this Additional Financing. Only studies to 
further understand barriers to the adoption of these devices will be financed.  
 
Sub-component C:  Information, Education, and Communication. This sub-component  
will finance promotional campaigns to support the consolidation of woodland energy 
management initiatives and interfuel substitution and energy efficiency initiatives.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The physical activities will be carried out in peri-urban and rural areas of Mali.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the project is expected to have positive environmental benefits, World Bank’s 
environmental and social safeguards will be complied with by the privatesector operators 
involved in decentralized energy services delivery.  The proposed scale up under the 
additional financing will not trigger any new social safeguard policy such as indigenous 
peoples, or environmental ones such as natural habitats.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The global objective is to contribute to positive environmental impacts, it is expected that 
only minor adverse impacts will occur. Both the energy services delivery and the 
household energy components will undergo social and environmental assessments to 
identify mitigation measures for issues that could result in long term impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The safeguards for the original project are rated satisfactory and the project had no 
negative environmental or social impacts. The additional financing will strengthen the 
institutional arrangement for social and environmental management with the recruitment 
of an environmental expert at the project coordination unit. His main responsibility will 
be to ensure that environmental and social measures are more adequately taken into 
consideration in the processing of business plans for energy production.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework and the Resettlement Policy 
Framework were reviewed and cleared by the Bank. They were disclosed by the info 
shop and in country on May 2, 2003 prior to appraisal of the original project. The 
borrower is currently implementing the original project within an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework. These serve as 
basis to screen all sub-projects. Sub-projects presented by private operators will continue 
to be subject to environmental and social assessments based on the frameworks. In view 
of potential land acquisition and/pr loss of access to resources, the government will 
prepare the appropriate resettlement instrument based on recommendations of the 
Resettlement Policy Framework. Technical support will be provided to strengthen the 
systematic screening of sub-projects and the effective implementation of mitigations 
measures that might be necessary.  
 
In order to facilitate the processing of safeguards documents and compliance with OP 
4.12, the management of land acquisition issues in rural electrification operations will be 
based on standard practices in this sub-sector and namely: (i) the respect of sector 
regulations on land transfer for electricity production,; (ii) the description of the nature of 
land transactions and process of identifying specific project sites during implementation; 
and (iii) the documentation of land transfers ,when such new land acquisition is not likely 
to result in involuntary displacement.  Otherwise a resettlement or abbreviated 
resettlement plan consistent with the RPF will be prepared and disclosed before sub-
project financing.  The likely scope of increased human and economic interactions as a 
result of the electrification in rural communities will be assessed; if this increase is also 
likely to induce the spread of STD, then appropriated management measures will be 
included in the environmental and social management plans (ESMP) of approved 
business plans for rural electrification.  
 
Through workshops and consultations, environmental and social issues will be 
addressed during the implementation of the additional financing project. Private sector 
operators and NGOs involved in the project will also be subject to sensitization on 
safeguards policies.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/02/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2003 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/02/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2003 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  8
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Koffi Ekouevi 
07/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
07/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
07/10/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pankaj Gupta 
07/10/2008 
Comments:   
