Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3711 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P111018 
Project Name: Additional Financing Mali Household Energy and Universal Access 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Koffi Ekouevi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 9, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);Renewable energy (25%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Climate change (P);Land 
administration and management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.86
3.86 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing would support the initial development objective of the 
Household Energy and Universal Rural Access (HEURA) Project which is to support the 
Government of Mali's efforts to increase the access of isolated low income populations to basic 
energy services to help achieve economic growth and poverty reduction targets, including those 
linked with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The original Project Design with its three components remains unchanged. The Additional 
Financing would support the original development objective of the current project and would be 
implemented using the same framework and implementation arrangements as the original 
project.  
 
Component 1: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$2.76 million)  
Page  2
The Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening component will finance the Water 
and Electricity Regulatory Commission (CREE), the Directorate of Energy (DNE), the National 
Directorate of Nature Conservation (DNCN), and the Rural Energy Agency (AMADER). The 
World Bank Institute will provide technical assistance in the design of capacity development 
activities based on project objectives and sector objectives as outlined in the CAS.  
 
Component 2: Energy Services Delivery (US$ 30.41 million)  
 
The Energy Services Delivery Component will finance the scale up of rural electrification 
projects. The experience of the spontaneous bottom up projects has demonstrated the potential of 
a
large scale energy access project in Mali. Following the bottom up rural electrification 
approach spontaneous private initiative projects are selected based on promoters’ ability to 
develop and operate a viableproject with a fixed investment subsidy (between 75-80% , 
$500,000 max). Subsidies are established on the basis of (i) number of customers to be 
connected during the first two years (ii) the average tariff (iii) subsidy by customer connected 
(total investment/number of customers).  
 
Component 3: Household Energy (US$1.76 million)  
 
The speed of physical progress of the woodland management initiatives of the original project 
is slow as many actors both local and central are involved and considerable amount of time is 
needed to build consensus. Moreover, sustainability of these initiatives is linked to the 
enforcement of forestry legislation, participatory approaches that are elaborate in design and 
implementation. A strategic choice has been made to consolidate initiatives of the original 
project and to scale up only those that have proven satisfactory in their implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The physical activities will be carried out in peri-urban and rural areas of Mali.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The safeguards for the original project are rated satisfactory based on assessments during field 
visits and monitoring reports. The project had no negative environmental or social impacts. The 
additional financing will strengthen the institutional arrangement for social and environmental 
management with the recruitment of an environmental expert at the project coordination unit. His 
main responsibility will be to ensure that environmental and social measures are more adequately 
taken into consideration in the processing of business plans for energy production.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 applies because some of the project activities may result in negative 
environmental impacts.  
 
The global objective of the project to contribute to reduce atmospheric carbon emissions 
through removing barriers and reductions in cost of renewable energy are expected to have 
positive environmental benefits. It is expected that only minor adverse impacts will occur. 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Within the framework of the existing ESMF, the Energy Services delivery component and the 
Household Energy  components will undergo social and environmental assessments to identify 
mitigation measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Disturbance of natural habitats will not occur in this project.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Project interventions in forestry areas are likely to cause destruction of trees and vegetation.  
This project is promoting community based woodland management that would have positive 
impacts.  In case forestry  areas are negatively affected the existing ESMF describes mitigation 
measures.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
To date, it is not anticipated that the sub-projects will adversely affect sites having 
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined under the 
OP4.11.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The Project activities will not affect indigenous peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and other economic 
resources and on livelihoods. In case, wehere activities may require resettlement, the existing 
RPF describes mitigation measures to be under taken.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
None of the project activities will require a dam.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
None of the project activities will take place on international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The Environmental and Social Management Framework and the Resettlement Policy 
Framework were reviewed and cleared by the Bank. They were disclosed by the info shop 
and in country on May 2, 2003 prior to appraisal of the original project. The SMU has agreed 
to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Koffi Ekouevi 
07/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pankaj Gupta 
07/10/2008 
Comments:   
