Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3275 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritania 
Project ID: P108554 
Project Name: Mauritania Port of Nouakchott Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Francois Marteau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
50.00
55.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary project objective is to secure the extension the Port of Nouakchott (PANPA) in 
order to face its growth perspectives, while improving the environmental impact of the port 
initial construction and development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Port of Nouakchott Development Project would be based on the following strategy:  
 
(i) build a container terminal parallel to the shore (ii) build new quays perpendicular to the 
shore, more specifically aimed at oil, bulk and general cargo traffic; and (iii) design and 
implement environmental and social measures aiming at mitigating the adverse impact of both 
the initial port concept and the extensions.  
 
The project may benefit from several financial instruments available from the WBG, and which 
will be reviewed during preparation. As noted above, Bank support would mostly target:  
 
(i) Component 1:  Optimize the investment program for the development of PANPA, given its 
growth perspectives  
Page  2
Most of the studies are already carried out using the Technical Assistance and the Urban 
Development Project. The WBG could fund (i) part of the container terminal infrastructure if 
viability of a full private sector option is not secured, (ii) support to GOM and PANPA to 
supervise the investments implementation and coordinate the Public Private Partnership 
Selection and contractualization process and (iii) secure that investment are complemented by 
appropriate facilitation measures to ensure efficiency.  
 
(ii) Component 2:  Ensure a satisfactory protection of Nouakchott’s environmentand limit the 
impact of PANPA on costal erosion  
 
The project would support the implementation of the safeguards measures as determined by the 
current study on Nouakchott flooding prevention and by the Environmental Assessment, 
including restoration of coastal transit, through (i) investment in environmental protection and 
possibly sediment transit restoration, (ii) capacity building of all stakeholders to efficiently 
monitor environmental impacts. These could be funded by the WBG, but the team will look for 
alternate and cheaper resources to try to provide GOM with the best funding options possible.  
 
Costing of the project at this stage is premature, as the elements which will give adequate 
elements are scheduled for January, 2008. Based on the team’s experience, the project cost may 
be as follows:  
 
-
Environmental protection: $ 15 million;  
 
-
Technical assistance to GOM: $ 5 million;  
 
-
Building of the new container terminal: $ 80 to 100 million, of which $ 50 million would 
be funded by the private sponsors, and 30 million may be funded by the WBG.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project location: Port of Nouakchott and neighborhood.  
 
The construction of the port pier, completed in 1986, has created a significant perturbation in 
the coastal transport of silt, leading to the deposition of sediment on the north side of the pier, 
increasing the shore line at an annual rate of 35 meters, and the erosion of the coastline 
immediately south of the port at the rate of 25 meters per year, with effects discernible as far as 
23 km south of the port.  With no mitigating actions, it is expected that these processes will 
continue at the present rate, with the deposition of sediment likely to extend beyond the pier by 
2015, with the erosion expected to extend to more than 1,000 m inland by the same date, and 
continuing to extend southward.  
 
The two major threats posed by this impact are (i) erosion of the natural coastal protection south 
of the port, leading to the possible flooding of much of the city of Nouakchott, and (ii) the 
accretion of silt beyond the pier, threatening the operations of the port.  Given the potentially 
significant economic impact of these threats, it is essential that they be addressed in the near 
future, whether or not the port is expanded. It is worth noting that the impact of the Port 
extension, if any, is likely to be much less than that of the initial construction.  
 
An initial analysis examined a number of possible solutions, and recommended that the long-
term resolution of this problem would require measures to restore the coastal transport of 
Page  3
sediment past the port, either through a continuous “bypassing” mechanism, or regular dredging 
and deposition.  A further study has been requested to examine the proposed solutions and 
associated costs in more detail, implementation of which the Bank would be prepared to support 
as a specific component of the proposed Project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The regulatory framework, both national and international, governing the environmental 
management of operations at PANPA is currently unclear.  The proposed Environmental 
Assessment will include an analysis of relevant legislation, and will help clarify the need for any 
measures necessary to close regulatory gaps.  The strengthening and implementation of the 
regulatory framework will be facilitated by the proposed creation within the Merchant Marine 
Directory of a Sea Environment and Port Areas Preservation Service.  The project will include 
support to help strengthen the regulatory and institutional framework for the environmental 
management of port and shipping operations, and will especially help develop an Environmental 
Management System in collaboration with the port operator during operation (the development 
of this system will be part of the Environmental Assessment).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main impact identified relates to the initial construction of the port, the extension usually 
not adding significant impact. However, the team considered the extension project taking into 
account the current challenges of the port and aiming at solving or limiting the initial and 
significant construction impact. In addition to the continued threats posed by the interruption of 
the coastal transport of sediments, the proposed expansion to the port raises the possibility of a 
range of environmental impact, both new and continued.  Under national legislation, and as a 
requirement of World Bank financing, this impact will be subject to an Environmental 
Assessment (EA), both to inform the design of the proposed structures and to guide the conduct 
of construction activities and future port operations. The proposed Safeguards category is 
therefore A.  
 
As well as reviewing and summarizing the separate analysis of the impact and mitigation of 
the interruption of the coastal transport of sediments, the sources of potential impact to be 
considered in the Environmental Assessment will include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following:  
 
•
The regulatory framework covering environmental management at PANPA (nationaland 
international);  
 
•
The status of current operations with regard to this regulatory framework;  
 
•
Existing sources of contamination;  
 
•
Further perturbation of the hydro-sedimentary system by new structures and dredging;  
 
•
Environmental and social impact of construction activities and erosion;  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
•
Disposal of dredge material during construction and future operations;  
 
•
Management of solid, liquid and gaseous waste from shipping and land-based sources in 
future operations;  
 
•
Management of oil spills and other hazards during future operations (establishment of a 
response plan, since the Nouakchott Port in an ecologically sensitive area, where thousands of 
fishermen are dependent on marine catches for their livelihood).  
 
The EA will also help define the extent of the environmental liabilities of any future 
concessionaire investing in the port and its operations.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
There might be impacts on the fish catches as a consequence of construction and people and 
businesses might be affected by the port expansion. Though the preliminary assessment from the 
team indicates that this should not be the case, a social specialist will visit the project site to 
assess whether social impacts need to be mitigated, and assess potential positive impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The necessary safeguard reporting instrument(s) will be consulted and disclosed in the 
country and to the InfoShop prior to Appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Francois Marteau 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Comments:   
