Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3423 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritius 
Project ID: P105669 
Project Name: Mauritius - Economic Transition (TA) Project 
Task Team Leader: Constantine Chikosi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project is designed to strengthen investment climate reforms in order to induce supply-side 
investment responses and accelerate economic growth.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Within the Government’s broader reform program, the project will address a subset of key 
activities to support and help keep up the momentum for reform. Some of the project activities - 
especially just-in-time technical assistance - will be defined only in broad terms, to allow the 
flexibility for opportunistic responses to the Government’s needs. The project will be structured 
around the following three pillars:  
 
(1) 
Business Facilitation:  Mauritius aspires to a top 10 global ranking in the annual Doing 
Business surveys by end 2010. It is currently number one in Africa having climbed from 32 to 27 
in the world in the 2008 survey. This achievement was mainly the result of the enactment of the 
Business Facilitation Act which implemented recommendations of the Bank’s Investment 
Climate Assessment (2006). Mauritius also aspires to become a regional center for the arbitration 
of commercial disputes. Under this component, the project will support activities which aim to 
Page  2
further improve the regulatory environment in which the private sector operates, to strengthen 
the institutions that protect private property rights and allow speedy, low cost business 
facilitation 
–
including technical assistance and systems investment in (i) setting up a 
commercial division of the High Court, (ii) strengthening Alternative Dispute Resolution 
systems to strengthen contract enforcement, (iii) facilitating registration of property, (iv) 
extending the coverage of the Credit Reference Bureau to improve access to finance.  It will 
address (through technical assistance and policy analysis) the legislative backlog of economic 
laws, many of which require revision, that inhibit private sector development and the preparation 
of key new legislation such the Credit Information Act, Arbitration and Conciliation Services 
Act, and Competition law. This component will also support strengthening of legislative drafting 
capacity in the State Law Office, currently one of the bottlenecks in dealing with the backlog of 
economic laws that need updating.  
 
(2) 
Parastatal Sector Reform:  This component would support: (i) enterprise level 
restructuring activities in key state owned enterprises; developing and implementing 
rationalization and divestiture options and a communications strategy to maximize acceptance of 
the reform program; (ii) improved oversight of the parastatal sector within the Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development and in line ministries (iii) adoption of improved corporate 
governance practices across the parastatal sector including improvements to the legal and 
regulatory framework, separation of Government’s ownership from its regulatory functions, and 
improved reporting of financial and operational performance, (iv) implementation of competition 
law and policy including creation of a competition authority and associated mechanisms. 
Funding for the initial diagnostic work and preparation of detailed project activities will be 
provided through a PPF.  
 
(3) 
Utility Regulation & Public Private Partnerships: A Public Private Partnerships (PPP) 
Unit already exists in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development but lacks capacity and 
an adequate institutional framework to discharge its increasingly important mandate. This 
component will support the establishment of a facility for just-in-time advisory services to the 
Government on various PPP projects. The component will also support the establishment of an 
enhanced policy, legal and institutional framework for public private partnerships and capacity 
building for the PPP Unit. A Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility funded consultancy 
will conduct an initial assessment and stakeholder consultations on the design of an appropriate 
legal and institutional framework for PPPs in Mauritius. While avoiding the creation of 
unnecessary new structures, the project will explore economies of scale in regulation given the 
country’s small marketsize and support the establishment, strengthening and possible 
consolidation of independent regulators for the infrastructure utilities (telecoms, energy and 
water) by helping to establish the Utility Regulation Authority (for which the enabling legislation 
has already been prepared) and put in place sound policy and institutional frameworks.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be managed from the Ministry ofFinance and Economic Development, New 
Government Center, Port Louis, Mauritius.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies will apply to this technical assistance project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard-related studies will be needed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Constantine Chikosi 
02/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
