Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2009 
Report No.:  48254
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritius 
Project ID:  P091828 
Project Name:  MU-Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Graftieaux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (70%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(15%);General transportation sector (10%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.10
1.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is consistent with the objective of the CAS (dated October 12, 
2006), which is to help the Government realize successfully Mauritius’ transition to a 
more competitive and sophisticated economy that requires the removal of infrastructure 
bottlenecks.  
 
It will aim at meeting the following specific objective: To contribute to improved 
national infrastructure through playing a key role in the definition and implementation of 
a
high-quality Public Sector Investment Program. More specifically, the project will 
contribute to: (i) improve the condition of the road network through road upgrading, 
periodic maintenance and pilot performance-based routine maintenance contracts, (ii) 
prepare investments in the urban transport sector to alleviate congestion between 
Curepipe and Port-Louis and in the road sector to keep upgrading the existing network, 
(iii) help the Government in defining a ten-year Public Sector Investment Program, (iv) 
assist in establishing a framework for economically viable clean energy development, and 
thereby increase the proportion of renewable energy in the energy mix, (iv) identify and 
prepare key investments in the water and wastewater sectors so as to increase water 
Page  2
production in a sustainable way and to augment the connection to public sewerage 
networks from 25% of households as of now to 50% by 2012 and (v) provide technical 
assistance and training to the line Ministries and agencies.   
 
3. Project Description 
Investment components are summarized below:  
 
(A)Wooton 
–
Belle Rive - Quartier Militaire Road, a 5.5-to-6.5 meter road, the main 
link between the East and the West of Mauritius, will be fully or partially rehabilitated 
and widened to up to 7.5 meters under the proposed project, to alleviate congestion and 
above all to improve road safety on this axis, largely used by trucks and buses. The scope 
of works for the upgrading of Quartier Militaire Road (B6) consists of two main 
components: (a) Upgrading of the existing alignment from Belle Rive junction to 
Quartier Militaire and (b) Construction of bypasses to inhabited areas at Valetta and 
Quartier Militaire.  
 
(a) The upgrading works include:  
 
•
Partial realignment, strengthening and improvement of the longitudinal profile of 
the existing road over a length of about 7 km with a 7.4 meter wide carriageway from 
Belle Rive junction to Quartier Militaire  
 
•
Construction of footpaths and drains, provision of street lighting and resurfacing 
of the existing road through the inhabited areas of Valetta and Quartier Militaire over a 
length of about 2.25 km.  
 
(b) The Bypasses include:  
 
•
Construction of a new 7.4 m wide road to bypass the village of Valetta over 
alength of 1.5km inclusive of two round-abouts, drainage and street lighting.(Valetta 
Bypass)  
 
•
Construction of a new 7.4 m wide road to bypass the village of Quartier Militaire 
over a length of 2.5km inclusive of three round-abouts, one underpass at Bonne Veine 
Road, drainage and street lighting.(Quartier Militaire Bypass).  
 
(B)Roadworks activities will include the periodic maintenance of three highway 
sections, which will complement the ongoing works on the Terre Rouge – Pamplemousse 
section on M2 (approx. 10 km of dual carriageway): (i) Terre Rouge – Quay D on M2 (5 
km of dual carriageway), (ii) Nouvelle France – Vigie on M1 (8 km of single 
carriageway) and (iii) parts of Pamplemousse-Grand Baie on M2 (4 km of double 
carriageway). Each of these three sections would be then maintained through one of the 
pilot performance-based routine maintenance contracts.  
 
The Road Development Authority (RDA) is the Executing Agency for both these 
investment components of the Project.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
(A)  Wooton 
–
Belle Rive - Quartier Militaire Road, a 5.5-to-6.5 meter road, the main 
link between the East and the West of Mauritius. The two 7.4 m wide bypass roads will 
bypass the villages of Valetta and Quartier Militaire.  
 
(B)  Three portions of highway in the North of the island of Mauritius: the Terre Rouge 
–
Pamplemousse section on the M2.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts on human populations 
or environmentally important areas.  
 
The Quartier Militaire project will improve the quality of life of the general population, 
through reducing travel time and increasing safety of transit between the East and West 
of the island.  The improvement in traffic flow will increase productive person hours and 
leisure time, as less time will be spent in transit between work and home.  
 
The population living alongside the road or in the vicinity will particularly benefit as 
works will include the construction of pedestrian pavements, guardrails, speed breaks and 
pedestrian crossings, all of which will enhance safety and enable ease of transit for 
pedestrians traversing the route.  
 
Street lighting will be provided along the new alignment and at all roundabouts to 
increase visibility for drivers, and reduce the risk of accidents. Bus shelters will be 
constructed, providing additional comfort and security to commuters.  
 
Page  4
The construction of an adequate drainage system channeling runoff to natural drainage 
courses will ensure that flooding, particularly at the Couacaud Bridge, and at other flood-
prone areas along the alignment, will be reduced.  This will reduce damage to cars, 
houses and structures, and will also enhance safety along the route.  
 
Any potential negative environmental impacts of the works (including the bypasses) on 
the Quartier Militaire Road have been identified in the EIA “Upgrading ofQuartier 
Militaire Road (B6)" dated July 2002.  The EIA was reviewed by the Ministry of 
Environment and National Development Unit on 28 August 2008, who determined that 
no EIA license would be required.  
 
The EIA is for the most part still current and relevant (though it is possible the number 
of trees along the route may have increased or decreased since 2002, but this will be 
assessed by the Conservator of Forests and the National Parks and Conservation 
Services).  Four trees will be planted for every tree felled, the current estimate being that 
1300 trees will be planted.  The exact number, location and types of trees to be planted 
will be determined in consultation with the Conservator of Forests, who will continue to 
monitor the tree plantings over the lifetime of the project.  
 
In the construction phase, adverse effects on the environment will include increased 
noise, vibration, and pollution levels due to construction and equipment, traffic 
restrictions due to lane closings, possible public utility interruptions in built-up areas, and 
to a lesser extent, slopes erosion, water flows obstruction, impairment of non-critical 
natural habitat, and minimal water pollution due to construction-related activities.  No 
major contamination of soil or surface water is envisaged.  
 
The project also includes the periodic maintenance of three highway sections, which 
will complement the ongoing works on the Terre Rouge – Pamplemousses section on M2 
(approx. 10 km of dual carriageway). For both transport project components, an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been established and measures required to 
prevent, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts and improve 
environmental performance will be included in the bidding and contract documents to 
ensure that good engineering practices will be applied during construction. The 
contractors will be made aware of this obligation and their safeguard performance during 
construction will be closely supervised and monitored by the Project Engineers with close 
supervision of the Project Supervision Consultants.  
 
The main social issue arising from project implementation is the need to extend the 
width of the Quartier Militaire road by up to 2 meters on either side in lightly populated 
areas. It will therefore be necessary in such areas, to ensure that Project Affected Persons 
(PAPs) are adequately compensated or provided assistance, as the case may be.  
 
The term “Project Affected Persons” means persons who, solely on account of 
theexecution of the activities under the Quartier Militaire project have or would have 
their: (a) standard of living adversely affected; or (b) right, title, or interest in any house, 
land (including premises, agricultural and grazing land) or any other fixed or movable 
Page  5
asset acquired or possessed, temporarily or permanently; or (c) business, occupation, 
work or place of residence or habitat adversely affected. In the case of PAPs in the 
Project area who do not have legal right or title to land that they are occupying, assistance 
will be given to replace non-land assets lost  (defined as fixed immovable structures and 
crop or agricultural produce losses in the land acquired for the project).  
 
An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared, and was initially 
disclosed by the borrower and in the InfoShop prior to appraisal (in December 2008).  
The Abbreviated Resettlement Plan has since been revised, in consultation with the 
Government of Mauritius.  The revised version is dated April 7, 2009, and will be re-
disclosed in the InfoShop and by the borrower on the RDA website. In Mauritius this 
RAP is referred to as the Land Acquisition Plan (LAP).  
 
The construction of the two bypasses at Valletta and Quartier Militaire will reduce 
through traffic in heavily populated areas, thereby reducing localized pollution and 
enhancing safety, in addition to easing traffic flow.  These two bypasses will traverse 
uninhabited sugar-cane fields.  A preliminary census and notification of land acquisition 
procedures and compensation of PAPS in the bypass areas took place before appraisal, 
and findings were added to the revised RAP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A. With the widening of the Quartier Militaire road, road traffic flow will improve, and 
road accidents will be reduced.  Since the route is the main artery between the East and 
West of the island, traffic will not increase beyond the present high load. The 
construction of pedestrian pavements, guardrails, speed breaks and pedestrian crossings, 
will enhance vehicle and pedestrian safety. The bypasses will reduce localized pollution 
in populated areas, and will further enhance safety.  Since the bypasses traverse 
agricultural land, there will be no impact on critical natural habitats.  
 
Sound engineering practice will be followed to ensure any impacts occasioned by 
construction - damage to walls, foundation and structures- will be kept to a minimum.  In 
the case such damage occurs, the usual procedure is for the RDA to repair such damage, 
and this is the preferred option historically.  Alternately, the PAP may opt for cash 
compensation (as assessed by the RDA) to undertake repairs themselves.  
 
B.   The resurfacing of existing roads would not significantly increase development in 
the North of the island and therefore, long term impacts would be minimal.  Air quality 
and noise in the areas should improve since there should be less traffic congestion once 
the roads are better maintained. Smoother traffic flow will reduce stop-start driving 
patterns, which lead to increased emissions of greenhouse gases.  
 
C.  The renewable energy study that will be undertaken as a separate component of this 
project will include the preparation of feasibility studies for two renewable energy (wind, 
solar, biomass, etc) projects. Once sites have been identified for these two renewable 
Page  6
energy studies, a social and environmental assessment will be undertaken to ensure that 
the proposed projects are in compliance with all Bank safeguards.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The possibility NOT to build bypasses that will detour around settled areas was 
considered, but eventually dropped following consultations with the PAPs and after a 
detailed socio-economic analysis was carried out, which showed that the magnitude of 
the benefits expected from these bypasses compensates for the extra costs (The project 
WITH the bypasses still yields an Economic Rate of Return of 51%).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In keeping with the World Bank’s Safeguard Policies, the Road Development Authority 
(RDA) prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the Upgrade of Quartier 
Militaire Road  in 2002, and is updating an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP)based on questions submitted by the Ministry of Environment and National 
Development Unit on 28 August 2008. The Ministry determined that no EIA license 
would be required.  
 
The RDA also prepared an EMP for the roadworks on the Terre Rouge – Pamplemousse 
section on M2. The EMP specifies the mitigation measures to be implemented by the 
contractor. In addition, all Contractors are required to obtain and abide by relevant GoM 
licenses for extraction of material from quarries and borrow sites, as well as licenses for 
the use of disposal sites, crusher and asphalt plant site, etc.  The Project Management 
Unit and supervision consultants are required to monitor compliance of license conditions 
and the implementation of the EMP very rigorously. In support of this, the project will 
provide for training for appropriate RDA staff in environmental and social management 
of the road sector.  
 
The Government of Mauritius’ institutional capacity for safeguard policies is high.  
Tourism and fishing are key sectors of the Mauritian economy and both depend on sound 
environmental management for long-run sustainability.  
 
Mauritius’ environmental agencies have more than adequate capacity and experience in 
commissioning and following through on environmental impact assessments and for 
monitoring compliance with the country’s environmental and social protection laws.  The 
government is responsive to the desires of the public, and has many times in the past 
postponed or altered public projects that faced strong opposition from those who would 
be negatively affected and/or NGOs (the Southeastern Highway is an example).  
 
For environmental issues, the Road Development Authority under the Ministry of Public 
Infrastructure, works closely with the Department of Environment within the Ministry of 
Environment and National Development to validate EIAs, and in the case of particularly 
sensitive projects, a staff member from the Ministry of Environment is assigned to the 
Page  7
supervision of the works from an environmental perspective. The Department of 
Environment’s staff is adequately trained and experienced.  
 
An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared for land acquisition 
that will result as a consequence of the Upgrade of Quartier Militaire Road. The RAP was 
initially disclosed by the borrower and in the InfoShop prior to appraisal (in December 
2008).  The Abbreviated Resettlement Plan has since been revised, in consultation with 
the Government of Mauritius.  The revised version is dated April 7, 2009, and will be re-
disclosed in the InfoShop and by the borrower on the RDA website. In Mauritius this 
RAP is referred to as the Land Acquisition Plan (LAP).  
 
The construction of the two bypasses at Quartier Militaire and Valletta will reduce 
through traffic in heavily populated areas, thereby reducing localized pollution and 
enhancing safety, in addition to easing traffic flow.  These two bypasses will traverse 
uninhabited sugar-cane fields.  A preliminary census and notification of land acquisition 
procedures and compensation of PAPS in the bypass areas took place before appraisal, 
and findings were added to the revised RAP.  
 
For the purposes of making available financing of the land acquisition payments under 
the Quartier Militaire Road Upgrade Project, and effecting full and prompt payment to 
PAPs, the Government of Mauritius (GoM) shall allocate to the Ministry of Housing and 
Land an amount equivalent to the aggregate value (aggregate value to be ultimately 
determined in accordance with the valuation method set forth in the RAP but currently 
estimated to be approximately US Dollars 1.1 million equivalent) of the land that the 
GoM proposes to acquire or has acquired, as the case may be, for the purposes of the 
Quartier Militaire Road Upgrade Project; and ensure that such amount be maintained by 
the Ministry of Housing and Land in a separate ledger account until all PAPs concerned 
have been paid in full.  
 
Before any land may be compulsorily acquired for the purposes of the Quartier Militaire 
Road Upgrade Project, the GoM shall (A) carry out and complete an investigation, as 
well as a precise survey and valuation of all land proposed for acquisition, (B) determine 
the land value in accordance with the valuation method stipulated in the RAP (C) offer to 
each PAP who has legal right or title to such land the land value determined for the 
respective land proposed for acquisition, providing adequate time, which shall be no less 
than 21 calendar days from the date of the notice of offer, for the PAP to consider such 
offer, and (D) provide to PAPs who do not have legal right or title to such land that they 
are occupying, (should there be any such PAPs occupying the land as of the cut-off dates  
defined in the RAP) assistance to replace  non-land assets lost  (defined as fixed 
immovable structures and crop or agricultural produce losses in the land acquired for the 
project).  
 
Should any PAP wish to contest the initial proposed offer, detailed procedures for 
counterclaims and appeals are outlined in the RAP.  
 
Page  8
The Chief Government Valuer in the Valuation Department of the Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Empowerment will undertake the assets valuation work, utilizing a very 
thorough valuation process which follows international accounting and valuation 
methods, (the internationally recognized Modern Methods of Valuation, primarily the 
comparative method). The valuation method to be used qualifies as replacement cost, as 
required by the Bank’s Operational Policy OP 4.12. “Replacement cost” is the method of 
valuation of assets that helps determine the amount sufficient to replace lost assets and 
cover transaction costs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for this project are primarily the residents living along Quartier 
Militaire Road, and owners of small businesses and agricultural plots along the Quartier 
Militaire Road and the two bypasses. Others include transporters, road users, students, 
local NGOs, institutional stakeholders (local governments, RDA, Public Utility 
departments).  
 
The RDA is working closely with the Citizens Advice Bureau and the local MP and 
community leaders, both in regard to public consultation and public information 
dissemination. Consultations and public participation have already been and will continue 
to be carried out as an ongoing and regular process throughout project planning, design 
and implementation stages. Preparation of appropriate documents and planning and 
implementation for the acquisition of land and other assets will be carried out in 
consultation with the PAPs and the PAPs will receive prior information of the 
compensation, relocation and other assistance available to them including:  
 
•
The relevant details of the project;  
 
•
The land acquisition plan and various degrees of project impact;  
 
•
Details of entitlements under the land acquisition plan and what is required of 
PAPs in order to claim their entitlements;  
 
•
Compensation process and compensation rates;  
 
•
Implementation schedule with a timetable for the delivery of entitlements.  
 
•
Information concerning grievance procedures and how to use them.  
 
All Compensation issues will be followed up by the Ministry of Land and Housing.  
 
Grievances can be voiced to the local Citizens Advice Bureau, who will hold periodic 
meetings on the project, and can also be voiced to the Contractor Engineer as well as 
directly to the RDA, which will ensure that necessary corrective measures are taken 
under the contract.  
 
The road maintenance along the M2 will have negligible effects on residents and 
businesses.  Any dust or noise pollution will be mitigated under measures prescribed in 
the EMP.   
 
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/13/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/08/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/03/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  10
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Graftieaux 
04/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
04/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Noreen Beg 
04/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
04/08/2009 
Comments:  This ISDS(and the RAP) were initially disclosed in the Info Shop and by the Borrower 
in December 2008. Both documents have been revised and will be re-disclosed in the Info Shop and 
by the Borrower. 
