Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/09/2008 
Report No.:  AC1522
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritania 
Project ID:  P089672 
Project Name:  MAURITANIA: TRANSPORT  SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Ibou Diouf 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (50%);General transportation sector (50%) 
Theme:  Corporate governance (P);Other public sector governance (S);Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary project objective is to improve road, maritime and air transport sector 
management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Transport Sector Institutional Development and Technical Assistance Project is 
designed to support GoM to: (i) carry out institutional reforms; (ii) strengthen its 
coordination role, and (iii) promote Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) in transport sector 
infrastructure development. The TSIDTA will have four components, as described below, 
and would be financed with (i) the proposed credit of US$ 4.5 million equivalent, and (ii) 
US$ 1 million brought by the Government of Mauritania. The proposed credit includes an 
advance already provided for the preparation of the Project of USD1.19 million.  
 
Component 1 - Institutional Support and Capacity-Building for the road transport sub-
sector (US$1.18 million)  
 
Page  2
Under this component, a special emphasis will be put on, but not limited to, the newly 
created Directorate General of Road Transport with a focus on road safety 
prevention/management, through (i) institutional capacity-building (with support to Road 
Safety Directorate); (ii) road safety situation assessment and implementation of a pilot 
M&E system; (iii) launch of a sensitization campaign; and (iv) purchase of road 
signalization for critical points in Nouakchott. This activity-based component will also 
undertake sub-sector studies to bridge the knowledge gap related to urban transport 
dysfunction costs in Nouakchott.  
 
Component 2 - Support to Institutional and Technical Capacity-building for the 
Maritime transport sub-sector (US$.75 million)  
 
The component will support GoM’s efforts in reorganizing the sub-sector, through 
capacity building for the newly created DMM and CECAM. Part of this component’s 
funding will also be used do develop and implement an information system for 
Nouadhibou Port, and legal and regulatory  framework will be improved, with the update 
of Merchant Shipping Code and Regulations.  
 
Component 3 - Support to Air Transport System Re-organization and Technical 
Capacity-building (US$0.89 million)  
 
The component will support GoM’s efforts to set up a development program for 
Mauritanian airports by funding the redaction of a master plan, with an emphasis on 
Nouakchott airport’s development perspectives. It will also provide institutional support 
to ANAC and SAM to help reorganize the sub-sector in the area of service development 
and economic policy, complementing the efforts of the GoM supported by IDA through 
the Mauritania component of the West and Central Africa Air Transport Safety and 
Security Project (WCAATSSP).  
 
Component 4 – Support to the Ministry’s coordination role and Project Activities 
Coordination (US$1.05 million)  
 
Given that GoM recently consolidated its transport sector management institutions 
under the Ministry of Transport, this component will support capacity building of the new 
institutions to ensure efficiency, taking into consideration the need for multi-modal 
coordination. It will also support the overall transport sector planning unit within the 
Ministry.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nouakchott.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibou Diouf 
04/07/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
04/07/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
04/07/2008 
Comments:   
