Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3708
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritania 
Project ID:  P112131 
Project Name:  Mauritania Road Corridor ACGF 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Francois Marteau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 16, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 7, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Rural markets (S);Nutrition and food security (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
20.00 
 
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
35.00
60.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will contribute to reduce two of the major barriers to growth, which are the 
thin national investment resource base and the very high costs of transport, which 
represent as high as 40 percent of internationally and domestically traded goods in remote 
areas of Mauritania and Western Mali, while consolidating Mauritania’s openness to 
Mali. The project development objective is therefore to reduce physical barriers along the 
corridor from Nouakchott to Nema and the Mali-Mauritania border.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will fund rehabilitation works on selected road sections of the Nouakchott-
Nema corridor. This corridor, also known as the “Route de l’Espoir”, is the main 
Mauritanian east-west axis, and its importance has also increased due to the recent 
opening of the Aioun-Nioro road to Mali. The project will concentrate on the Kifa-
Tintane section (140 km).  
 
The project will consist of three contracts:  
 
(i) Physical road works (under a co-financing or parallel financing arrangement with the 
FADES, to be determined before appraisal);   
Page  2
(ii) Supervision of the above civil works;  
 
(iii) Supervision of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
implementation, which will also include the monitoring and evaluation of the project 
impact on local development, especially on employment.  
 
The costs for each contract are given in the following table:  
 
Physical works 
50,231,288  
 
Works supervision 
2,511,564  
 
ESMP supervision 
1,802,603  
 
Total 54,545,455  
 
Physical contingencies (5%) 2,727,272  
 
Price Contingencies (5%) 
2,727,272  
 
Total Project Costs 
60,000,000   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The rehabilitation will take place on the Kifa-Tintane section of the Nouakchott-Nema 
corridor, also known as the Route de l’Espoir. The project would cover two different 
regions, known as Hodh El Gharbi and Assaba, with respective populations of 212,156 
and 242,265 inhabitants in 2000. The population in the two main local towns, Kifa and 
Tintane, has especially largely increased over the last years, both due to demography and 
to urbanization. As a result, these two towns, as well as other villages located in the same 
areas, now have significant needs in terms of health and socio-economic infrastructure. 
The natural environment is very harsh, and local resources are very scarce, coming 
mainly from agriculture.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
a. The project involves the widening of the current road between Kifa and Tintane. There 
are no large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts associated with this  road 
widening and rehabilitation project, which explains why the project has been classified in 
category B. However, civil works associated with the rehabilitation trigger the BP/OP 
4.01 on environmental assessment. An Environmental Management Plan has 
consequently been carried out, which identified the main following issues:  
 
-
health problems (HIV/AIDS contamination risks), air dust pollution, smokes from 
building machines, accident risks, earth damage during civil works  
 
-
sewage issues may worsen locally due to waste production generated by the 
construction operation (this is already a major issue in Kifa and Tintane)  
 
-
waste production generated by the construction operation may pollute surface and 
underground water, which would have negative impacts on population (mainly on health) 
and on fauna  
 
-
appearance of sand on the road and in its surroundings due to wind erosion 
created both by nature and by human activities  
 
-
Vegetal cover will be partly destroyed, but rights-of-way mostly consist of desert 
and impacts on vegetation will therefore be very limited.  
 
-
destruction of animal habitat, due to the following reasons: (i) oil discharge when 
pumping water out, which may have an impact on aquatic fauna; and (ii) hunting by the 
workforce. The rehabilitated road will also create a barrier to animal migration, but the 
impact of the project on animal habitat should nevertheless be limited. It is also worth 
noticing that the concerned species are not endangered.  
 
-
Temporary noise due to civil works, which may have a negative impact on local 
fauna, mainly birds.  
 
b. Resettlement issues are also anticipated, even though the road investments will be 
made along well-established existing alignments.  Land, mostly consisting of small fields, 
may have to be acquired, either on a permanent or on a temporary basis, and owners of 
these fields will therefore need to be resettled or compensated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main long term adverse impact identified by the Environmental Assessment is linked 
to the increased road accident risks due to traffic growth and HIV/AIDS propagation. 
Sewage and waste issues may also prove to be worrying if economic activity increases in 
the area, but these cannot be fully linked to the road project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative has been considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. The 
operation is indeed a rehabilitation of existing roads, and no alternative can therefore be 
Page  4
conceived. However, studies have been carried out to ensure that the most sustainable 
technical option has been chosen with respect to the project resources.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
a. An Environmental Assessment (EA) has already been carried out, funded by the 
TSIDTAP PPF. It has been reviewed by the Bank and found quite satisfactory. 
Monitoring of EMP implementation is incorporated in the terms of reference of the 
supervision consultant, which also specify that the supervision consultant will establish a 
grievance mechanism to identify and respond to complaints of Project-affected people in 
a
timely manner.  
 
b. An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) will be carried out, reviewed and 
published by IDA as soon as possible. This ARAP will include in-depth consultation with 
the people affected by the project. Mauritania is now rather experimented in terms of 
ARAP production, as one was already carried out for the Urban Development Project 
(PDU) by the Urban Development Agency (ADU), together with a local consulting team 
benefiting from support from an international consultant. The PDU resettlement program 
was well prepared, and no crucial issues arose during implementation. This ARAP, as 
well as the social and economic survey which to be carried out at the same time, will be 
transmitted to the Project Implementing Agency to give some feedback.  
 
It must be noticed that, due to ACGF processing schedule, this datasheet will be the first 
ISDS for the project. That is why an appraisal stage ISDS has been chosen, even if the 
ARAP is not finalized yet. It will be revised when remaining safeguards work is finished 
and all safeguards documents are disclosed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
a. The key stakeholders will be: local populations, NGOs (one NGO has already been 
involved in the implementation of a RAP to facilitate the resettlement process during a 
former Bank project, and its action has been considered very satisfactory), donors, 
regional and local leadership, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Environment.  
 
b. Mechanisms for consultation;  
 
The EA has been carried out on the basis of a participative methodological approach. 
Individual interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized during the 
execution of the study and will continue all along the approval process. The project 
contents, in terms of environmental and social safeguards, as well as mitigation impacts 
and compensations measures will be developed and discussed with the stakeholders 
mentioned above. The team will then ensure that this participatory consultation process 
continues on a regular basis during the project implementation. Supervision missions will 
be the opportunity to assess the whole process on a regular basis.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/04/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Disclosure expected for the EIA-EMP and RAP as an appraisal condition   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
Page  6
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Francois Marteau 
06/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna 
06/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Salamata Bal 
06/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
06/17/2008 
Comments:   
