Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  43483 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritania 
Project ID: P089672 
Project Name: MAURITANIA: TRANSP.  SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Ibou Diouf 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Corporate governance (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary project objective is to improve road, maritime and air transport sector management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Transport Sector Institutional Development and Technical Assistance Project is designed to 
support GoM to: (i) carry out institutional reforms; (ii) strengthen its coordination role, and (iii) 
promote Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) in transport sector infrastructure development. The 
TSIDTA will have four components, as described below, and would be financed with a potential 
credit of US$ 4 million equivalent, including an advance already provided for the preparation of 
the Project of USD1.19 million.  
 
Component 1 - Institutional Support and Capacity-Building for road transport sub-sector 
(US$0.8 million)  
 
Under this component, a special emphasis will be put on, but not limited to, the newly created 
Directorate General of Road Transport and Road Safety with a focus on road safety 
prevention/management, particularly institutional arrangements and urban transport services 
Page  2
regulation. Given that the new “Driver Licensing and Vehicles Registration Act” has recently 
been adopted, the component will support its operationalization. This activity-based component 
will also undertake sub-sectoral studies to bridge the knowledge gap related to: (i) urban 
transport activities economic/financial viability; and (ii) environmental/ social adverse effects of 
urban transport.  In addition, this component will reinforce the development, adoption and 
implementation of operational guidelines for the environmental management for road 
construction, upgrading and maintenance.  
 
Component 2 - Support to Institutional and Technical Capacity-building for Maritime transport 
sub-sector (US$1 million)  
 
The component will support GoM’s efforts in: (i) designing a Port Infrastructure Development 
Master Plan for Nouakchott, through a Public and Private Partnership scheme; (ii) reviewing and 
updating of the legal and regulatory framework for the maritime transport sub-sector, (iii) 
reviewing of the institutional framework for ports management (including operational procedures 
for the management of Nouadhibou and Nouakchott Ports). The component will also buttress 
the: (i) establishment of a permanent framework for dialogue among maritime transport 
stakeholders; (ii) development of human resources for maritime transport sub-sector 
management; and (iii) strengthening of International Shhipping and port facility Security (ISPS) 
code monitoring. Finally, in anticipation of the projected Port Infrastructure Project, the 
component will finance key feasibility studies to support a design of the future investment 
project.  
 
Component 3 - Support to Air Transport System Re-organization and Technical Capacity-
building (US$0.9 million)  
 
The component will support GoM’s efforts to set up a priority investment program for 
Nouakchott airport to improve its management. It will provide assistance to the government to: 
(i) define the viability of the new international airport through a Public and Private Partnership; 
(ii) review the institutional framework of the air transport sub-sector, (iii) update the civil 
aviation code to ensure its conformity with International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
standards, and the Yamoussoukro Decision. (iv) strengthen the technical capacity for improved 
management of the air transport sub-sector through existing international training programs/local 
workshops; depending on funding availability (v) purchase airport security and safety control 
equipments; and (vi)  develop an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the Nouakchott 
airport investment program, including public consultation on the draft version of these terms of 
reference.  
 
Component 4 – Support to the Ministry’s coordination  role and Project Activities Coordination 
(US$0.5 million)  
 
Given that GoM recently consolidated its transport sector management institutions under the 
Ministry of Transport,  this component will support capacity building of the new institutions to 
ensure efficiency, taking into consideration the need for multi-modal coordination. Specifically, 
it will assist the Ministry of Transport in finalizing a coherent sector policy consistent with 
GoM’s projected reforms and the need for a multi-modal transport strategy. It will also support 
Page  3
the overall transport sector planning unit within the Ministry. Since the project will not set up a 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU), it will provide technical, operational and material assistance 
to Directorate of Studies, Planning and Cooperation (DEPC) to coordinate project 
implementation activities. In this regard, fiduciary staff will be recruited to reinforce DEPC 
internal project coordination unit, which assumes the overall sector planning.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nouakchott   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Since the project will not finance any physical investment no environmental and social safeguard 
policies are triggered. However, the project offers a number of valuable opportunities to 
strengthen environmental management capacity in major infrastructure sectors.  A key positive 
environmental outcome of this project is that it will provide training to the staff of the newly 
created Directorate of Studies, Planning and Cooperation (DEPC). The proposed project 
category is C.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project is a Category C and safeguards responsibility will be automatically transferred as 
it does not support construction.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibou Diouf 
01/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/11/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
