Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/23/2008 
Report No.:  AC2770
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritania 
Project ID:  P102031 
Project Name:  MR - Business Environment Enhancement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sherri Ellen Archondo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (40%);Banking (20%);General energy sector 
(20%);Law and justice (20%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
0.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective (PDO) is to enhance the business climate 
through improvements in the financial, legal, regulatory and capacity environment.  This 
would facilitate private-sector led growth/investment in the economy and improve 
services provided by the electricity sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
Coming under a new reform-minded Government and nearly a decade after the last 
financial/private sector intervention, the project will be a technical assistance credit that 
focuses on strengthening the building blocks of the overall business, financial and 
judicial environment, including support to the electricity sector.  
 
The project will be funded by a five-year IDA-financed investment credit for US$5.0 
million equivalent.  The credit will be used to finance equipment and technical expertise 
for measures which can be taken in the short-term and studies which will provide the 
foundation for a wider reform program, including preliminary studies for the proposed 
MR-Gas-to-Power Project.  
Page  2
Project components were designed on the basis of recommendations from the FSAP, 
ICA and Doing Business Report, which were the basis of the analytical framework.  The 
project is comprised of two technical components and one administrative component:  (a) 
Improving the Business Climate to Foster Private Sector Development, which includes 
direct support to small and medium size enterprises to strengthen their capacity to 
compete; (b) Building Public-Private Partnerships and Productivity Enhancement; and (c) 
Support for Project Implementation.  The first component of addresses the two primary 
constraints highlighted in the analytical work, namely: (i) access to finance and (ii) 
streamlining the regulatory environment for business, including reduction of 
administrative barriers and tax reform, while the second component partially addresses 
weak infrastructure with support to the electricity sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nouakchott, Mauritania   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sherri Ellen Archondo 
12/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
12/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
01/23/2008 
Comments:   
