Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3340 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P107159 
Project Name: MX National Urban Transport Strategy 
Task Team Leader: Walter Vergara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 7, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
425.00 
 Carbon 
Fund 
50.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  15.00 
 
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
1.00
491.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program development objective is to contribute to the transformation of the transport sector 
through improvements in the long-term sustainability, efficiency and quality of urban transport 
in Mexico.  The first stage of this program would target Mexico City and selected medium size 
cities.  
 
In Mexico City, for example the improvements sought (expansion of the bus corridor program, 
the maximization of modal shift, the use low carbon bus technologies and other measures 
targeting congestion and efficient resource allocation) will result in major reductions in GHG 
emissions and local criteria pollutants, effectively defining the carbon intensity of the transport 
sector for years to come and significantly reducing exposure to air toxics of the local population, 
with consequent health benefits.   The project’s results will be used as an element for the nation 
wide program focused on medium-size cities throughout Mexico.  
 
Page  2
The proposed project is consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) discussed by 
the Board in March 2004. The CPS recognizes that to promote Mexico’s development in 
harmony with nature and the environment, it is necessary to address air pollution, promote clean 
energy technologies, and reduce GHG emissions. The expansion of the Metrobus system is 
consistent with Bank’s goals to target the mobility of the poor segments of the population (many 
of the new corridors will be connecting poor neighborhoods) and constitutes a tool to reduce the 
growing trend in motorization in the city.  
 
Within the broad development objective, the project seeks to: (i) implement a city wide BRT 
system operating with low carbon bus technologies and physical, administrative and tariff 
integration among BRT corridors and other public and private transport operators; (ii) reduce the 
global and local pollution caused by the transport system; (iii) build the capacity of the relevant 
institution(s) to support a continuous, comprehensive, and transparent low carbon transport 
planning process, (iv) strengthen the Metrobus’ capacities to expand and manage the corridor 
program; (v) improve inter-agency coordination at the local and metropolitan level provide for 
the transfer of know how and experience to other cities in the early planning of BRT systems; 
(vi) ease congestion through regulatory and fiscal measures.  It will also provide support for the 
assessment of alternatives to address other modes of transport in the city. The corridor program 
will be planned in close coordination and complementarity with the Metro system and other mass 
transit solutions in the MCMA. Once fully implemented, the system is expected to operate on 
nearly 200 km of exclusive bus ways meeting a daily ridership of 1.5 million passengers, 
resulting in an accumulated reduction of 3.6 million tons of CO2 by 2022, and in a major 
reduction (35% for particulate matter; 50% for carbon monoxide and 60% for aromatics) in 
exposure for these passengers.  
 
The project would make use of several Bank financial mechanisms: a) the provision of a Bank 
loan would help supporting the financing of the corridor infrastructure and will provide support 
for continuing policy dialogue on sectoral issues; b) carbon finance, based on the application of a 
proposed baseline methodology, will purchase certified emission reductions; c) with the help of 
CCIG funds, the introduction of cleaner bus technologies in the corridors will be facilitated by 
the creation of a fund to reduce the difference in capital costs between standard and low carbon 
buses during the first few years of operation; d) continuation of the support provided through the 
GEF-funded operation in transport and climate (through the financing of critical studies, 
including financial and economic assessments for the operation of hybrid vehicles in the system; 
and an assessment of the optimal expansion of Metrobus in synergy with Metro and other public 
transport modes) and close coordination with the regional transport GEF initiative; and e) a 
possible participation of the proposed CIF, expected to go to the Board by April, 2008, that will 
support the use low carbon bus technologies.  
 
The project is part of the Bank’s national urban transport strategy and is being closely 
coordinated with the Bank’s urban transport projects on the federal level and in medium size 
cities. Replication of the successful lessons learned in this project will be promoted in Mexico 
and in the region throughout project implementation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  3
Development of transport corridors. The current corridor Master Plan consists of nine corridors 
and the extension of the existing Insurgentes corridor by 2012, as reflected in the work program 
in Appendix 2, approved by the City management. The corridors will be developed in 
coordination with urban development, air quality, and climate strategies which together respond 
to the combined needs of economic, social and environmental performance and in accordance 
with the recently adopted climate change strategy. This component will also include measures to 
ease congestion and promote modal shift. Financing of the corridor infrastructure is being sought 
through a Bank loan and domestic resources. Carbon finance will purchase the emission 
reductions.  
 
b)       Introduction of low carbon bus technologies on the corridors. The field tests supported 
under the GEF project have demonstrated the viability of low carbon bus technologies (hybrid 
diesel electric and CNG electric) under Mexico City field conditions. Hybrid bus technologies 
can deliver substantial reductions in GHG emissions, while lowering emission of local criteria 
pollutants.  The project will support part of the incremental cost in comparison to the Baseline 
standard Diesel buses thus making it possible to initiate operation at a commercial scale and 
providing an experience of global value.  The vehicles will use modern low-pollution fuels to 
meet stringent emission standards.  
 
c) 
Capacity Building. This component will help expand local capacities to manage the 
corridor system expansion and operation, in consonance with the needs to cope with a growing 
transport demand in the MCMA. The component will focus on business, financial, operational, 
administrative, procurement, environmental, infrastructure, safeguards, regulatory, institutional 
capacity building for Metrobus and for other key agencies involved in transport and air quality in 
the MCMA. It will also provide support for the development of a rational framework to address 
overarching urban transport issues in the metropolitan area in order to ensure maximum cost-
efficacy of the institutional and financial resources allocated to the sector. The project will also 
support capacity building and trainings to ensure a sustainable operation of hybrid bus 
technologies.  
 
d) 
Expansion of the low carbon corridors experience to medium-size cities. Lessons learned 
from this project will be disseminated and replication to other cities in Mexico will be promoted.  
Financial and technical resources will be allocated through the GEF regional transport project 
and the CIF to support the adoption of decisions, enactment of regulations and development of 
business structures in support of the development of the BRT concept in other cities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The program targets the transformation of the transport sector in Mexico toward a low carbon 
path through activities that would reduce the carbon footprint and improve the efficiency of 
delivery of transport services in urban areas.  The solid progress already achieved in Mexico City 
on transport and climate issues, and the results of the proposed operation would constitute a solid 
step to steer future transport sector investments toward low carbon options and also provide a 
platform on which to build a national program that could use the results obtained in the City. 
Other cities included in the program are Monterrey, Ciudad Juarez, Leon and Puebla which 
Page  4
together with Mexico City account for over 35% of the country’s population.    The first stage of 
the program will target Mexico City, where the program activities have been already defined in 
some detail, focusing on the expansion of the METROBUS system.  Subsequent program 
activities would include activities in the cities mentioned above and further activities in Mexico 
City.  
 
The current administration is planning to expand the Metrobus network by constructing 9 
additional corridors and by extending the current Insurgentes Corridor. By the end of this 
government’s administration, it is expected that nearly 200 kms of BRT will have been 
constructed in Mexico City and service provided to at least 1.5 million passengers each workday. 
The construction of the existing corridor’s expansion, as well as the Eje 4 Sur corridor, will be 
operational by mid 2008.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The technical implementation of the project will be carried out by Metrobus. Metrobus manages 
successfully the first BRT corridor on Insurgentes for which a social and environmental impact 
assessment was conducted. The analysis also included the definition of mitigation measures to 
minimize the social and environmental impacts.  
 
For the expansion of the system a thorough environmental and social impact assessment will be 
conducted for each corridor.  
 
Environmental Impact Assessments and Environmental Management Plans will be required for 
each corridor to mitigate the potential environmental impact on the project sites and surrounding 
areas during construction, and will be addressed to all infrastructure works (trunk lanes, transfer 
stations, and bus stops). They will also be aimed at integrating environmental and social (i.e to 
avoid resettlement, for instance) criteria into the design phase.  All potential impacts that cannot 
be averted in the design will have to be mitigated through EMPs and social mitigation measures 
as needed.  The EIAs and EMPs will be carried out either by contractors independent of the ones  
developing the final infrastructure designs, or as separate studies for each corridor, in close 
coordination with the specific designs.  The EIAs and EMPs will follow guidelines to be 
developed during preparation. The social impact analysis to be carried out for each corridor will 
identify possible social impacts and propose mitigations measures accordingly.  
 
In the case of Mexico City Metrobus will be in charge of coordinating the development of the 
EIA and EMP for each corridor and of leading the contracting and supervision of their studies; it 
will hire environmental and social specialists to execute the social and environmental 
assessments of each corridor.  All bidding documents for the infrastructure works will include 
not only the EIA and EMP, but also a Manual for monitoring their implementation, including the 
protection of cultural assets and social mitigation plans.  
 
As part of project preparation Metrobus’ capacities will be strengthened through Bank 
safeguards training to carry out the social and environmental assessments of the planned 
corridors and to elaborate the management plans.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  5
Mr Walter Vergara (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to provide net environmental benefits in the long run, derived from a 
more efficient transport system with lower emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases.  
The project will invest in upgrading existing urban roads to enable BRT systems, which in most 
cases are linked to urban space improvements.  Nonetheless, there are some critical points in 
each corridor which require a close consideration at the early planning and design stage; and 
especially during the infrastructure works.  These include the potential effect on historic and 
cultural heritage sites, on socially vulnerable spots and on involuntary resettlements.  
 
In addition, the project has potential adverse environmental impacts associated with its 
construction, in particular in regards to: (a) management of materials and waste; (b) restriction of 
traffic flows and access to homes and businesses; (c) increased noise and emission of pollutants; 
(d) management of work camp sites; and (e) interference with urban infrastructure (phone lines, 
piping, electricity wires, sewage).  An Environmental Impact Assessment will be developed for 
each corridor as well as an environmental management plan.  The elements to be considered 
should include: (a) housing and business relocation needs; (b) potential interruption or limitation 
in the access to housing and businesses, both temporal and permanent; (c) reduction and impact 
on green areas, parks, and other entertainment and public spaces; (d) impact on historic and local 
heritage buildings; (e) potential deterioration of the urban quality of life and potential decrease in 
the value of property in the neighboring areas; (f) potential increase of accidents in the vicinity of 
schools, hospitals, elderly houses, and commercial buildings; (g) impact and potential 
interference on urban infrastructure (pavement, phone lines, electricity wiring, water pipes and 
sewage mains, etc); and (h) potential unacceptable nuisance during construction (noise, dust, 
waste, and traffic congestion).  
 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and project Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) will be completed, consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal for identified investments 
that are in design stage. For the other corridors an environmental framework will be developed.  
The EMP should include, as best possible, specific mitigation and compensation measures for all 
project activities in the identified corridors as well as a monitoring plan for implementation 
during project construction and operation.  For the corridors where final engineering designs 
would be completed after appraisal, the EMP should be updated with the relevant, specific 
details before issuing the invitation for bids for those works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
As part of project preparation the potential impacts on historical and cultural heritage sites 
will be analyzed and an adequate management plan will be prepared consistent with Mexican 
regulations. Management plans will include “chance find” procedures that are included in the 
project EMP.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project is expected to improve the standards of life of the population through an 
improved more efficient transport system.  As a consequence of the implementation of the BTR 
system, families are expected to spend less of their income on transportation. Additionally, the 
urban public transport users will have access to a safe and improved transport system.   Families 
will be able to use the money and time that they currently spend in transport to satisfy other 
needs.  The BRT system will also facilitate the use of mass transportation to the disabled 
population.  Despite the positive social impacts of the project for the urban population, the 
implementation of the BRTs has the potential to cause involuntary displacement in some 
corridors, particularly limited access to businesses and displacement of some of the current 
operators.  For the above reason, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared with 
Resettlement Action Plans for specific corridors as each comes online during project 
implementation. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared that includes the elements 
described in OP 4.12 Annex A. This would ensure that adverse social impacts are accounted for 
in an upstream manner, that mitigation actions are undertaken prior to any actual displacement, 
and the project affected people are identified sufficiently early to allow them to participate in the 
planning, implementation and monitoring of resettlement processes.  
 
The RAP would provide (i) a concrete strategy for the mitigation of physical and economic 
displacement in all corridors and (ii) specific plans for each proposed corridor once the 
engineering designs are completed and affected persons able to be identified. This would be a 
living document and should include steps for updating the Plan as appropriate for each corridor.  
 
The Bank will provide training to Metrobus on resettlement during the preparation of the 
project.  If needed, specific activities to improve the capacity in this area will be included.  
Additionally, the successful experience Insurgentes BRT Project will be applied.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/16/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/16/2008 
 
Page  7
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Please see comments to each specific safeguard triggered.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arturo Ardila Gomez 
12/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
