                                                                                           45146
                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             CONCEPT STAGE

Report NO.: Not Available in the portal for Carbon Financed projects


Date ISDS Preparedmpdated: April 8,2008

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data




2008
Managing Unit: LCSEG

Sector: Energy (100%)
Theme: Climate Change and Energy
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
NCDMF Amount (US$m.):              US$7,000,000
Other financing:amounts bv source:
                "
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                       Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project                Yes [X ]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
The objectives of the Biomass Residues Based Co-generation Project are twofold. At global
level, the project aims to help mitigate climate change by reducing GHG emissions caused by
fossil fuel emissions. At local level, the project aims to improve the energy mix by inclusion of
biomass, given the increase in oil prices. Through the project, 20% of this fuel will be replaced
by biomass (malt bagasse) generated at the plant. The project is an end-of-pipe partial fuel switch
project and is expected to have no negative environmental effects.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:
The Grupo Modelo Biomass Residues Based Co-generation Project consists of the replacement
of fossil fuel used for heat and electricity generation at the blrewery, specifically replacement of
heavy fuel oil by biomass. About 20% or 1,306,436 GJIyear of this fossil fuel will be replaced by
feeding bagasse to the boiler. The emissions being reduced by the project are those resulting
from the fraction of fossil fuel to be burned in the boiler that will be replaced by the bagasse

biomass residues. The GHG Emission Reductions (ERs) will.be generated and sold to the
Netherlands CDM Facility (NCDMF). The company Compaiiia Cervecera de Zacatecas, S.A., is
located at Calera de Victor Rosales, Zacatecas, Mexico, and is part of the Grupo Modelo, S.A. de
C.V. a private company.

According to preliminary estimates, the proposed project is expected to abate at least 100,000
metric tons of C02eper year, and over 400,000 tC02eby the:end of 2012. These quantities
would total more than 700,000 tC02e of ERs for the period 2009-2015. The World Bank's
Carbon Finance Unit intends to buy 80 percent of the estimated ERs by 2015 in a deal involving
certified emissionreductions (CERs) and verified emission reductions (VERs).

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics rtslevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
Mexico, Calera de Victor Rosales, Zacatecas. The brewery is located in a mainly industrial
zone, although the directly neighboring lots are dedicated to agricultural activities. The closest
residential area is Calera de Victor Rosales,located approxirnately 2.5k.m away from the plant.

Latitude North 22" 58' 22"
Longitude West 102' 42' 27"

E. Borrower's InstitutionalCapacity for SafeguardPolicies:

Grupo Modelo, which also comprises Compaiiia Cervecera de Zacatecas, has established and
operates a very efficient environmental control program in all of its facilities. It has an
organizationalstructurededicated to quality control, environment and security, reporting directly
to the highest management level of the company.

This program has been successful and all of its breweries within the country have received the
Clean Industry Certificate (CIC), issued by the federal enlvironrnental authority (PROFEPA),
based on external environmentalauditsperformed by multidisciplinary consultants.

Compafiia Cervecera de Zacatecas has also received bi yearly certificates since 1998 till now
without any major findings in the auditsperformed.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialistson tlhe Team:
JosC Luis Calderon Bartheneuf, Environment Specialist.
Dora Patricia Andrade Salavem'a, Environment Specialist.


11. SNEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 ~1                                                                                        Yes               No         I    TBD
  In case of malfunction, the supply of dry bagasse would autlomatically be shut down. The same
  procedure would apply for the wastewater treatment plant treating effluents resulting from the
  bagasse drying process. The company is completing an Environmental Management Plan which
  will be reviewed during project preparation.

/ Natural    Habitats (OPBP 4.04)                                                                             X

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                        X

  Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                   X

   Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                                   X

   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X

1  Safetv of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X


   Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                   I                       X

   Proiects in Dis~utedAreas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     x

   Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
   Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
   Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)



   111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATION PLAN

   A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
       would be prepared:
  Not Applicable

   B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
       ISDS:
   October 30. 2008

   C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific studies and their timing1should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:


   IReminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

   InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
  persons.

October 30,2008


IV. APPROVALS




   Comments:

