Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4424 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/15/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P106424 
Project Name: MX Efficient lighting and appliances 
Task Team Leader: Roberto Gabriel Aiello 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P120654 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: July 20, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (67%);Other social development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.12 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 Clean 
Technology 
Fund 
50.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project's development objectives are to enhance the country's energy security by increasing 
Mexico's efficient use of energy and to support its efforts to mitigate climate change.  Energy 
security and climate change goals would be achieved by promoting an increased use of energy 
efficient equipment and services and by developing a sustainable and growing market for energy 
efficiency equipment that will reduce GHG emissions caused by electricity generation based on 
fossil fuel consumption.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project includes four components:  
 
Component 1:  Replacement of Incandescent Bulbs (IBs) with Compact Fluorescent Lamps 
(CFLs) in the Residential Sector (Estimated total cost: US$125 million - IBRD US$85 million, 
CTF US$5 million, CF advance payment US$15 million, GOM US$20 million).  
 
This component will finance the acquisition and distribution of 70 million CFLs for low-
income urban and rural households, as part of the Government's national program on energy 
Page  2
efficiency which aims to replace 200 million IBs by CFLs in the residential sector over a 5-year 
period.  Transforming the incandescent bulbs market implies significant investment and 
coordination efforts as well as the need to strengthen the capacity of the implementing agencies.  
Two sub-components will support (i) the acquisition and distribution of CFLs, and (ii) 
implementation support for the implementing agencies.  
 
This component would provide dramatic upfront investments for large-scale purchases, in order 
to bring down upfront costs to consumers, and thus create a massive and sustained shift in the 
Mexican lamp market by accelerating the increase in market share of CFLs vis-
à-vis 
conventional incandescent lamps (notably through the exchange of IBs) in the residential sector.  
The higher up-front costs are a key barrier and only a large size bulk purchase program will be 
able to negotiate substantial reductions in price needed to enable all consumers to switch their 
lighting technology choices.  While the lower bulk cost may induce many to change their 
behavior and purchasing decisions, very low-income households (with limited financial means), 
rural households (with limited access to CFLs), etc. will require additional support to participate 
in the substitution program.  
 
The first sub-component involves the Acquisition and Distribution of CFLs (US$120 million).  
70 million CFLs would be procured in bulk by the implementing agency (CFE or FIDE) in 
multiple tranches based on (i) mutually agreed technical specifications, (ii) ensuring open 
competition (i.e., ICB), (iii) performance of independent testing, and (iv) designing measures to 
ensure bulk purchase does not create future monopolies.  A phased procurement would allow 
ongoing testing of purchasing and delivery mechanisms and to evaluate technical savings which 
would provide information to adjust subsequent phases.  During distribution of the first tranche 
of lamps to low-income consumers, various options for distributing to other customers will be 
tested and further developed. Based on preliminary discussions with the GoM, NAFIN would be 
the borrower and CFE/FIDE, under the coordination of SENER, would be the implementing 
agencies for this sub-component, together with strategic partners.  
 
In the initial phases, the light bulb exchange would take place at decentralized outlets run by 
strategic partners to the program including utilities, service providers, and private sector 
participants.  The coordinating entity will enter into appropriate legal arrangements with each of 
the partners to define responsibilities, liabilities, cost recovery and incentives.  For the low-
income households, a subsidy differentiation scheme would apply:  CFLs for very low income 
end-users would be subsidized 100% (i.e., CFLs would be provided for free) whereas lower 
levels of subsidies would apply (e.g., CFL would be provided at the bulk purchase price or just 
financed on utility bills) for all remaining households.  The GoM is still working on how to 
structure the financing, particularly regarding the subsidy component.  The detailed 
implementation arrangements will be refined during project preparation. A description of the 
possible implementation arrangements for this sub-component is included in Annex III.  
 
The second sub-component will provide Implementation Support (US$5 million: IBRD) for the 
component's implementing agencies.  This subcomponent would strengthen planning and 
implementation capacities of the implementing agencies (SENER, CONUEE, FIDE, etc).  The 
subcomponent would also support: (a) post-implementation surveys to assess impacts and 
customer satisfaction and design a future approach/phase to help ensure sustainability, and (b) 
Page  3
the analytical aspects for the development of CFL recycling centers through private sector 
participation.  
 
Energy savings from the replacement of 70 million lamps during the period 2009-2018 are 
estimated to total annually 4,000 GWh in consumption and 1,000 MW in power over the entire 
period by reducing the need for peak load, most notably.  Annual CO2e emissions reductions 
have been estimated at about 2 million once the program is fully implemented.  
 
Component 2:  Replacement of Refrigerators and Air-Conditioners (ACs) (Estimated total cost: 
US$415 million - IBRD US$290 million, CTF US$30 million, CF advance payment US$10 
million, GoM US$85 million).  
 
This component would finance the replacement of about 1.2 million refrigerators and ACs as 
part of the GoM's recently launched program to replace 5.5 million units over 5 years.  The 
ongoing program targets the replacement of 400,000 units during 2009 (a description of the 
implementation arrangements is set out in Annex IV).  The main barriers for the substitution of 
old and inefficient appliances are high initial investment cost of new and efficient refrigerators 
and ACs and lack of incentives and awareness to shift to more efficient equipment.  Without the 
appropriate financial benefits and incentives, the households would not choose to buy more 
efficient equipment unless old equipment is outdated beyond repair and the cost of new energy 
efficient equipment is equal or less than a cost of conventional equipment.  By providing 
subsidies and soft-loans (based on a 4 tier incentive scheme), to low-income households to 
purchase the new equipment, this component removes the affordability barrier, ensures that the 
old equipment is scrapped and recycled properly to prevent any leakage and assures a proper 
monitoring system. The consumers will benefit from reduced energy bills, free technical 
assistance and a warranty for the new equipment.  The manufacturers will benefit from 
expanding their sales and reaching a much larger share of customers.  
 
Under the preliminary Project design proposal, World Bank financing would be used (i) to 
provide subsidies to low-income customers (from 50 percent to 10 percent of total cost of 
refrigerator or AC) based on a 4-tier incentive scheme based on monthly electricity consumption, 
and/or (ii) to set up a fund to provide credits to interested low income consumers to would like to 
obtain finance from NAFIN to cover the non-subsidized portion of the appliance cost. According 
to SENER's preliminary estimates, one third of the estimated budget would fund the subsidies 
while the remaining two thirds would target the financing scheme.  This component would be 
implemented by NAFIN, CFE and FIDE with the overall coordination of SENER.  
 
The implementation proposal will be reviewed as part of Project preparation. For scaling up the 
program with the Bank's support, the GoM is still working on how to structure the financing, 
particularly regarding the subsidy component.  
 
Annual electricity savings from reduced consumption of electricity resulting from the 
replacement of inefficient appliances by more efficient ones are estimated at about 1,500 GWh 
of electricity reducing around 800,000 tons of CO2e per year.  These figures would increase four 
times once the GoM's overall program is completed.  
 
Page  4
Component 3:  Street lighting and other energy efficiency in Municipalities (Total estimated 
cost: US$50 million - IBRD US$25 million, CTF US$10 million, CF advance payment US$5 
million, GOM US$10 million)  
 
This component would support municipalities in developing energy efficiency projects. 
Initially, investments would focus on simple retrofits, notably street lighting but could also 
include other areas such as water pumping.  Some of the barriers to develop energy efficiency 
investments in municipalities include high transaction costs, cumbersome processes, need of 
multi-year contracts, and lack of financing.  These barriers would be mitigated under the 
proposed scheme, where CONUEE would work with BANOBRAS and municipalities to help 
market and develop street lighting replacement projects.  CONUEE would present the 
opportunities and alternative implementation schemes (i.e., municipality commissions and audit 
and then purchases equipment based on the audit report, use of ESCOs to offer turn-key services) 
and then assists the municipalities through the entire process.  CONUEE would work with a few 
municipalities on a pilot basis to develop appropriate bidding schemes, implement it 2-3 times 
and then incorporate lessons learned into a standardized process for wide-scale replication.  
CONUEE would also identify and train a network of partners to act as project agents in order to 
facilitate scale-up.  In parallel, CONUEE would investigate options to allow for multi-year 
contracting in the future.  
 
Under this component, BANOBRAS would on-lend a portion of the Bank loan for energy 
efficiency projects with municipalities.  
 
The first sub-component supports Street lighting and energy efficiency investments in 
municipalities (US$47 million).  The Bank would lend funds to BANOBRAS that would then 
onlend these funds for individual energy efficiency projects in municipalities, especially for the 
replacement of inefficient street lighting systems.  Typical loans would be for about 3 years at an 
estimated cost of around $1 million per project (depending on the size of the municipality).  
Where ESCOs are used, efforts would be made to tie the loans to performance contracts, so that 
the loan is not disbursed to the ESCO unless the project is saving the expected energy required to 
service the loan.  This shifts much of the project risks away from the municipality and helps 
ensure better performance of the projects.  BANOBRAS may also consider options to bundle 
projects together, perhaps at the state level, to improve lending while lowering individual project 
transaction costs.  
 
The second sub-component will involve Capacity building activities to BANOBRAS, 
CONUEE and municipalities ($3M). This sub-component will assist the various partners on the 
implementation of the financing program including: (a) marketing of the program to 
municipalities; (b) development of case studies on successful projects and dissemination for 
wide-scale replication; (c) development of standardized bidding documents, contracts, 
monitoring and verification reports, etc.; (d) standardization of project appraisal methods and 
systems; (e) program evaluation; and (f) review of policy issues related to ESCOs in the public 
sector, such as budgeting and procurement guidelines.  
 
A
detailed description of the proposed implementation arrangements for this component is 
included in Annex V.  
Page  5
Component 4: Technical Assistance and Institutional Strengthening (US$5 million, CTF).  
 
This component will provide technical assistance to relevant energy sector agencies to 
operationalize and implement the Sustainable use/Energy Efficiency law.  
 
The first sub-component involves Technical assistance for SENER (US$2 million: CTF). This 
subcomponent would provide technical assistance to SENER to carry out planning work related 
to energy security in the context of the new Sustainable use/Energy Efficiency law. Key studies 
and activities supported by this component will be designed during project preparation to support 
planning and implementation capacities of SENER under the energy reform.  
 
The second sub-component will support Institutional Strengthening of CONUEE (US$3 
million: CTF). This subcomponent will provide technical assistance to CONUEE to support the 
restructuring process of the commission and the operationalization of the new Sustainable 
use/Energy Efficiency law.  Key studies and activities supported by this component will be 
further designed during project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The only safeguard policy that this project triggers is the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 
4.1). The Project will have minor environmental or social impacts. Among the environmental 
benefits of reducing energy consumption through energy efficiency projects are: the reduction in 
local air pollutants (particulates, SOX, NOx, HC), and the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions, specifically CO2. Energy savings and GHG reduction resulting from the investments 
to be supported through the project will be monitored and reported under the project. Demand-
side EE investments in the residential sector may bring significant social benefits by reducing the 
electricity bills while improving the comfort level.  The Municipal component benefits' will 
include greater security for the local population (by having better lighting on the streets, etc). 
Specific environmental and social issues for each component are addressed below. Although it is 
recognized that the overall impact of the project will be positive, the renewal of equipment could 
also lead to negative environmental impacts or leakage from a climate change point of view.  
 
Component 1: Replacement of Incandescent Bulbs by CFLs  
 
Replacement of IBs by CFLs will take place nationwide in urban and rural households. 
Beneficiaries of this component will include different low-income social groups, including 
indigenous people (IPs) and it will have no adverse impact on the indigenous population. A 
Social Assessment will be carried out during project preparation to (i) identify cultural impacts 
that the project could generate, (ii) understand roles and responsibilities of the different 
participating institutions at the community, municipal state and federal levels, (iii) identify 
participatory mechanisms to avoid creating false expectations on the indigenous peoples, (iv) 
identify the best mechanisms to engage with the IPs; and (v) conduct an analysis of the different 
actors (NGOs, community organizations, etc) working with the IPs that could help on the design 
of a strategy to promote the replacement of IBs by CFLs. The Project triggers the Indigenous 
Peoples (OP 4.10) safeguard policy therefore an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared 
based on the findings of the Social Assessment to ensure that benefits are culturally compatible 
Page  6
and to appropriately manage any impact, positive or adverse, which may affect or involve 
indigenous peoples.  
 
As will be stipulated in the Agreements between NAFIN, CFE and FIDE and the strategic 
partners, the strategic partners will be responsible for distribution of CFLs and recollection of 
used incandescent bulbs. CFE and FIDE will be responsible for ensuring proper disposal of the 
used bulbs in compliance with the Mexican environmental law, policies and procedures and with 
the World Bank safeguards policy (OP/BP/GP 4.01). Through the capacity building sub-
component, the analytical aspects for the development of CFL recycling centers through private 
sector participation will be supported.  
 
Component 2: Replacement of Refrigerators and Air Conditioners  
 
This component will take place nationwide. This component will have impacts associated with 
the disposal of old refrigerators and air conditioners, including the dismantling of units, the 
recycling of metals, and the safe handling and disposal of refrigerant gases. An adequate 
recycling and disposal program can minimize potential impacts, especially those related to the 
refrigerant gases; in fact, similar programs been adopted worldwide that have good manuals and 
guidelines. Project documents will make clear that the implementation of the recycling and 
disposal program will be audited by Bank-designated consultants to identify opportunities for 
institutional strengthening and capacity building. This component will also support the 
development of a certification program for dismantling and recycling centers and for supporting 
annual audits of these facilities.  
 
Manuals are currently in use in Mexico for refrigerant gas recovery as well as for waste 
management in scrapping centers. As of today, an Environmental Management Plan has been 
developed for the first phase program implemented by FIDE, based on direct environmental 
audits performed at two dismantling and recycling centers (Monterrey and Saltillo) and based on 
an in depth-
review conducted with SEMARNAT and FIDE of results of this program´s first 
phase (ended 2006). The EMP establishes  several recommendations to adequately comply with 
O.P 4.01 and Mexican legislation, including: (i) to make mandatory for transporters of old 
equipment from homes to the recycling centers to be certified, (ii) to study with SEMARNAT 
the possibility of destroying HCF gases in the nearest future, (iii) the need for final recyclers to 
comply with the now applicable State Law where they operate, (iv) to update manuals before the 
Program´s kick off due to important changes in the Mexican legislation in the last 2 years, (v) to 
perform environmental audits to recycling centers at least once a year, and (vi) to  comply with 
the EMP developed for this purpose. During project preparation, it will be defined which agency 
will be responsible for contracting and overseeing the work of the independent auditors, the 
implementation and outcomes of the certification program for dismantling and recycling centers, 
as well as for supporting annual audits of these facilities.  
 
Component 3: Energy Efficiency Investments in Municipalities  
 
This component will support approximately 30-50 municipalities nationwide in developing 
energy efficiency projects, especially for the replacement of inefficient street lighting systems. 
Project agents (ESCOs) will be responsible for the replacement of inefficient systems and will 
Page  7
also be responsible for the proper disposal of those systems in compliance with the Mexican 
environmental law, policies and procedures and with the World Bank safeguards policy 
(OP/BP/GP 4.01).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be assessed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN) 
Mr Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Management Plan will be prepared to comply with OP 4.01 for the project 
as a whole. The agency responsible for compliance of the implementation of the EMP will be 
SENER.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared to comply with OP 4.10 for the project as 
a
whole. The agency responsible for compliance of the implementation of the IPP will be the 
National Secretariat of Energy (SENER).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/31/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  8
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards documents should be completed by the end of August.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello 
05/21/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
06/03/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
