Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/12/2009 
Report No.:  AC4469
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P114012 
Project Name:  Sustainable Transport and Air Quality 
Task Team Leader:  Arturo Ardila Gomez 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 20, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (60%);Health (25%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme:  Climate change (33%);Pollution management and environmental health 
(33%);Access to urban services and housing (17%);Environmental policies and 
institutions (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.38 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
31.58
31.58 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to assist the selected Mexican cities in (i) fostering long 
term increases in the patronage of less energy intensive transport modes so as to promote 
reductions in GHG emissions growth rates; and (ii) inducing policy changes in favor of 
sustainable transport projects. To this end, the project will provide technical assistance 
and support studies to: (a) regulate freight transport; (b) integrate urban land-use and 
transport planning; (c) induce sustainable transport policies, and programs in Mexican 
cities that contribute to a long-term increase in patronage of more efficient modes of 
transport; (d) target research for environmental assessment (both local and global) of 
transport and land-use measures; (e) pursue political dialogue  by engaging different 
actors dealing with transport, land-use, and environment matters at all levels of 
government; (f) foster a national and regional common approach to sustainable transport, 
articulating land-use planning, and air quality policies; and (g) create a network of Latin 
American cities to allow sharing of regional experiences, enhance the analytical tools 
available at the institutional level, and make them available to all interested cities.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The STAQ Program has been structured into a Regional Project and three Country 
Projects in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. The Regional Project will focus on monitoring, 
developing methodologies and toolkits, and dissemination of lessons learned towards 
strengthening the capacity of specific cities directly participating in the Country Projects, 
as well as any other interested Latin American cities, to be able to develop 
comprehensive strategies to promote sustainable transport.  
 
The GEF Country Project in Mexico will provide technical assistance and fund 
preparatory studies for eventual Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) and non-motorized transport 
(NMT) programs; no works will be undertaken through this grant.  The project consists 
of technical assistance and pilot investments in four pre-identified cities (Puebla, Leon, 
Monterrey and Ciudad Juarez) to remove barriers for sustainable transport. The cities 
have been identified on the basis of the following characteristics: (i) they are economic 
and governmental centers at the national, state or municipal levels, and (ii) the state and 
municipal governments are committed to addressing environmental and sustainable 
transport issues.   The project will co-fund measures in four thematic windows presented 
below, following the cities#, Bank#s, and GEF priorities for climate change mitigation in 
the urban transport sector.  
 
Window 1: Freight Management. This window includes studies and technical assistance 
to improve the planning, management, financing, and control of freight transport in 
Ciudad Juarez. This window will also aim at improving the policy and legal framework 
for regulating freight transport in Ciudad Juarez in order to reduce emissions of GHG. 
Funding of US$120,000 is proposed, in order to implement a regulatory plan, including a 
route system, and a traffic control and supervision systems for Ciudad Juarez.  
 
Window 2: Land Use / Transport Coordination.  This window includes: studies and 
technical assistance intended to address and suggest measures to mitigate barriers that 
impede a proper transport and land use integration and to improve institutional capacity. 
In Puebla, GEF will promote the creation of a specialized entity responsible for urban 
transport planning within the municipality. In Ciudad Juarez the project will help develop 
a
medium term plan for improving pedestrian mobility and a study for recovering 
historical public centers. The total funding assigned is the equivalent of US$205,000.  
 
Window 3: Public Transport Enhancement. This window includes studies and technical 
assistance to improve the institutional and regulatory framework, and to define the state 
government and municipal roles related to the planning, management and implementation 
of integrated and sustainable systems for urban transport. This window will also develop 
strategies for the participation of the private sector in the urban transport management. 
The four cities are at somewhat different levels of development and technical capacity 
and at different stages in the planning process for public transport systems. The studies 
carried out will recognize
 this reality as follows. In León, GEF funding will finance the 
studies required for the design and implementation of the second phase of OPTIBUS, 
under an integrated transport system. In Monterrey, GEF funds will develop studies for 
Page  3
the implementation of two BRT corridors integrated to the current METROREY system. 
In Ciudad Juarez, the project will finance the studies required for the implementation of 
the BRT and to reorganize urban transport in the city. In Puebla, GEF funds will finance 
studies for the rationalization of routes and the design of a BRT corridor project, 
including origin # destination surveys. Funding of US$3,757,000 for this Window is 
proposed.  
 
Window 4: Non-motorized transport. This window comprises studies and technical 
assistance to introduce and promote walking and the use of bicycles as a viable and safe 
alternative to the use of private cars or other traditional motorized transport systems. The 
intended outcome of these activities is to demonstrate and prepare cities to make further 
investments in non-motorized facilities and to undertake further activities to promote 
bicycle usage.   Funding is proposed at about US$1,116,000.  
 
Included also is partial financing of the project coordinating unit (located in 
SEDESOL), which will be in charge of supervising and monitoring performance of the 
GEF subprojects in the four cities and coordinating with the other countries under the 
regional umbrella.  The amount allocated is US$180,000.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This grant is for preparatory studies and will not fund any physical works.  All project 
related activities will take place in four cities: Puebla, Leon, Monterrey and Ciudad 
Juarez.  Eventual works related to the outcome of these studies will take place in 
consolidated urban areas and no effects are expected on natural habitats, resources or 
fragile zones.  
 
GEF funds will not be used for infrastructure investments and an environmental and 
social management framework (MASTU for GEF project) has been prepared that will be 
used to help mainstream safeguard considerations into the project cycle at city level.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
Ms Carla Della Maggiora (LCSEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
This GEF grant will only fund preparatory studies therefore it will not cause any direct 
social or environmental impacts. However an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework has been prepared to ensure that the cities incorporate studies to assess 
possible social and environmental impacts and to mainstream safeguard considerations 
into the project cycle at city level. This framework follows the model approved for the 
Mexico Urban Transport Transformation Project (MASTU). In addition to social and 
environmental matters during project cycle, the MASTU-GEF includes guidelines for 
public consultation during the different stages of the project cycle and the establishment 
of mechanisms to solve complains and conflicts.  
 
The MASTU-GEF will be applied in the subprojects that materialized as a result of the 
studies financed by the GEF STAQ, to include adequate prevention, mitigation and 
compensation measures to address and minimize the potential environmental and social 
impacts of construction and/or operation. SEDESOL, in charge of project execution, will 
be responsible for ensuring that the cities follow the MASTU in preparation and 
supervise its application during implementation of those projects. To this aim, SEDESOL 
will provide, if necessary, technical assistance with Bank#s support. An assessment, 
conducted during preparation, indicates that the four cities have the capacity to apply the 
MASTU_GEF adequately. The four targeted cities have participated in the design of the 
original version of the MASTU under the previous Medium Cities Urban Transport 
Project in Mexico, and through this process, all cities have started to mainstream social 
and environmental management into their project cycle. Although the capacity of the 
cities varies, the four have experience to address social and environmental impacts as 
established in Bank#s safeguards.  
 
The GEF-MASTU has been disclosed in the country (Web-site of SEDESOL) the four 
cities and in the Infoshop.  
Page  5
The GEF STAQ project will finance technical assistance and studies aimed at improving 
public transport systems and environmental quality, while assuring social equity. 
Therefore it is expected to have positive impacts on living standards of the population, 
mainly the poor users of public transport. None of the projects to materialize is expected 
to cause environmental impacts or involuntary resettlement. Nevertheless, as mentioned 
above, the MASTU will be followed to address any type of social or environmental 
impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term negative impacts are expected from this operation including only 
financing studies. Positive long-term impacts are expected due to the reduction in growth 
of traffic and related emissions and increased accessibility, safety and quality of public 
transport aimed at poor population.  
 
The investments to be later materialized based on the support provided by this project, 
will be  designed to have a positive long-term impact due to the reduction of global and 
local emissions, as CO2, NOx, SOx, particulate matter, and other contaminants currently 
present. The reduction will be directly linked to improved vehicle operation, reduced trip 
lengths, use of more efficient modes of transport and improved technologies. None 
involuntary resettlement is expected.  
 
Still, as established in the MASTU-GEF the cities will incorporate in the said-studies 
adequate prevention, mitigation and compensation measures to address and minimize the 
potential environmental and social impacts of construction and/or operation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An assessment of institutional capacity of the four cities indicates that they have the 
capacity to address social and environmental matters and are willing to continue building 
its capacity.  
 
The four targeted cities had participated in the design of the original version of the 
MASTU under the previous Medium Cities Urban Transport Project in Mexico, and 
through this process, all cities have started to mainstream social and environmental 
management into their project cycle. Currently the MASTU includes a clear set of 
guidelines that incorporates the experience of these cities, among others, on urban 
transport projects that at present, is fully embraced by the national government.  
 
As such, all cities understand the importance and benefits associated to mainstreaming 
social and environmental sustainability good practices, including the consultation process 
Page  6
presented in the MASTU-GEF. Environmental management has generally been 
institutionalized, and as a result of learning by doing, the teams in those cities at a more 
advance stage of subproject definition, include social management units capable of 
managing social impacts associated to the subprojects. Replication of the learning by 
doing process is expected in those cities that are at the early stages of subproject 
development (Puebla and Ciudad Juarez), especially given the clear mainstreaming of 
environmental and social consideration in the project cycle presented in the MASTU-
GEF.  
 
SEDESOL, in charge of the project gained experience managing the Bank financed  
 
Medium Cities Urban Transport Project and will collaborate with SEMARNAT and 
local governments to ensure adequate capacity building. SEDESOL would provide 
technical assistance to the cities to adopt the MASTU.  
 
The GEF-MASTU comprises:  
 
(i) Identification of the investment interventions and their potential environmental and 
social impacts  
 
(ii) Characterization of the subprojects  
 
(iii) Social and Environmental Management and Project Cycle  
 
(iv) Action plans where needed.  
 
The main objectives of these activities were to:  
 
(i) 
Identify the actual environmental and social impacts (positive and negative) of the 
sub-projects and the measures that should be implemented to prevent, mitigate and 
compensate the potential negative impacts identified during subprojects preparation, 
implementation and operation.  
 
(ii) 
Develop guidelines for public consultation of the subprojects and discussions 
regarding the social and environmental measures.   
 
(iii) 
Assign clear roles and responsibilities to each actor in social and environmental 
management process and identify capacity needs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The MASTU was originally developed by the cities and over time, it has evolved into a 
clear set of guidelines that incorporates the experience of the cities on urban transport 
projects that at present, is fully embraced by the national government, including 
SEDESOL and SEMARNAT. Consultations were held with key national and sub-
national government agencies and key stakeholders in participating cities. Key 
stakeholders are public transport operators and transit users.  
 
The MASTU will be applied to all Bank investments in urban transport in Mexico, and 
as such, it will help streamline safeguard policies in the country.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/15/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  8
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arturo Ardila Gomez 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Carla Della Maggiora 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
 
Comments:   
