                                                                                                         53867

                      unEGRATEDSAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                       Report No.: AC4424
                                               ,
                                               : .
                                                    -- .. .. -.------ F I
                                                            --..
                                                               $ C l. (H .. r.: Q    E CUr' Y
Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 06/0112009         !Iot.,:.caralon No.       Boa No.:;r~Z"p"'8
                                               f~    PN     IDATl2~".'-~ LoQ.
I. BASIC INFORMATION                           \!i ICe"."'''''
                                                     11en                 Icc
                                                   ~IU;                 or I) Ln/Cr OMP IiSW COIRO Adm PrcK
A.. Basic Project Data
                                                                       PIE>(,'td.'-I
Coun~ Mexico                                   ProjectDD:PI06424
Project Name: MX Efficient lighting and appliances
Task Team Leader: Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Estimated A1)1)raisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: March II, 2010
Managing Unit: LCSEG                           Lending lnstrwnent: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector. DiS1rict heating and energy efficiency services (100%)
Theme: Climate chaaRe {67%);Other social develoJ)ment (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           400.00
IDA Amount (USSm.):              0.00
GEF Amount (USSm.):              0.00
PCP Amount (USSm.):             30.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       115.00
        ~l~ T~hnolo~ EWld                                               50.00
                                                                       165.00


B. Project Objedives (from sedloD 1 of PCN)
The Projecrs development objectives are to enhance the country's energy security by increasing
Mexico's efficient use of energy and to support its efforts to mitigate climate change. Energy
security and climate change goals would be achieved by promoting an increased use of energy
efficient equipment and services and by developing a sustainable and growing market for energy
efficiency equipment that will reduce GHG emissions caused by electricity generation based on
fossil fuel consumption.

c. Project Description Ifrom sectioD 3 of peN]
The project includes four components:
 Component 1: Replacement of Incandescent Bulbs (IBs) with Compact Fluorescent Lamps
(CPLs) in the Residential Sector (Estimated total cost: USS125 million - mRD USS8S million,
CTF US$S million, CF advance payment US$15 million, OOM USS20 million).

 This component will finance the acquisition and distribution 0(70 million CFLs for low-
income UIban and rural households, as part of the Government's national program OD energy
efficiency which aims to replace 200 million IBs by eFLs in the residential sector over a 5-year
period. Transforming the incandescent bulbs market implies significant invesbnent and
coordination efforts as well as the need to strengthen the capacity of the implementing agencies.
Two sub-components will support (i) the acquisition and distribution of CFLs, and (ii)
implementation support for the implementing agencies.

  This component would provide dramatic upfront investments for large-scale purchases, in order
to bring down upfront costs to consumers, and thus create a massive and sustained shift in the
Mexican lamp market by accelerating the increase in market share of CFLs vis-a-vis
conventional incandescent lamps (notably through the exchange ofms) in the residential sector.
The higher up-front costs are a key barrier and only a large size bulk purchase program will be
able to negotiate substantial reductions in price needed to enable all consumers to switch their
lighting technology choices. While the lower bulk cost may induce many to change their
behavior and purchasing decisions, very low-income households (with limited financial means).
rural households (with limited access to·CFLs). etc. will require additional support to participate
in the substitution program.

 The first sub-component involves the Acquisition and Distnbution ofCFLs (USS120 million).
70 million CFLs would be procured in bulk by the implementing agency (CPE or FIDE) in
multiple tranches based on (i) mutually agreed technical specifications. (ii) ensuring open
competition (i.e., ICB), (iii) perfonnance of independent testing, and (iv) designing measures to
ensure bulk purcbase does not create future monopolies. A phased procurement would allow
ongoing testing of purchasing and delivery mechanisms and to evaluate technical savings which
would provide information to adjust subsequent pbases. During distribution of the first tranche
of lamps to low-income consumers, various options for distributing to other customers will be
tested and further developed. Based on preliminary discussions with the GoM, NAFIN would be
the borrower and CFElFIDE, under the coordination of SBNBR, would be the implementing
agencies for this sub-component, together with strategic partners.

  In the initial phases, the light bulb exchange would take place at decentralized outlets run by
strategic partners to the program including utilities, service providers, and private sector
participants. The coordinating entity will enter into appropriate legal arrangements with each of
the partners to define responsibilities, liabilities, cost recovery and incentives. For the low-
income households, a subsidy differentiation scheme would apply: CFLs for very low income
end-users would be subsidized 100% (i.e., CFLs would be provided for free) whereas lower
levels of subsidies would apply (e.g., CFL would be provided at the bulk purchase price or just
financed on utility bills) for all remaining households. The GoM is still working on how to
structure the financing, particularly regarding the subsidy component. The detailed            .
implementation arrangements will be refined during project preparation. A description of the
possible implementation ammgements for this sub-component is included in Annex m.

 The second sub-component will provide Implementation Support (USSS million: mRD) for the
component's implementing agencies. This subcomponent would strengthen planning and
implementation capacities of tho implementing agencies (SENBR, CONUEB,·FIDE, etc). The
subcomponent would also support: (a) post-implementation surveys to assess impacts and
customer satisfaction and design a future approach/phase to help ensure sustaimibility, and (b)
the analytical aspects for the development of CFL recycling centers through private sector
participation.

 Energy savings from the replacement of70 million lamps during the period 2009-2018 are
estimated to total annually 4,000 GWb in consumption and 1,000 MW in power over the entire
period by reducing the need for peak load, most notably. Annual C02e emissions reductions
have been estimated at about 2 million once the program is fully implemented.

 Component 2: Replacement of Refrigerators and Air-Conditioners (ACs) (Estimated total cost:
USS41S million - IBRD USS290 million, CTF USS30 milliQn, CF advance payment USSI0
million, GaM USS8S million).

 This component would finance the replacement of about 1.2 million refrigerators and ACs as
part of the GoM's recently launched program to replace 5.S million units over 5 years. The
ongoing program targets the replacement of 400,000 Units during 2009 (8 description of the
implementation arrangements is set out in Annex IV). The main barriers for the substitution of
old and inefficient appliances are high initial investment cost ofncw and efficient refrigerators
and ACs and lack of incentives and awareness to shift to more efficient equipment. Without the
appropriate financial benefits and incentives, the households would not choose to buy more
efficient equipment unless old equipment is outdated beyond repair and the cost of new energy
efficient equipment is equal or less than a cost of conventional equipment. By providing
subsidies and soft-loans (based on a 4 tier incentive scheme), to low-income households to
purchase the new equipment, this component removes the affordability banier, ensures that the
old equipment is scrapped and recycled properly to prevent any leakage and assures a proper
monitoring system. The consumers will benefit from reduced energy bills, free technical
assistance and a warranty for the new equipment. The manufacturers will benefit from
expanding their sales and reaching a much larger share of customers.

 Under the preliminary Project design proposal, World Bank financing would be used (i) to
provide subsidies to low-income customers (from SO percent to 10 percent oftotal cost of
refrigerator or AC) based on a 4-tier incentive scheme based on monthly electricity consumption,
and/or Oi) to set up a fund to provide credits to interested low income consumers to would like to
obtain finance from NAFIN to cover the non-subsidized portion of the appliance cost. According
to SENER's preliminary estimates, one third of the estimated budget would fund the subsidies
while the remaining two thirds would target the financing scheme. This'component would be
implemented by NAFIN, CFE and FIDE with the overall coordination of SENER.

 The implementation proposal will be reviewed as part of Project preparation. For scaling up the
program with the Bank's support, the GaM is still working on how to structure the financing,
particularly regarding the subsidy component.

  Annual electricity savings from reduced consumption of electricity resulting from the
replacement ofinefficicnt appliances by more efficient ones are estimated at about 1,500 GWh
of electricity reducing around 800,000 tons of C02e per year. These figures would increase four
times once the GaM's overall program is completed.
 Component 3: Street lighting and other energy efficiency in Municipalities (Total estimated
cost: USSSO million· mRD USS2S million. CI'F USSI 0 million, CF advance payment USSS
million. GOM USSI0 million)

 This component would support municipalities in developing energy efficiency projects.
Initially. investments would focus on simple retrofits. notably street lighting but could also
include other areas such as water pumping. Some of the baniers to develop energy efficiency
investments in municipalities include high transaction costs, cumbersome processes, need of
multi-year contracts, and lack of financing. These b8Iriers would be mitigated under the
proposed scheme, where CONUBE would work with BANOBRAS and municipalities to help
market and develop street lighting replacement projects. CONUBE would present the
opportunities and alternative implementation schemes (i.e.· municipality commissions and audit
and then purchases equipment based on the audit repo~·use of ESCOs to offer tum-key services)
and then assists the municipalities through the entire process. CONDEE would work with a few
municipalities on a pilot basis to develop appropriate bidding schemes, implement it 2-3 times
and then incorporate lessons learned into a standardized process for wide.scale replication.
CONUEE would also identify and train a network of partners to act as project agents in order to
facilitate scaJe·up. In paralle~ CONUEE would investigate options to allow for multi·year
contracting in the future.

 Under this component, BANOBRAS would on-lend a portion of the Bank loan for energy
efficiency projects with municipalities.

  The first sub-component supports Street lighting and energy efficiency investments in
municipalities (USS47 million). The Bank would lend funds to BANOBRAS that would then
onlend these funds for individual energy efficiency projects in municipalities, especially for the
replacement of inefficient street lighting systems. Typical loans would be for about 3 years at an
estimated cost of around SI million per project (depending on the size of the municipality).
Where ESCOs are used. efforts would be made to tie the loans to performance contracts, so that
the loan is not disbursed to the ESCO unless the project is saving the expected energy required to
service the loan. This shifts much of the project risks away from the municipality and helps
ensure better performance of the projects. BANOBRAS may also consider options to bundle
projects together, perhaps at the state level, to improve lending while lowering individual project
transaction costs.                                          .

 The second sub-component will involve Capacity building activities to BANOBRAS.
CONUEE and municipalities (S3M). This su~omponent will assist the various partners on the
implementation of the financing program including: (a) marketing of the program· to
municipalities; (b) development of case studies on successful projects and dissemination for
wide·scale replication; (c) development of standardized bidding documents, contracts,
monitoring and verification reports, etc.; (d) standardization of project appraisal methods and
systems; (e) program evaluation; and (f) review of policy issues related to ESCOs in the public
sector, such as budgeting and procurement guidelines.

  A detailed description of the proposed implementation arrangements for this component is
included in Annex V.
            Component 4: Technical Assistance and Institutional Strengthening (USSS million, CTF).

            This component will provide technical assistance to relevant energy sector agencies to
           operationalize and implement the Sustainable uselEnergy Efficiency law.

            The first sub-component involves Technical assistance for SENER (USS2 million: CTF). This
           subcomponent would provide technical assistance to SENBR to carry out planning work related
           to energy security in the context of the new Sustainable uselBnergy Efficiency law. Key studies
           and activities supported by this component will be designed during project preparation to support
           planning and implementation capacities of SENSR under the energy refotnl.

            The second sub-component will support Institutional Strengthening of CONUEE (USS3
           million: CTF). This subcomponent will provide tecbnical assistance to CONUBE to support the
           restructuring process of the commission and the operationalization of the new Sustainable
           uselEnergy Efficiency law. Key studies and activities supported by this component will be
           further designed during project preparation.

           D. Project location (iflmown)
           The project triggers the Environmental Assessment policy (OPIBP/GP 4.01) and the Indigenous
           Peoples policy (OPIBP 4.10). The Project will have minor environmental or social impacts.
           Among the environmental benefits of reducing energy consumption through energy efficiency
           projects are: the reduction in local air pollutants (particulates, SOx, NOx, HC), and the reduction
           of greenhouse gas emissions. specifically C02. Energy savings and GHG reduction resulting
           from the investments to be supported through the project will be monitored and reported under
           the project. Demand-side BE investments in the residential sector may bring significant social
           benefits by reducing the electricity bills while improving the comfort level. The Municipal
           component benefits' will include greater security for the local population (by having better
           lighting on the streets, etc). Specific environmental and social issues for each component are
           addressed below. Although it is recognized that the overall impact of the project win be positive,
           the renewal of equipment could also lead to negative environmental impacts or leakage from a
           climate change point of view.

            Component 1: Replacement of Incandescent Bulbs by CFLs

            Replacement of ms by CFLs will take place nationwide in urban and rural households.
           Beneficiaries of this component will include different low-income social groups, including
           indigenous people (IPs) and it will have no adverse imp.act on the indigenous population. A
           Social Assessment will be carried out during project preparation to (i) identify cultural impacts
           that the project could generate, (ii) understand roles and responsibilities of the different
           participating institutions at the community, municipal state and federal levels, (iii) identify
           participatory mechanisms to avoid creating false expectations on the indigenous peoples, (iv)
           identify the best mechanisms to engage with the JPs; and (v) conduct an analysis of the different
           actors (NGOs, community organizations, etc) working with the IPs that could help on the design
           of a strategy to promote the replacement orms by CFLs. The Project triggers the Indigenous
           Peoples (OP 4.10) safeguard policy therefore an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared




                                                                                             d   .o.v .. ,.   iM.o.s.sQ.Q.   (.           _   AA   hQQQQ   .. .,..:SM.P
..... ht         .   'ViQ.   ((   .QQ   .((i Q2""QiQiQ .. (   hQICh ..   iV.V ..J   it   J                                        'QQi.
based on the findings of the Social Assessment to ensure that benefits are culturally compatible
and to appropriatcly manage any impact, positive or adverse, which may affect or involve
indigenous peoples.

 As will be stipulated in the Agreements between NAFIN, OPE and FIDE and the strategic
partners, the strategic partners will be responsible for distribution ofCFLs and recollection of
used incandcscent bulbs. CFE and FIDE will be responsible for ensuring proper disposal of the
used bulbs in compliance with the Mexican environmental law, policies and procedures and with
the World Bank safeguards policy (OPIBP/GP 4.01). Through the capacity building sub-
component, the analytical aspects for the development of CFL recycling centers through private
sector participation will be supported.

 Component 2: Replacement ofRemgerators and Air Conditioners

 This component will take place nationwide. This component will have impacts associated with
the disposal of old reftigerators and air conditioners, including the dismantling of units, the
recycling of metals, and the safe handling and disposal of refrigerant gases. An adequate
recycling and disposal program can minimize potential impacts, especially those related to the
refrigerant gases; in fact, similar programs been adopted worldwide that have good manuals and
guidelines. Project documents will make clear that the implementation of the recycling and
disposal program will be audited by Bank-designated consultants to identify opportunities for
institutional strengthening and capacity building. This component will also support the
development of a certification program for dismantling and recycling centers and for supporting
annual audits of these facilities.

 Manuals are currently in use in Mexico for refrigerant gas recovery as well as for waste
management in scrapping centers. As oftoday, an Environmental Management Plan has been
developed for the first phase program implemented by FIDE, based on direct environmental
audits performed at two dismantling and recycling centers (Monterrey and Saltillo) and based on
an in depth-review conducted with SEMARNAT and FIDE of results of this program's first
phase (ended 2006). The EMP establishes several recommendations to adequately comply with
O.P 4.01 and Mexican legislation, including: (i) to make mandatory for transporters of old
equipment from homes to the recycling centers to be certified, (ii) to study with SEMARNAT
the possibility of destroying HCF gases in the nearest future, (iii) the need for final recyclers to
comply with the now applicable State Law where they operate, (iv) to update manuals before the
Program's kick off due to important changes in the Mexican legislation in the last 2 years, (v) to
perfonn enviromnental audits to recycling centers at least once a year, and (vi) to comply with
the EMP developed for this purpose. During project preparation, it will be defined which agency
will be responsible for contracting and overseeing the work of the independent auditors, the
implementation and outcomes of the certification program for dismantling and recycling centers,
as well as for supporting annual audits of these facilities.

 Component 3: Energy Efficiency Investments in Municipalities

 This component will support approximately 30-50 municipalities nationwide in developing
energy efficiency projects, especially for the replacement of inefficient street lighting systems.
Project agents (ESCOs) will be responsible for the replacement of inefficient systems and will
also be responsible for the proper disposal of those systems in compliance with the Mexican
enviromnentallaw, policies and procedures and with the World Bank safeguards policy
(OPIBP/GP 4.01).

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard PoUcies (from PeN]
To be assessed.

F. EnviroDmental and Sodal Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) ....
   Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN)
   Mr Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf(LCSUW)

n.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard PoUcies Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)
                                                               Yes
                                                                X        ,   No       TBD

    An Enviromnental Management Plan will be prepared to comply with OP 4.01 for the project
as a whole. The agency responsible for compliance of the implementation of the EMP will be
SENER.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Man82ement (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                      X
Indil[enous PeoDles (OPIBP 4.10)                                X
InvoluntarY Resettlement (OPIBP 4.11)                                         X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                       X

Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

DI. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/3112009

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   I8DS:
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingl should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The safeguards documents should be completed by the end of August.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed tuUI submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                                                                                               OSIlI/2009
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                MrReldarKv
   Comments:
 Sedor Manager:
   Comments:




I Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a fonn and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.                   .
