Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4423 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P115347 
Project Name: School Based Management 
Task Team Leader: Ricardo Rocha Silveira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 19, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 28, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (40%);Secondary education (40%);Pre-primary education 
(20%) 
Theme: Education for all (50%);Participation and civic engagement (25%);Managing for 
development results (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
220.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
As approved by the Board of Directors (December, 2005), the long-term development objective 
of the APL is to improve the education coverage, social participation, and educational outcomes. 
This objective is measured as follows:  
 
-
Program schools as a percentage of all public basic education schools;  
 
-
Commitment to the goals and activities of the Strategic School Transformation Plan 
(PETE) or its state equivalent, as expressed by local financial contributions to the schools, and;  
 
-
Average test scores in Math and Spanish for students in participating PEC schools.  
 
The specific development objective of the PEC II is to improve the targeting of the PEC 
program to focus on schools with poorer students and to focus school management on learning 
issues.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project is the second phase of an APL. The proposed project is fully consistent 
with the APL#s PDO and design.  The second phase (2010 to 2012) will focus on fine-tuning 
information systems, targeting and prioritization mechanisms, and improving social participation 
in school decision-making. The aim will be to increase the educational focus of PETEs and 
ensure that PEC schools achieve their objectives. Improvements in institutional arrangements 
will also be sought, such as using PEC to coordinate among the various programs that SEP offers 
at the basic education level. The School-Based Management Program (phase II) will maintain the 
three components from phase I:  
 
Component 1: School Grants:  This component would finance the necessary resources and 
technical assistance for targeted participating schools to implement school improvement plans.  
The federal share of PEC would be partially financed through the Bank loan, which would be 
complemented by state and community resources. The loan would be used to finance the 
continuity and expansion of the Program in an equitable and efficient manner.  
 
The project would continue to support reforms in the Program Operating Rules (Reglas de 
Operación) that are published annually.  
 
Component 2: Program Monitoring and Oversight.  This component would finance Program 
monitoring, oversight, and dissemination and it follows the structure of Component 2 in phase I. 
The component would include support for the redesign of the school-based information system 
(SIPEC) and accreditation of other information systems.  
 
Component 3: Policy Development and Evaluation. As in phase I, this component would 
support the organizational and institutional development of the Program and contribute to policy 
changes that in the long term can mainstream positive aspects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All the Mexican territory.   
 
E.  Borrow
er’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Bank has excellent experience with the Borrower#s institutional capacity from three projects 
in the same sub-sector:  Mexico Basic Education Development, Phases I, II and III, as well as 
Phase I of the proposed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The project poses no significant environmental issues, as it does not finance construction of 
new schools and supports only limited rehabilitation works and maintenance carried out through 
community development. In phase I of PEC, OP/BP 4.01 was not triggered and the project was 
classified C for its environmental impact.  A review of school financed activities in Phase I 
indicates that most of the expenses went to very small rehabilitation works (mainly bathroom 
rehabilitation, classroom repairs, painting, etc.) mostly
carried out by the parents themselves. 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Project components in Phase II will not change; on the contrary, PEC is promoting paying more 
attention to pedagogic aspects and teachers training and less resources should be going to finance 
small rehabilitation.  This has already been established in the Project#s Operating Rules. 
Moreover, under PEC II, simple environmental guidelines will be prepared and distributed 
among grant recipients, to be followed in intended works to promote adequate debris and paint 
remains disposal, selection of degradable materials, avoidance of flammable materials, 
discouraging the use of chemicals, etc. On this basis the project team is proposing an 
environmental  rating of C for phase II.  For the same reasons no resettlement impacts of any 
kind are expected.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The PEC phase II include is giving a greater focus on schools in poorer and more 
marginalized communities which in the case of Mexico means indigenous population therefore 
the project will trigger Indigenous Peoples 4:10. The Indigenous People Plan prepared for the 
APL continues to be valid for Phase II. However, activities to ensure indigenous peoples# 
participation and benefiting from the project will be be up-dated for Phase II, taking into account 
lessons-learned from phase I and a recent evaluation of PEC execution in indigenous schools.  
This study also included consultation with children, parents, teachers and principals in these 
schools as well as relevant community stakeholders. The social specialist in the team will 
supervise preparation of this update to ensure compliance with this safeguard.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
As explained above, the typical works under PEC will not require additional land or 
expansion affecting other persons. There will not be any land acquisition or constructions that 
cause any kind of resettlement, thus OP 4.12 will not be triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/03/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The IPP is under implementation and has rated satisfactory since 2006.  It will be reviewed 
prior to project Appraisal. To this end, an assessment of PEC#s performance is under 
preparation focusing on indigenous schools and in schools with a high percentage of 
indigenous students (including urban areas). This study will identify strengths and 
weaknesses of the Program as well a possible implementation issues that might be affecting 
indigenous peoples participation.  The IPP will be up-dated to incorporate an improved  
strategy intended to: (i) better target indigenous schools and schools with a high number of 
indigenous students, including those in urban areas; (ii) ensure participation of indigenous 
parents in school councils and preparation of the PETE under a culturally compatible 
promotion program (providing materials in their own languages for instance); (iii) address 
learning issues affecting indigenous students taking into account their cultural background; 
(iv) improve the monitoring system by incorporating into the school-information system 
(SIPEC) data disaggregated by gender and ethnicity; and (v) propose reforms to the PEC 
operating rules to reflect the new strategy. This study includes consultation with indigenous 
students and their parents as well as with relevant stakeholders to take into account their 
views in the design o the new strategy.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ricardo Rocha Silveira 
08/28/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/27/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
09/01/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
