Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4455 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/15/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P114012 
Project Name: Sustainable Transport and Air Quality 
Task Team Leader: Arturo Ardila Gomez 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 22, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (60%);Health (25%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme: Climate change (33%);Pollution management and environmental health 
(33%);Access to urban services and housing (17%);Environmental policies and 
institutions (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.38 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
31.58
31.58 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The higher-level objective of the STAQ Program is to reduce the rate of growth of GHG 
emissions from transport in Latin America through the promotion of less energy intensive and 
cleaner modes of transport. The Program, which was approved in pre-appraisal stage in August 
2006 under the GEF III Strategic Priorities, is consistent with the programmatic goals of GEF 
Operation Policy 11 and the GEF Strategic Priority in Climate Change focal area (CC-6). GEF 
grants under OP11 are to promote the implementation of low carbon technologies, modal shifts 
to less polluting forms of transport, and interventions related to bus rapid transit systems, non-
motorized transport, traffic management, and land use planning. The elements of the STAQ 
Program will contribute to these goals by financing the incremental costs associated with 
awareness generation, policy adjustments, regulatory initiatives, and climate friendly technology 
options towards playing a crucial role in overcoming key barriers to adoption of climate friendly 
development, transport policies and technologies in the urban transport sector. In addition, the 
overall structure and methodology of the Program was designed to ensure that it: (a) is country-
Page  2
driven and supports governments’ efforts to promote sustainable development; (b) strives to 
leverage other funds; and (c) demonstrates cost-effectiveness of different measures to reduce 
GHG emissions associated with transport.  
 
Regional project development objectives will be: (i) to establish a network of local and national 
government stakeholders, international organizations and private sector entities to promote 
policies and actions leading towards more energy efficient and cleaner urban transport systems in 
Latin American cities; (2) to assist cities to develop sustainable urban transport strategies that 
integrate climate change and air quality components; and, (3) to improve the capacity of cities to 
quantify the impacts of transport policies on climate change and air pollution emissions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The STAQ Program has been structured into a Regional Project and three Country Projects in 
Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. The Regional Project will focus on monitoring, developing 
methodologies and toolkits, and dissemination of lessons learned towards strengthening the 
capacity of specific cities directly participating in the Country Projects, as well as any other 
interested Latin American cities, to be able to develop comprehensive strategies to promote 
sustainable transport. The 3 Country Projects, each of which consist of either 3 or 4 city-specific 
sub-projects, will focus on facilitating the planning and implementation of sustainable transport 
investments and policies at the city level.  
 
The Regional Project will fulfill the coordinating function for the entire STAQ Program by 
providing general technical supervision as well as perform several standalone activities. In 
general it aims to provide a framework for developing harmonized sustainable transport, climate 
change and air quality strategies across the region. The approach it will implement will enable it 
to have an impact beyond the individual projects and sub-projects and integrate other cities and 
projects financed by partner organizations. Indeed, all Latin American cities will be welcome to 
access the informational database to be produced by the Regional Project, as well as participate 
in its workshop or training activities.  
 
The Regional Project will analyze and disseminate local and global environmental impacts of 
pilot investments in 11 cities and disseminate lessons learned among cities formally participating 
in the STAQ Program, as well as to other Latin American cities towards helping them develop 
integrated approaches to sustainable transport that addresses all the GEF thematic windows in a 
more comprehensive way. For example, increasing the public transport share of passenger travel 
plays a central role in developing sustainable transport policies in cities around the world, but 
need to be accompanied by strong policies to reduce the growth in car use, implementation of 
land use controls to promote public transport systems and improve accessibility and integration 
of these systems with pedestrian and biking facilities. While participating cities have proposed 
specific projects in particular windows, the Regional Project will assist them in implementing 
additional complementary interventions so that the aggregate impact of their overall sustainable 
transport initiatives will be much larger than the sum of the impacts of each individual 
intervention.  
 
The Regional Project is divided into four operational components: (1) Assessment of 
Environmental Benefits and Co-Benefits of Transport Interventions, (2) Institutional 
Page  3
Strengthening, (3) Policy Dialogue at Regional and National Level, and (4) Program 
Management and Monitoring. These components will function in complementary fashion 
towards the achievement of each of the three main development objectives stated above. While 
subcomponents 1, 2 and 3 are designed to satisfy the needs of the 11 cities directly participating 
in the Program, their products and processes are open to all Latin American cities. 
Subcomponent 4 is more tightly focused on the 11 cities directly participating in the Program, for 
it addresses project administration concerns.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All project related activities will benefit the entire Latin American Region, while the country 
specific projects are designed to benefit 11 cities in 3 countries: Argentina, Brazil and Mexico.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Regional Project will not involve any environmental or social safeguards issue. The CAI 
Initiative staff and partners are well qualified to address long term impacts related to emission 
growth from the transport sector. Each country specific project will rely on executing agencies or 
cities with experience implementing safeguard aspects related to Bank loans. The respective 
capacities will be described in detail in each project related PAD and ISDS.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The Regional Project only involves coordination, studies, technical assistance, training, 
workshops and monitoring activities. None of which will trigger any environmental or   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/20/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard related documents will be prepared under the regional project. Specific 
documentation will be prepared and submitted for each country project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arturo Ardila Gomez 
06/29/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
06/29/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
