Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/30/2008 
Report No.:  AC3766
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P112327 
Project Name:  Additional Financing of Consolidation of Protected Areas System Project 
SINAP II - Fourth Tranche 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Moreira 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: August 28, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.44 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.30 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
0.25 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
1.00 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
6.60
10.15 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to promote the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity in Mexico through the consolidation of the National System of Natural 
Protected Areas (SINANP) by:  
 
a. 
Conserving globally important biodiversity in selected areas of the SINANP 
through an endowment fund;  
 
b.
Promoting the economic, social and environmental sustainability of productive 
activities in selected areas;  
 
c. 
Promoting social co-responsibility for conservation; and  
 
d.
Promoting the inclusion of biodiversity and sustainable criteria in development 
projects and other practices affecting selected protected areas.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Project will focus on the three priorities of the national biodiversity strategy and 
action plan: (i) protection of biodiversity ecosystems; (ii) sustainable use of biodiversity 
and (iii) improvement of the knowledge base on biodiversity. The Project's components 
are the following:  
 
Component 1: Expansion of the Fund for Natural Protected Areas. This component 
comprises the expansion and optimal operation of the endowment fund. To this end, the 
Project comprises a fund-raising program involving the Government of Mexico, the 
Mexican Fund for Nature Conservation (FMCN) and alliances with national and 
international NGOs. Investment income of the endowment fund will support basic 
operation costs of protected areas.  
 
Component 2: Protected Areas (PA) Conservation Programs. This component will 
finance the implementation of management plans and eligible conservation activities in 
the protected areas included in the project.  
 
Component 3: System-wide Institutional Strengthening. This component comprises: (i) 
a
Central Coordination to support PA, including capacity-building and technical 
assistance to PA's staff,  and promotion of social participation; (ii) institutional 
strengthening of the National Protected Areas Commission (CONANP); and (iii) 
consolidation of a network of NGOs and civil society organizations for the sharing and 
adoption of knowledge on protected areas management.  
 
Component 4: Mainstreaming conservation and sustainable use policies. This 
component will promote the inclusion of criteria of biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable use in the development of programs affecting the selected protected areas.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed supplemental GEF grant will support the following protected areas listed in 
the Project Appraisal Document:  
 
*
La Sepultura, in Chiapas state;  
 
*
El Ocote, in Chiapas state; and  
 
*
Mapimi, in Chihuahua, Coahuila and Durango states.  
 
All three protected areas (NPA) are of high biological and ecological importance facing 
threats to the conservation and sustainable use of their natural resources and are therefore, 
a
priority for conservation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
Ms Adriana Moreira (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
a. Environment  
 
The project is not expected to have any significant negative environmental impacts. 
While no self-standing EA has been prepared, the conservation management plans 
prepared for each protected area under the project will ensure the protection of natural 
habitats, forests and biodiversity and avoid negative impacts. The project has been rated 
"B" because of some productive activities in buffer zones, financed by the mainstreaming 
component, and small park infrastructure might have a low impact. Any such impacts 
will be timely identified and addressed under the Protected Areas Management Plans; 
mitigation measures will be programmed and budgeted in the annual operational 
programs. Procedures for screening and assessing impacts of such activities are 
established in the CONANP Operational Manual. Moreover, in accord with Mexican 
Legislation, appropriate impact assessments will be prepared and reviewed by 
SEMARNAT as necessary.  
 
b. Social  
 
OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples. Given that the Project's PAD was prepared before July 1, 
2005, the project is subject to the provisions of OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples. Social 
Assessments (SA) have been prepared for each protected area under the project to 
identify social issues and propose mitigations measures accordingly. Specifically, SA 
identifies if indigenous peoples are present in NPA in order to prepare if necessary an 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan in consultation and agreement with indigenous 
communities. In the case of El Ocote where 54 percent of the population is of indigenous 
descent, the whole social strategy for this NPA has been prepared as an IPP. In NPA La 
Sepultura, where there is a small number of indigenous populations concentrated in a 
locality called Villahermosa, an IPP was prepared for this community; main activities and 
budget are described in the action plans of each IPP, Logic Framework for each NPA 
Page  4
includes specific indicators to monitor activities linked to this action plans. In Mapimi 
there is no indigenous population.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. No resettlement is envisaged under the Project. 
However, to achieve conservation objectives without affecting the access to natural 
resources, the project includes the following process: (i) participatory planning to involve 
population in preparation of management and conservation plans to reach agreement 
about natural resources use and possible limitations; (ii) social assessment for each 
protected area to identify main stakeholders, possible affected population and define 
eligibility criteria to benefit by mitigation measures; (iii) preparation of Sustainable 
Development Action Plans (SDAP) to restore and/or improve livelihoods of affected 
population through grants to execute community-base subprojects to progressively 
substitute damaging practices by sustainable activities.  Local communities are fully 
involved in the selection, design and execution of these suprojects; they sign agreements 
to receive grants, training and technical assistance to implement such subprojects.  
Annual Operation Programs in each NPA incorporate programs and budgets for SDAP. 
CONANP, the executing agency, has agreed to comply with this process and has 
established institutional and administrative arrangements for its execution. Communities 
participate in annual monitoring and evaluation exercise and can present grievances 
and/or disagreements through the Management Committees legally established in each 
NPA.  This project was prepared before July 29, 2005 when OP 4.12 was approved; 
however, described process to address limitations in the access to natural resources, fully 
confirm Process Framework as defined in OP 4.12.  
 
OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. Conservation Management Plans of protected 
areas identify and incorporate as necessary the protection of cultural assets that might 
exist within their boundaries. CONANP Operational Manual comprises measures to 
protect both existing cultural assets and chance-findings. In this fourth tranche the 
remains of some old haciendas and factories within Mapimi NPA have been identified; 
although these assets have not been classified officially as historical sites, they are 
protected in the Management Plan. Moreover, agreements for their protection have been 
reached with communities that have incorporated these assets as attractions in ecotourism 
projects they are implementing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts associated with the Project are presumed to be fully positive because 
it will allow for the sustainable management of conservation of an increasing number of 
protected areas of global importance. Local population will also benefit by incorporating 
sustainable use of natural resources that in most cases also generate income and 
contribute to improve their livelihoods and by improving thier knowledge about 
conservation practices to preserve their own natural resources.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Project's social strategy is adapted to each NPA to specifically address social issues 
and avoid and/or mitigate negative impacts with the full involvement of local 
communities. To this end the social strategy comprises four action lines: (i) Indigenous 
peoples' plans, to be prepared in NPA where there are indigenous population; (ii) 
Sustainable development action plans, comprising alternatives to avoid/mitigate possible 
social impacts due to restrictions in the access or use of natural resources; (iii) 
Participation Strategy, to ensure stakeholders' involvement in conservation strategy 
mainly through the Advisory Council; and (iv) Communication programs, to promote 
public awareness and education about biodiversity values; commitment to conservation 
practices; and dissemination of good practices.  
 
Social strategy's activities are annually programmed and budgeted in annual operational 
plans. The Logical Frameworks prepared for each NPA include specific indicators for 
each activity in the social strategy. All NPA under the project incorporate social 
specialists in their teams and bilingual specialists knowledgeable of indigenous cultures 
in those with indigenous peoples.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has agreed to the methodology incorporated in the SINAP II project 
comprising preparation of a social assessment and implementation of the social strategy 
in each NPA to comply with safeguards policies. There has been full compliance to this 
commitment in the three previous tranches as it is in this fourth one. In the course of 
Project implementation, the borrower has undertaken a series of steps to ensure full 
compliance with safeguard policy issues: (i) the central Executing Unit and the local 
teams in each NPA have incorporated environment and social specialists to address social 
issues; (ii) specialized consultants are hired as necessary to provide additional support; 
(iii) CONANP and FMCN, as partner executing agencies, as well as SEMARNAT, the 
project's overseeing agency, have developed standards and regulations on line with the 
Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies. Independent evaluations inform the 
Bank of any issue that might require remedial actions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Project builds on a legal framework that ensures participation of main stakeholders 
through the Advisory Councils established in each NPA. Moreover, the Project 
specifically promotes stakeholders' participation in preparation and implementation of the 
Protected Area Management Plans and in the four action lines in the social strategy.  
 
Social assessments are prepared at each tranche to identify main stakeholders, social 
issues and possible impacts to design mitigation measures accordingly; SA comprises 
stakeholders' consultations and reaching agreements to prepare as necessary Sustanable 
Development Action Plans and IPP where indigenous peoples are involved. This process 
includes consultation with main stakeholders. For this Fourth Tranche, Conservation 
Page  6
Management Plans, Social Assessments and Social Strategies were prepared for each 
NPA in consultation with local communities and main stakeholders and were locally 
disclosed. These documents are available for consultation at the natural protected areas, 
CONANP's web-site and will be sent to the InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  7
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
07/03/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
07/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
07/03/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
07/29/2008 
Comments:   
