Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4622 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/29/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P113764 
Project Name: MX PROCAMPO 
Task Team Leader: John D. Nash 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 28, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (70%);Other environment and natural resources 
management (10%);Land administration and management (10%);Water resource 
management (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
700.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to provide income support during the current 
economic crisis to some 2.3 million farmers, while supporting the move towards more 
sustainable agriculture.  A secondary objective is to remain engaged with the Government of 
Mexico in their effort to reform the PROCAMPO program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have two main components:  
 
Component 1: Financing of PROCAMPO payments:  This component would be about US$500 
million and would finance a portion of the transfer payments to farmers under the PROCAMPO 
program.   It would not finance any in-kind support to families nor provide any direct services to 
the recipients.  Under the program, bi-annual transfers totalling to US$1.1 billion, are made to 
some 2.3 million farmers cultivating some 14 million hectares.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Technical Assistance: This component will consist  mostly of consultancies - 
individual (possibly for some experts in the PIU), and firms (possibly for M&E, and for policy-
oriented studies to assist with the reform of PROCAMPO).  The details of the TA component 
have not yet been defined.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be financing cash transfers of about US$500 million out of the total 
PROCAMPO transfers of US$1.2 billion during CY 2010.  While PROCAMPO is a national 
project, covering eligible farmers in all states, the Bank-financed project will likely target about 
8-10 states, including those that are the poorest.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
ASERCA, which is the nodal implementing agency for the PROCAMPO program, is located in 
SAGARPA.  ASERCA, as such, is assumed to have limited capacity for safeguard policies since 
the PROCAMPO program has been implemented by it over the years as an "income-support" 
program, rather than as an agricultural productivity project. However, project preparation will 
evaluate the existing capacity of ASERCA to oversee safeguards aspects, and identify any 
necessary strengthening measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) is being planned for the second half of August 2009 to 
get a report sometime in September 2009. The EA will, based upon an assessment of the 
experience with past implementation of PROCAMPO, evaluate potential applicability of other 
safeguards (including Natural Habitats, Forests, and Pest management) and set forth a plan to 
mitigate any negative impacts and enhance positive ones.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The proposed EA will, based upon an assessment of the experience with past implementation 
of PROCAMPO, evaluate potential applicability of this safeguard and, if applicable, set forth a 
plan to mitigate any negative impacts and enhance positive ones. The EA will include an 
inventory of all lands that qualify as critical natural habitats in the project area.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The proposed EA will, based upon an assessment of the experience with past implementation 
of PROCAMPO, evaluate potential applicability of this safeguard and, if applicable, set forth a 
plan to mitigate any negative impacts and enhance positive ones.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The proposed EA will, based upon an assessment of the experience with past implementation 
of PROCAMPO, evaluate potential applicability of this safeguard.  The EA will include an 
evaluation of pest-related laws, institutions and programs. A Pest Management Plan will likely 
be prepared.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
PROCAMPO has been providing cash transfers to  farmers who currently farm or own land 
that was used before the program began for growing crops that were expected to be adversely 
affected  by NAFTA. The eligible land remains basically the same since the program began in 
1993-94. There was no special provision to target or assist indigenous peoples. Because the list 
of beneficiaries cannot be modified, the IPP to be prepared under the project will have the 
following objectives: (i) to assess the extent to which the project can benefit indigenous 
population; (ii) to identify barriers that may be preventing indigenous peoples to receive benefits; 
and (iii) to propose an action plan to address identified barriers and propose alternatives to 
ensure their participation. A social assessment will be prepared using as much as possible recent 
studies and focusing on the states where the majority of the indigenous population live; 
consultation will be conducted at national level with participation of indigenous peoples' leaders 
and other key stakeholders. PROCAMPO operational rules will be modified as necessary to 
ensure indigenous peoples benefit to the maximum extent feasible from the proposed project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft EA and the IPP are expected to be completed by September 30, 2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John D. Nash 
07/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
07/27/2009 
Comments:   
