Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/26/2009 
Report No.:  AC4248
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P115067 
Project Name:  Support to Oportunidades Project 
Task Team Leader:  Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
1,500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project would support Mexico’s conditional cash transfer (CCT) program, 
Oportunidades, which serves about 5 million poor families.  About 70 percent of these 
families are in rural areas, 16 percent live in semi-urban areas, with the remaining 14 
percent in urban areas.  The principal project development objectives are:  
 
•
Improve consumption levels for poor families with minors under 20 and increase 
human capital formation for children by increasing health check-ups, improving health 
and nutrition status, and by increasing school enrollment and attendance.  
 
•
Build sustainable connections between Oportunidades and other social 
programsof the government of Mexico in order to improve health and education 
outcomes for Program participants.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project has two components.  The first component is Support to the 
Continuation of the Oportunidades Program. Oportunidades is a conditional cash transfer 
program which disburses cash transfers (grants) to extremely poor families with children 
below 20 years of age, conditional on compliance with certain requirements.  Currently, 
these include: a) ensuring that all household members visit health centers at least twice a 
Page  2
year (more frequently for pregnant women, newborns and children under 12 months, all 
according to established protocols); b) assuring that children or youth from 3rd grade to 
20 years old enroll in school and attend classes no less than 85 percent of the time; and c) 
assuring that an adult member of the family attends a monthly health information 
workshop.  In addition to the cash transfer, the Program provides a basic package of 
health services free of charge and bimonthly delivery of food supplements for young 
children, malnourished children, and pregnant and lactating mothers. Students 
participating in the Program also receive additional annual or in some cases bi-annual in-
kind or cash support for school supplies.  
 
The amount of the education cash transfers (scholarships) increases at higher grade 
levels.  In middle school and high school, the scholarship is higher for women than men 
because young women at these educational levels tend to abandon their studies in higher 
proportion and at a younger age.  The structure of cash transfers also includes a transfer 
to compensate families with spending on energy which is paid to all who comply with the 
health conditions, as well as a recently-introduced transfer (Vivir Mejor) to compensate 
for the international increase in food prices.  On average, the monthly transfer from the 
program represents about 20 percent of the income of the participating households.  The 
maximum monthly amount that can be received by a family with children in primary 
school is equivalent to about US$100 (per family) and for those whose children are in 
middle or high school, US$160 (per family).  Under the first component, the proposed 
Project would finance the bi-monthly cash payments for 4 of the 6 transfers 
(health/nutrition, energy, food price increase compensation, and education) in the full 
structure of cash transfers to families. Loan withdrawals for grants will be supported by 
Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) prepared based on the list of families eligible for 
payment and reviewed by the Program staff.  
 
The activities included under the second component Institutional Strengthening of 
Oportunidades would aim to:  
 
(a) Increase the extent to which the health and education services used by 
Oportunidades families are participating in various on-going public initiatives to improve 
the quality and accessibility of those services.  Some of the initiatives already identified 
include early childhood development (PEI-CONAFE), education quality (PEC and AGE 
initiatives), community health workers, and health insurance for the poor (Seguro 
Popular).  
 
(b) Develop strategies to increase the autonomy of families so that they are able to 
increase their well-being including among others, facilitating access to graduating youth 
scholarships for higher education and labor orientation and training courses and, 
particularly for families with many years in Oportunidades, facilitating access to other 
social programs for housing, employment, among others.  
 
(c) Further improve the design and operation of Oportunidades, including, for example, 
an analysis of the possible addition of co-responsibilities at the community level and a 
diagnosis of the reasons why some school-age children of participant families are not 
receiving the education transfers, together with remedial measures.  
 
(d) Implement the IPP.  
 
Under this component the Project would finance consultancy services, including studies, 
systematization of best practices and experience in implementation of pilot programs, 
diagnosis of the requirements to facilitate better coordination with other social programs 
Page  3
(for example, how to facilitate better exchange of data, needs for changes in the operating 
rules of various programs), design and implementation of dissemination and 
communication strategies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nation-wide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project triggers the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  Given 
the objectives of the project which include improving consumption levels for poor 
families, increasing human capital formation for children, and building sustainable 
connections between Oportunidades and other social programs of the government of 
Mexico, and the demonstrated results of Oportunidades, it is expected that the project 
would have a positive impact on education levels, health conditions and nutrition for the 
participant families, in particular the children.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long term, the project aims to improve the economic opportunities for the children 
in these families by promoting higher education levels and better health and nutrition 
status.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the project no adverse impacts are expected.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed Project triggers the safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.  The 
management information and monitoring systems are strong.  A social assessment was 
carried out during Project preparation.  Although Oportunidades did not have a specific 
strategy to target indigenous peoples, around 40 percent of its beneficiaries are 
indigenous population, which represent 90 percent of the indigenous population in the 
country.  Those not included are inhabitants of dispersed communities with less than 100 
inhabitants, which are very difficult to reach and often do not yet have the required health 
and education services.  
 
Through the action plan comprised in the Indigenous Peoples Plan, the Project would 
support efforts to strengthen the performance of Oportunidades through the following 
activities:  
 
1.  Improving child nutrition by training mothers to improve the quality of food 
consumption; provision of food supplements to address child malnutrition and promote 
better feeding habits; and a pilot to incorporate early childhood education for small 
children.  
 
2.  Improve education outcomes by addressing cultural and socioeconomic barriers, 
such as language and child labor that prevent indigenous children from advancing in 
school.  Pilot efforts to be tested are tutorials for school children and programs to 
promote their involvement of parents in the education of their children, especially in 
secondary schools through programs such as PEC (Programa Escuelas de Calidad).  
 
3.  Promotional efforts to facilitate the access of high school graduates to obtain 
financial assistance to access tertiary education (through existing programs) as well as 
training to enhance their employment opportunities.  
 
4.  Improvements in the quality of health services by: (i) strengthening the linkages 
between health centers and promoters in the community; and (ii) testing pilot programs to 
reduce maternal mortality (Madrinas and midwives training).  
 
5.  Improved participation and consultation mechanisms and facilitating filing any 
complaints or requests through instruments such as the Sentinel Surveys and capacity 
building in indigenous communities.  
 
6.  The M&E system would incorporate specific indicators disaggregated by gender and 
ethnicity to monitor implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan.  
 
The Borrower has demonstrated adequate institutional capacity for safeguard policies.   
Oportunidades has over a decade of experience in operating the Conditional Cash 
Transfer Program, with good operational and impact results, including in indigenous 
communities.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are participant families and service providers, including those in 
indigenous communities, which account for a substantial share of Oportunidades.  Public 
consultations are an integral part of the operations of Oportunidades.  The program has 
developed its own permanent, periodic consultation process whereby it systematically 
collects opinions and perceptions from stakeholders, in particular participant families, not 
only with the aim of monitoring progress towards its objectives, but also to identify and 
avoid any undesirable affects on the participants.   The main instruments are the 
numerous publicly available external evaluations carried out by well-known local and 
international institutions, including quantitative and qualitative analysis; and the sentinel 
studies, for which the perceptions of a sample of program participants and service 
providers representative at the state-level are collected twice a year in order to identify 
possible deficiencies and remedial measures.  In addition, the IPP has been disclosed on 
the program’s webpage (www.oportunidades.gob.mx).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/20/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
02/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
02/23/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
02/23/2008 
Comments:   
Page  7
