Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4055 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/12/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P115067 
Project Name: Support to Oportunidades Project 
Task Team Leader: Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
1,000.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would finance the continuation of Mexi
co’s conditional cash transfer 
(CCT) program, Oportunidades, which covers about 5 million poor families.  About 70 percent 
of these families are in rural areas, 16 percent live in semi-urban areas, with the remaining 14 
percent in urban areas.  The principal project development objectives are:  
 
•
Complement the income of poor families with children.  
 
•
Increase the accumulation of human capital in extremely poor families 
throughimprovements in their access to education, health and nutrition.  
 
•
Strengthen program quality  
 
In the area of program quality, the loan would focus on supporting the program in areas where 
performance and results have lagged. These include operations in indigenous areas, on outcomes 
in health and education, families with extended participation in the program, and links to 
employment for graduating youth.  The key performance indicators that will be used to track 
progress towards these objectives will be identified during project preparation.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The lending instrument requested by the Government of Mexico is a Specific Investment Loan 
(SIL) of between $1 
–
1.5 billion to be implemented mostly in 2009, including a substantial 
retroactive payment.  There would be two components.  One, proceeds from the Bank loan 
would finance the transfers to families.  Two, there would be a small technical assistance 
component to finance studies and other analytical work.  
 
Oportunidades is an inter-institutional federal program.  The participating institutions include 
the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, the Institute of Social Insurance, the Ministry 
of Social Development, and state and municipal governments. The Ministry of Social 
Development is responsible for the general coordination of the program through the National 
Coordination Unit. The federal level is responsible for establishing program operating 
procedures, for financing and financial management, and for evaluations and audits. The state 
level is responsible for the operation of the program (except financial management), the 
organization of health and education services, and for supervision.  The municipal level is 
responsible mainly for logistical support.  The main targeting instrument now is a proxy means 
test.  Targeting results are good, with the program delivering over 45 percent of benefits to the 
poorest decile, one of the best performances in the Region.  
 
Households choose whether to participate in health or educational subsidies, or within them 
how many children participate.  In nutrition, the bimonthly delivery of food supplements and 
food-nutrition education aims to reinforce infant, pregnant and lactating women’s nutrition.  In 
the case of health, the program provides a basic package of health services free of charge.  In 
education, actions are directed to support the enrollment, permanence and regular attendance to 
school of children of beneficiary families. The educational component encompasses scholarships 
for education and the purchase of school supplies.  The monetary value of the scholarships 
increases at higher grade levels.  In middle school and high school, the scholarship is higher for 
women than men because young women at these educational levels tend to abandon their studies 
in higher proportion and at a younger age.  On average, the monthly transfer from the program 
represents about 20 percent of the income of the participating households.  The maximum 
monthly amount that can be received by a family with children in basic education is US$94 and 
for those whose children are in higher schooling levels, US$156.  
 
Payments are made bimonthly to the mother in the participating family. Households are paid in 
cash at temporary pay points which use available infrastructure (such as community centers), 
with transportation and payment of the money contracted to the financial agents, i.e. the Mexican 
post and telegraph office (TELECOMM) or the National Savings and Financial Services Bank 
(BANSEFI).  Since its origin, the program has had recertification requirements for participants in 
order to confirm their continued eligibility.  An operational manual sets out the detailed 
operating procedures and institutional arrangements.  
 
As mentioned earlier there is evidence from rigorous evaluations of the positive impacts of 
Oportunidades.  However, there also are concerns about shortfalls in some areas.  The program 
may not be sufficiently tailored to the needs of indigenous communities, which may lower its 
effectiveness in some parts of the country.  Although evidence of its impact on increasing the 
utilization of services is strong, results on outcomes, particularly in the case of education are 
Page  3
disappointing and point to the need for more analysis of “supply-side issues”.  Even with 
extended program participation, some families have been unable to improve their living 
standards.  What are the factors contributing to this result?  Are additional conditions needed?  In 
order to help the program respond to these issues, the proposed Bank project would support work 
in the following areas:  
 
•
Strengthening program performance in states with large proportions of indigenous 
populations;  
 
•
Improving education and health outcomes;  
 
•
Improving outcomes for families who have been in the program for a long time; 
 
•
Improving support for secondary school students and graduating youth.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Oportunidades program has over a decade of experience in operating the CCT program, with 
good operational and impact results. The management information and monitoring systems are 
strong.  The program should have sufficient institutional capacity for the indigenous safeguards 
policy.  Moreover, the program has identified efforts to improve the functioning of the program 
in indigenous communities as a priority area to be supported under the proposed project. An 
institutional assessment of this capacity would be carried out during preparation to corroborate 
actual capacity, particularly at SEDESOL field offices, and propose an institutional 
strengthening program as necessary.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
It is expected that the project would support efforts to strengthen program performance in 
states with large proportions of indigenous through the following activities:  
 
1.
A
pilot to incorporate into the program activities of education and nutritional supplements 
for small children.  
 
2.
Efforts to strengthen of school management, including improvements in teaching quality 
and promoting the involvement of parents in the education of their children, especially in 
secondary schools with distance learning.  
 
3.
Improving the links for graduates of secondary school to financial assistance for tertiary 
education (through existing programs) as well as to employment services.  
 
4.
Improvements in the quality of health and education services, including by reinforcing 
the “education quality projects (PEC)”.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/08/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The program has provided information and data to be used for the social evaluation.  
 
Upon discussions with SEDESOL the team will agree on a work program comprising the 
following matters:  
 
1. Assessment of Oportunidades performance in states with large indigenous population;  
 
2.
Institutional assessment and preparation of institutional strengthening program to manage 
the program with indigenous peoples following OP 4.10;  
 
3.
Collection and review of information about indigenous peoples involved in the project; 
specific studies would be undertaken as necessary.  
 
4.
Preparation of Indigenous Peoples Framework to guide Oportunidades implementation 
under the project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
12/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
12/08/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
