Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3250 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/05/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P106261 
Project Name: Mexico Sustainable Rural Development 
Task Team Leader: Marie-Helene Collion 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P108766 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 27, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
209.80 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
209.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective of the proposed project would be to promote the 
establishment of existing and new agro-industries/agri-busineses that promote emission-
reduction technologies, thus contributing to both Government development objectives and the 
goals of the National Strategy on Climate Change and Mexico’s commitments under the Kyoto 
Protocol. The project would also place emphasis on developing policies and regulatory 
frameworks that would strengthen the contribution of the agricultural sector in achieving 
Mexico’s goals under the Kyoto Protocol.  
 
The global environment objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the goals of the 
National Strategy on Climate Change by reducing GHG (CO2) emission through the adoption of 
emission-reduction technologies.  
 
Under blended financing from IBRD and GEF, combined with carbon credit resources and 
beneficiaries’ contributions, the project objective would be achieved through: (i) promoting 
increased private investment in energy efficiency practices and renewable energy sources in 
Page  2
existing and new small and medium-scale agro-processing industries; (ii) increasing sustainable 
biomass productio
n,
conversion, and use as energy; and (iii) strengthening SAGARPA’s 
institutional capacity to effectively address the agricultural sector’s impact on climate change.  
 
To attain the project objectives, the proposed project would provide financial assistance 
(through matching grants) and technical assistance for the design and implementation of agro-
industrial sub-projects. In addition, the project would strengthen the unit within FIRCO 
responsible for the promotion of agri-businesses, building on the platform created by the 
successes of the ALCAMPO and PERA projects and the FOMAGRO program. The proposed 
project would not only strengthen SAGARPA’s attempts to integrate FOMAGRO with increased 
efforts to reduce the agricultural sector’s negative impact on climate change, but would also 
expand the scope of Government support to include agro-industries that incorporate energy 
efficient practices and renewable energy sources. The proposed project-financed activities would 
focus mainly on measures to promote a greater access of eligible investors to the new incentives 
offered by the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is proposed to achieve its objectives through four components:  
 
Component 1, Promotion of energy efficient agro-industrial investments: Under this 
component, the project would increase productivity in the various stages of the production chain 
for agricultural products, while incorporating low emissions and energy efficient technologies. 
The funding would be provided through a matching grant mechanism to ensure the highest level 
of ownership by small and medium-sized investors and cost-effectiveness of investment, 
primarily in the fruit, vegetable and intensive livestock (dairy, beef, and/or pork production) 
sectors. The project financing would promote: (i) the modernization of existing small and 
medium-sized agro-industries to improve their productivity and their energy consumption 
efficiency; (ii) development of new energy-efficient small and medium-sized agro-industries 
(e.g. improved production technologies, produce packing, efficient milking equipment and 
cooling for dairy products, drying and packaging facilities for fruit and vegetables, meat 
processing plants); and (iii) the development of energy production from biomass, both through 
direct support from GEF funds and through access to carbon credits, which would provide 
financial and environmental sustainability of the investments. The GEF support for the biomass 
energy production will be primarily granted to provide the initial capital investment and remove 
technological barriers.  
 
Component 2, Investment and Production Support Services: This component would include 
technical assistance to beneficiaries in sub-project preparation and implementation; 
demonstration and validation of energy efficient technologies; and training in integrating energy 
efficient production and processing technologies in their farms and agro-industries.  
 
Component 3, Institutional Strengthening: Activities to be financed by the project under this 
component would include assistance for policy development to address issues related to climate 
change and the environmental impact of sub-projects.  In particular, institutional strengthening of 
areas within SAGARPA that will address the targets outlined within the National Strategy on 
Climate Change.  Also, support to FIRCO would be given to improve their capabilities, at both 
Page  3
the central and local offices, with regards to both the promotion and implementation of the 
proposed project and the coordination and execution of programmatic CDM activities.   
 
Component 4, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation:  Under this component, the 
project would finance a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within FIRCO that will be 
responsible for project execution and the development and operation of a Monitoring and 
Evaluation System.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project area would be national in focus, though the majority of sub-project activities are 
envisioned to be carried out in current areas of the country with relatively high concentration of 
agricultural activity (including agro-industrial and agri-processing), as well as potential 
Programmatic CDM activity. These areas have been defined by the client through project 
preparation as the 10 states of Jalisco, Coahuila, Durango, Chihuahua, Veracruz, Sonora, 
Guanajuato, Michoacan, Yucatan and Nuevo Leon.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
NAFIN, Hacienda, and SAGARPA/FIRCO have been engaged with the safeguards required 
through the implementation of several World Bank projects (including the recently completed 
AL CAMPO and PERA Projects) and are well qualified to comply with the Bank's safeguard 
policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Roberto Adrian Senderowitsch (LCSPS) 
Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is classified as Environmental Category B 
–
Partial Assessment.  Inconformity 
with Bank policy, the client has prepared the Environmental Assessment (EA) of the project.  All 
activities are designed to have positive environmental and economic impacts as a result of 
technical and financial support to investments in both improved energy efficiency in selected 
agro-industries, as well as installment of bio-digestors to improve manure management in main 
dairy and pig production areas of the country. Investments in these two sectors would have 
positive economic returns to beneficiaries, providing a win-win situation with positive returns as 
well as positive environmental impacts with regards to climate change mitigation efforts. 
Potential adverse environmental impacts would be minor or non-existent, as they would be 
avoided or minimized through appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures.  
 
Any potential impacts would be included in the in-depth screening process of sub-projects 
which would take place to ensure their compliance with Bank safeguard standards. As it is 
envisaged that Bank financing would be utilized for relatively small/medium sized projects, this 
project is not expected to have significant environmental impacts. Though demand-driven, the 
project would not fund those sub-projects mentioned and included in the restrictive list (see 
Annex 10), which excludes projects with significant adverse environmental impacts.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): Specific procedures would be included in the Project 
Operational Manual. The Bank would provide careful supervision of sub-projects and ensure 
fulfillment of Bank safeguards. The project is one of national scope and sub-projects in natural 
protected areas are excluded, as well as areas with dense and abundant forests of high biological 
vulnerability. This would also be verified for each particular sub-project considered for funding.  
 
No significant negative environmental impacts from project activities are envisaged because 
the project’s components and activities would all be oriented towards positive economic impacts 
as a result of its technical and financial support to investment in both improved energy efficiency 
in selected agro-industries, including bio-digestors to improve manure management and reduce 
methane emissions in the main dairy and pig production areas of the country. As such, the 
project is expected to have significant positive environmental impacts.  Furthermore, improved 
capacity for environmental management by both private and public sector would also result in a 
positive impact on the environment in general.  
 
The project’s main investment tool would be the financing of eligible sub-projects presented 
by beneficiaries. Each demand-driven sub-project would be screened by the PIU, based on a 
checklist adapted from the current FOMAGRO’s experience and used by a Regional Committee 
to assess potential environmental impacts. Proposals with environmental risk would be 
thoroughly analyzed and the PIU may require design revisions and/or mitigation measures where 
appropriate prior to approval, being licensed eventually according to the current legal 
framework. Annual evaluations will be carried out, as this innovative program may require 
improvements in its mechanism of implementation. The annual evaluations will assess the 
effectiveness of the screening process.  
 
The Project Operational Manual would include the necessary checklists to screen and 
highlight such sub-projects and will include detailed provision of the steps such sub-projects 
would need to go through in order to ensure compliance with the Bank’s safeguards.  
Compliance with the EMP would be assessed by an environmental specialist during supervision 
both in how the screening process of subprojects is conducted and also through field visits.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Though no conversion of critical natural habitats are envisioned to be either promoted or 
permitted under activities under this project, all sub-projects would ensure that proposed actions 
are consistent with the policy OP/BP 4.04 and specifically address issues in the sub-project 
design to avoid any possible activities that result in natural habitat conversion.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
As this project promotes the establishment of existing and new agro-industries/agri-busineses 
that promote emission-reduction technologies, and not direct agricultural production (which 
could include pest management practices), this safeguard would not apply to this project.   
Further analysis and definition would be conducted at appraisal.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Though most sub-projects are expected to involve the expansion and/or upgrading of existing 
agro
-
industries, no major construction work is expected to 
take place with project financing. The 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
assessment of this project indicated that it is highly unlikely that any activity may have any 
negative or positive impact on objects, sites, structures, natural features or landscapes with 
archeological, paleontological, historical or any other aspect of cultural significance. Based on 
this, in the unlikely event that project activities were to have a potential impact on features of 
cultural significance, all bidding documents, contracts, and work-orders for civil works would 
follow standard environmental rules for contractors, including chance find procedures for 
cultural property.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project would seek to increase the participation of small agri-businesses.Some of the 
eligible agri-businesses could belong to indigenous peoples (IP) or groups of indigenous peoples.  
Though any existing agri-business, regardless of its ownership, is invited to participate in the 
program, it is considered relevant to have a specific information and dissemination program 
designed to reach IP (taking into account language requirements, for example).  SAGARPA has 
a
Sub-Secretariat for Rural Development that deals specifically with indigenous peoples' issues. 
The Project will collaborate with SAGARPA's Rural Development Sub-Secretariat in order to 
ensure that the dissemination of information regarding the project is designed to reach IP.  In 
addition, IP may require specific attention regarding training and capacity building, which will 
be taken into account under the training program. An Indigenous People Framework will be 
prepared as part of the social assessment.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/12/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment and Social Assessment launched with PHRD initiation and will 
be finalized by Appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael G. Carroll 
06/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
08/05/2008 
Comments:  Acting for Mr Reidar Kvam 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marie-Helene Collion 
08/05/2008 
Comments:  Acting for Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
