Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3977 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Moldova 
Project ID: P113569 
Project Name: ENERGY, ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader: Doina Visa 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Access to urban services and housing (P);Other economic 
management (S);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.20
1.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives of the Additional Financing would remain the same as 
objective (b) of the original project.  The Development Objectives of the Energy II project are to: 
(a) improve the security and reliability of the electricity transmission system and wholesale 
electricity supply, and therefore facilitate unimpeded commercial operation of the power system; 
and (b) improve the availability, quality and efficiency of heating in selected priority public 
buildings (schools, hospitals, and residential buildings for disabled and other vulnerable groups).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The original project comprises four components: (a) electricity system upgrade; (b) heating 
supply and efficiency improvement; (c) technical assistance for project implementation and 
energy reforms; and (d) project management and implementation (incremental operating costs). 
The proposed Additional Financing  would scale up  the second component (b) by improving the 
heating supply for around 23 additional public institutions in 12 rayons, including 4 hospitals and 
19 educational buildings (schools and kindergartens).  MEPIU has prepared an indicative list of 
additional buildings based on requests received during the original project (202 proposals 
Page  2
received from District Councils and Rayons).  The selection of the institutions has been done 
using the selection criteria agreed with the Bank during the preparation of the Energy II Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The locations of the heating subprojects will be throughout the country, and will include the 
following municipalities: Drochia, Oknita, Soroca, Leovo, Soldanesti, Basarabeasca, Singerei, 
Cimislia, Taraclia, Orhei, Stefan Voda, Anenii Noi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The existing human and institutional capacities to ensure Environmental Manangement Plan 
implementation are adequate.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental assessment was completed on September 30, and cleared by the Bank on 
October 10,2008.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/14/2008 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The necessary studies have been completed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Doina Visa 
10/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
10/08/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
