Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:47560   
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/27/09 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: 
Moldova
 Project 
ID: 
P109459
 
Project Name: 
Community Forestry 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Anatol Gobjila
 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 
March 3, 2009
 
Estimated Board Date: 
April 9, 2009
 
Managing Unit: 
ECSSD
 Lending 
Instrument: 
Carbon Finance
 
Sector: 
Forestry (100%)
 Theme:
 
Other environment and natural 
resources 
management (P); Climate change (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Arcadie Capcelea
 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 
USD$ 2.6 million
 
Other financing amounts by source: Moldova State Forestry Agency; PHRD
11.0 ($m) 
B.  Project Objective [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project’s development objective is to restore degraded land to economic and environmental use for 
the benefit of rural communities. In addition to community benefits, the project's forestation activities 
would support through restored productivity and conservation of soil the global objectives of carbon 
sequestration and reduction of atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The project aims to 
achieve
 
forestation of 8,000 hectares of degraded agricultural and community land 
with an aim of creating new community forests and protective forest belts; and to build community-based 
capacity to manage the newly created forests. 
The project
 
will have a single component with two main 
activities: 
 
A. Creation of community forests and protective forest belts.
 
The project would forest some 1,300 plots 
scattered throughout the country. The plots are located in 264 mayoralties (primarias) in all the rayons of 
the country. The land to be forested is largely “refused land” – land that has not been privatized and the 
primarias are unable to restore to productive uses due to a lack of financing and technical know-how. The 
local communities have contracted Moldsilva for periods of 5 to 10 years for the execution of forestation 
works on their behalf. Following contract expiry, forest management activities will be continued by the 
primarias. Moldsilva will apply environmentally sound forest management practices, well-developed in 
Moldova, to ensure the maintenance of healthy plantations, while developing a sustainable flow of wood 
and non-wood products for subsistence and commercial purposes. Maintenance cuttings will be carried 
out from canopy closure to maturity stages, while improvements in phytosanitary conditions through the 
control of forest pests and fires. 
 
B. Technical Assistance to Communities on Forest Management.
 
The project would build capacity and 
improve the enabling environment for community forest management by providing: (i) Technical 
Page  2
assistance for the development of community forest management on community land; and (ii) Direct 
technical support to communities for creating new forests and protective forest belts. For this purpose the 
project beneficiary has received a grant from the PHRD Climate Change window. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project plots are located in different administrative regions and geographical zones 
scattered the country. For each plot (polygon), geographic co-ordinates (GPS) are recorded 
and photographic evidence is collected and archived, as per the quality assurance and 
control requirements of the project data and information systems. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity [from PCN] 
 
The project will be implemented by the State Forestry Agency - Moldsilva. This institution has already 
implemented two similar carbon sequestration projects and its existing EA capacity is adequate. 
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
This OP is triggered and the client will 
prepare an Environmental Assessment and a simple EMP, which will be disclosed and 
consulted in the country and published in the Infoshop.
 
[
]
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
It is expected that the project will not affect any of the 
country protected areas or high priority Natural Habitats (NHs). The proposed lists of land 
plots proposed for forestation will be screened through the EIA process by the MENR to 
exclude any possible NHs to be proposed for forestation and/or any impacts on them.
 
[
]
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
)
The proposed forestation activities will not involve usage of 
any pesticides and/or mineral fertilizers and thus this OP is not triggered.
 
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
All land plots identified for afforestation are in 
public ownership.  The Bank's safeguard on involuntary resettlement has not been 
triggered, as very minimal changes in access to community grazing land are expected and 
the previous PCF and Biocarbon Fund project experience and social M&E data has shown 
that a process framework was not needed.  The land plots per primaria in this project are 
of a similar small size (on average, 7-10 hectares) and constitute on average less than 10% 
of the total available village pasture area. The majority of pastures suffer from a high 
degree of degradation, with among the lowest productivity and values for grazing. The 
project will not require land acquisition.  
 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
)
N/A 
[X] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
The project triggers this OP in the positive way by supporting 
expansion of the forest cover in the country. The project will not support any logging 
activities.  A PHRD grant fully compliments the carbon finance project to help reinforce 
community training in the sustainable management of forest resources.
 
[
]
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
4.37) N/A 
Page  3
[
]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
). 
The land plots under forestation 
represent totally and/or partially degraded agricultural land and thus this OP is not 
triggered.  This policy is not triggered because no overlap with cultural properties is 
anticipated in these rural/degraded agricultural lands.  The EIA process will in any case 
screen all proposed sites to ensure that no known cultural sites would be impacted.  The 
planting of trees, the primary focus of the project does not involve substantial enough 
earthworks to be concerned with “chance finds” of cultural artifacts.
 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
N/A 
[
]
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) N/A 
This policy is not triggered 
[
X] 
Disclosure Policy (OP 17.50) 
The Environmental Assessment and EMP will be disclosed 
in the country and in the Infoshop.
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
It is expected that the project’s environmental impact will be mostly positive and substantial, through the 
following: (a) Reduction of soil erosion (from water and wind) and stabilization of land at risk of gully 
formation and landslides, with associated improvement of aquatic ecosystems currently affected by soil 
erosion and nutrient flows; (b) Restoration of soil productivity and horizon development of favorable soil 
hydrology; (c) Restoration of vegetative cover, wildlife habitat, and biodiversity value; Improvements in 
microclimatic conditions, and carbon sequestration. The potential for an adverse environmental impact 
will be minor and only due to soil preparation works at the initial stage of forestation activities. However, 
this can be easily managed through a series of specific agro-technical measures.  
 
Based on the aforementioned, it is proposed that the project is attributed an EA category B. A simple 
EMP will be prepared to address sustainable forest management practices, with special consideration to 
water-use issues due to prevailing drought conditions in Moldova 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared. 
 
The A QER for this project will not be held. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
The PDD (PAD) stage ISDS will be prepared by March 5, 2009. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Anatol Gobjila 
February 2, 
2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Agi Kiss 
February 20, 
2009 
Comments 
Sector Manager:
 
John Kellenberg 
February 6, 
2009 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
