Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/16/2008 
Report No.:  43523
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P107612 
Project Name:  NATIONAL WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION PROGRAM 
Task Team Leader:  Takao Ikegami 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (80%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Other rural development (S);Pollution management and environmental 
health (S);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Proposed development objectives (PDOs) are (i) to improve the coverage, quality, 
efficiency, and sustainability of water and sanitation services in selected urban and rural 
communities; and (ii) enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Construction and Territorial 
Development (MCTD) to prepare and supervise the implementation of investment 
projects and to provide technical assistance to the operating Apa Canals. The key 
outcome indicators selected to measure progress towards each of the dimensions of the 
PDOs are: (i) the number of hours of water service; the share of households connected to 
a
piped water and sewerage network (for improving the coverage of water and sanitation 
services in urban communities): (ii) the share of water supply samples meeting Moldovan 
water quality standards (for improving the quality of water and sanitation services in 
urban communities); (iii) the non-revenue water (NRW) (for improving the efficiency of 
water and sanitation services in urban communities); (iv) the ratio of cash operating costs 
(without depreciation)/cash operating revenue (for improving the financial sustainability 
of water and sanitation services in urban communities); and (v) the number of rural water 
supplies that have been rehabilitated; training days provided to staff in MCTD and Apa 
Page  2
Canals (for improving the environmental sustainability of water and sanitation services in 
urban communities).   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1. Water Supply and Wastewater Services in Select Water Utility Entities 
This component identified seven Apa Canals in Balti, Cahul, Cau≈üeni, Floresti, Orhei, 
Soroca, and Ungheni to benefit from a combined US$8.00 million investment. The 
component will finance the rehabilitation of water and sanitation system in the 
participating Apa Canals including: (i) the installation of water pipe that was procured 
under the Pilot Water Supply and Sanitation Project (PWSSP) for the selected 
municipalities; (ii) the rehabilitation of a water treatment and of networks and pumping 
stations; (iii) the procurement of construction machinery and trucks; and (iv) the 
construction of new sewage collectors.  
 
Component 2.  Water Supply Services in Select Rural Communities (US$4.0 million). 
This component will aim at rehabilitating water supply services in selected rural 
communities including the rehabilitation of the water systems in about 50 rural 
communities. Specifically, this component will finance the rehabilitation of existing deep 
wells and piped water systems in 50 villages, identified as priority villages within the 
Government 2007 water and wastewater strategy. The majority of these villages were 
affected by the 2006/07 drought in Moldova. The component aims to provide safe water 
to each village school, health center or administrative center, and to those villagers who 
are willing to pay to connect to the piped system. Furthermore, it will finance an 
education campaign including selected programs on health and sanitary education in the 
50 villages that intend to educate the population on safe water consumption habits.  
 
Component 3. Capacity building (US$1.0 million) component will enhance the capacity 
within MCTD to prepare, appraise, and supervise the implementation of water supply and 
sanitation projects. The component will finance: (i) Equipment, services and incremental 
operating cost to enhance the capacity of MCTD to select, appraise, and supervise water 
supply and wastewater investment programs; (ii) activities to increase the level of 
external financing to the sector; (iii) project management in relation to the enhanced 
capacity of MCTD to manage externally financed projects, and (iv) training programs 
aimed at the staff of MCTD.  
 
Component 4. Energy Efficiency (US$1.0 million) component will help to demonstrate 
and disseminate through energy audits, workshops, and sharply targeted investments the 
potential for increasing energy efficiency in municipal water and wastewater operations 
with a view of reducing the greenhouse gas emissions from the sector. The component 
will finance goods and services to increase energy efficiency in urban water and 
wastewater systems.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Investments financed by the proposed project under Component 1 will rehabilitate and 
upgrade existing water supply networks and wastewater systems in seven selected towns 
Page  3
(Balti, Cahul, Cau√Ö≈∏eni, Floresti, Orhei, Soroca, and Ungheni) throughout Moldova. 
These towns were considered the most important ones in the country in relation with 
institutional, socio-economic, financial and technical aspects according to a Feasibility 
Study (FS) prepared by the Client in September 2007. Also, the project will finance under 
Component 2 the rehabilitation of the existing deep wells and piped water systems in 50 
villages, identified as priority villages within the Government 2007 water and wastewater 
strategy.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bankís safeguard policies and procedures, including 
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the project has been classified as a Category B 
for environmental assessment purposes given that it will finance only rehabilitation of 
existing water and wastewater infrastructure. An EA report including an EMP was 
prepared by the MCTD to analyze the potential adverse environmental issues related to 
the proposed infrastructure investments and to ensure that these aspects are mitigated 
during the project design. Furthermore, a separate EMP document was prepared 
specifically for the water supply rehabilitation investments in selected villages 
(Component 2).  
 
No major impacts on physical cultural resources are expected during the project 
implementation, yet attention should be paid to the possibility of built PCR (e.g., 
churches) being affected by dust and vibration during construction.  
 
The involuntary resettlement safeguard OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered since: (a) there will 
be no land acquisition for the works under the project as these will all take place on 
public property; and (b) extension of water and wastewater networks financed under the 
Page  4
project will be built on public property, where there are no squatters occupying all or part 
of the land. Therefore, there will be no compulsory land acquisition under the project.  
 
Although the project areas are on two international waterways, the Nistru and Prut 
Rivers, the investments proposed under the project are only for rehabilitation and 
improvement of existing water supply and wastewater schemes, which are not expected 
to change the volume of extraction/discharge water or quality of water of these rivers. 
Therefore, given the rehabilitation nature of the activities under the project, the team 
considers that no notification to other riparian states is required under the Bank policy. 
However, the OP/BP 7.50 policy applies to this project and falls within the exemption to 
the notification requirement under paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy. The project obtained an 
exemption from the ECAVP to the notification requirement under paragraph 7 (a) of the 
Policy on March 10, 2008.  
 
It is important to note that none of the water supply sources in this project will be from 
dams or reservoirs. The deep wells proposed for rehabilitation investments under the 
project Component 2 are providing water from a local shallow aquifer. Therefore, the 
project investments do not trigger the OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EA identified a number of minor negative environmental impacts such as 
infrastructure construction related effects (dust pollution, noise and vibrations, waste 
management), impacts of accidental pollutant discharge on water/groundwater, soil and 
air quality, and possible temporary effects to local vegetation (trees), landscape and 
cultural properties. However, these impacts are temporary and may be effectively 
prevented or reduced through application of appropriate protective actions, mitigation 
measures and monitoring activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed project activities are in line with the short-term investment priorities in the 
water supply and sanitation sector launched by the Government during 2007-2009. 
Therefore, these rehabilitation infrastructure investments include the most urgent 
activities proposed in the selected 7 mid-towns and 50 rural communities throughout 
Moldova. The medium- and long-term investment priorities planned by the Government 
(which are not financed by the project) include, among other activities, the construction 
of new wastewater treatment plants and the affiliated sewerage networks in selected 
towns, construction of new water supply networks for better coverage to the entire rural 
population, and rehabilitation of all water supply network pumping stations and sewerage 
networks in the country.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) including EMP prepared by the Government of 
Moldova confirmed the environ
mental category ìBî designation for the proposed project. 
Page  5
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared by the MCTD to ensure that 
mitigation and monitoring activities protect the population and environment from key 
risks related to rehabilitation works such as noise, soil erosion on steep slopes, and 
protection of waterways. The EMP also includes a check on potential impacts on Physical 
Cultural Resources.  
 
The project implementation agency is the MCTD that will be strongly supported by PIU 
staff initially responsible for implementing the Pilot Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
(PWSSP) and the Moldova Environmental Infrastructure Project. Therefore, this PIU 
staff has experience in implementing World Bank financed projects including addressing 
and monitoring safeguard aspects related to the proposed project. However the PIU staff 
will be officially transferred to MCTD on the basis of Government decision to be issued 
shortly after the negotiations held on April 8, 2008.   The PIU Director directly reports to 
the Minister of MCTD.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultations on the drafts EIA and EMPs related to project component 1 were 
held in selected municipalities during February 1-13, 2008. The draft project EA 
including specific EMPs was publicly disclosed timely in the mass media sources such as 
the municipalitiesí web sites and local newspapers. Minutes of these public meetings and 
a
list of participants are included in the final reports before their final disclosure in 
country and at the Bankís Infoshop. Public meetings to discuss the EMP document 
prepared for investments financed under the project component 2 took place with 
interested parties from the North, South and Central regions of Moldova on February 28, 
2008. All comments discussed during these meetings were incorporated in the final EMP 
and sent officially to the Bank on March 6, 2008 for final disclosure at the Infoshop 
(March 12, 2008).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  7
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Takao Ikegami 
02/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
04/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop 
02/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
03/04/2008 
Comments:   
