Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC4112
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P113569 
Project Name:  ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR ENERGY II PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Doina Visa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Access to urban services and housing (P);Other economic 
management (S);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives of the Additional Financing would remain the same 
as objective (b) of the original project.  The Development Objectives of the Energy II 
project are to: (a) improve the security and reliability of the electricity transmission 
system and wholesale electricity supply, and therefore facilitate unimpeded commercial 
operation of the power system; and (b) improve the availability, quality and efficiency of 
heating in selected priority public buildings (schools, hospitals, and residential buildings 
for disabled and other vulnerable groups).   
 
3. Project Description 
The Original Project comprises four components: (a) electricity system upgrade; (b) 
heating supply and efficiency improvement; (c) technical assistance for project 
implementation and energy sector reforms; and (d) project management and 
administration. The proposed Additional Financing  would scale up  the second 
component (b) by improving the heating supply for around 18 additional public 
Page  2
institutions in 10 rayons, including  hospitals and educational buildings (schools and 
kindergartens).  MEPIU has prepared an indicative list of additional buildings based on 
requests received during the original project (204 proposals received from District 
Councils and Rayons).  The selection of the institutions has been done using the selection 
criteria agreed with the Bank during the preparation of the Energy II Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The locations of the heating subprojects will be throughout the country, and will include 
the following municipalities: Drochia, Oknita, Soroca, Leovo, Soldanesti, Singerei, 
Cimislia, Taraclia, Orhei, Stefan Voda, Anenii Noi.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The only safeguard policy that applies to this project is Environmental Assessment. 
Generally it is expected that the project will have no appreciable adverse environmental 
impacts, but instead will have environmental benefits associated with the replacement of 
old boiler equipments with more environmentally-benign ones. In particular, all new 
heating systems will provide much higher energy efficiency, resulting also in lower 
emissions and reduction of fuel consumption, achieved by:  
 
•
selecting new boilers with higher energy efficiency;  
 
•
installing new and modern substation equipment (e.g. pumps with variable speed 
drive);  
 
•
preinsulating distribution pipes with higher efficiency thermal insulation, leading 
to lower heat losses in the network;  
 
applying leak detection systems to timely prevent water losses;  
 
•
using automatic control of system processes and regulating their operation based 
on outside temperature and demand (at boiler plant and substation levels);  
Page  3
•
applying of thermostats for adjustment capabilities at radiator level;  
 
•
implementing energy conservation measures(window replacement, roof repairs);  
 
•
installing of metering devices for monitoring of energy flows.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impacts of the project activities are mostly positive and include 
the reduction of NOx and CO2 emission.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None anticipated.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower prepared Environmental Management Plan for the initial phase of Energy 
II project. Implementation of the EMP was and will be a covenant in the Development 
Credit Agreement for the Additional Financing. Institutional and human capacities 
assessment to perform environmental safeguards for the Energy II and its Additional 
Financing was conducted by the WB safeguards specialist during the pre-appraisal 
project supervision mission in September, 2008. The mission concluded the following: 
(a) the EMP was implemented generally successfully. Among further activities which 
should be implemented are measures with regard to asbestos plates at the electrical 
substations. Whenever possible Moldelectrica should organize their painting and/or 
replacement and disposal, also avoiding their usage in the future; (b) there is no need for 
its revision and/or updating the EMP for the proposed Additional Financing; and (c) 
generally the existing human and institutional capacities to ensure EMP implementation 
are relevant, although additional training on both environmental requirements in the 
electricity and heating sectors is recommended. For improving monitoring and 
supervision of project implementation MEPIU will strengthen cooperation with local 
inspectors, providing them with the information about forthcoming new subprojects and 
activities, including organizing joint supervision of them.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Government of Moldova and the municipalities that will 
participate in the heating component. In conducting the Energy II Environmental 
Assessment the Ministry of Energy (ME) published an announcement in the major 
newspapers of Moldova, indicating the availability for review of the project EMP by any 
interested party. The same public announcement included information on a public 
meeting for discussion of the project EMP. The public meeting was organized by the ME 
with the active participation of the Ministry of Environment and Territorial Development 
(Environmental Policy Division), which routinely maintains close working ties with the 
environmental NGOs represented in Moldova. The public meeting took place on May 15, 
2001 and was attended by 45 representatives of various NGOs, the media, municipalities 
and ministries. The Borrower's combined EA/EMP for the project was submitted to the 
Page  4
Bank in August 2001, together with the report on the public consultation and disclosure 
process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/08/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/15/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Doina Visa 
09/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
09/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Istvan Dobozi 
12/24/2008 
Comments:   
