Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/18/2009 
Report No.:  AC4294
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P116321 
Project Name:  Rural Investment and Services Project -  Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Olivier Colleye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 14, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (56%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(22%);General industry and trade sector (15%);General public administration sector 
(5%);Other social services (2%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm 
income generation (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Legal institutions for a 
market economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
2.50
4.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project is the Second Phase of a two-phase Rural Investment and Services Program. 
The Program objective, which remains unchanged, is to provide long-term support to 
accelerate agricultural recovery and
 growth so that Moldova’s agricultural and rural 
sectors can play their full role in providing the underpinnings for future income growth 
and poverty reduction.  
 
Within this program objective, the project’s Second Phase (RISP II) objective is to 
continue to foster post-privatization growth in the agricultural and rural sectors by 
improving access of farmers and rural businesses to what they need to succeed – 
knowledge, know-how and finance, while building the capacity of the private and public 
institutions to ensure the sustainability of the activities.  
 
Page  2
RISP II has been under implementation since June 2006, yielding excellent results. 
Additional financing is being sought for scaling up existing activities, to enhance impact 
and to ensure that the outcomes of the Rural Investment and Services Program are 
fostered at times of economic malaise, and that farmers and rural entrepreneurs continue 
to have access to the resources and knowledge necessary to ensure their development, 
and the long-term viab
ility of the country’s ruraleconomy.   
 
3. Project Description 
Rural Advisory Services (US$1.65 million). The Rural Advisory Services (RAS) 
component provides information, knowledge and know-how to small private farmers. 
Such advice is thematically diverse, ranging from agricultural technology to food safety 
and quality standards to marketing advice, as well as other areas of general and 
specialized interest on the part of the farmers. So far, under RISP II the RAS provided 
advisory and informational services to more than 300,000 farmers.  
 
The additional financing will provide further support to maintain the operation of this 
important public service, while the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (MAFI) 
continues its efforts to develop a vision for the future of the RAS in Moldova – its 
outreach, thematic coverage and financing. Over the course ofRISP II, MAFI has 
gradually assumed more responsibility for the overall oversight, coordination and 
financing of RAS activities, and this trend is only expected to strengthen.  
 
The National Agency for Rural Development (ACSA), established as an NGO under 
Phase I, will continue to coordinate field implementation of the RAS component through 
its network of Service Providers (SPs) and.  
 
Rural Business Development Component (US$ 0.25 million). The Rural Business 
Development Component finances technical assistance to rural entrepreneurs, and 
provides operational support for local development agencies (DAs), with the aim to 
create legally registered, self and co-owned sustainable rural businesses, which have the 
potential to become clients of financial institutions. So far, under RISP II, the component 
contributed to the creation of 423 businesses and 1300 new jobs, with financing from a 
variety of sources, including remittances. Under the additional financing, the component 
will continue to provide, based on expressed demand, support for the formation of viable 
agribusinesses, including business cooperatives, processing and marketing entities, as 
well as non-farm rural businesses with proper legal and operational status which will 
contribute to employment creation and income augmentation in rural areas. The services 
to the up-and-coming businesses under the component will include the identification of 
profitable products, services and potential markets, the conceptualization of business 
ideas, the development of business plans, and, ultimately, the preparation of loan 
packages. Per client demand, this component will also provide technical assistance to 
initiate the operations. Once established and in operation, the newly established business 
entities will also receive post-creation support on a cost-sharing basis. The businesses 
created under the component will have access, subject to the discretionary decisions of 
the participating financial institutions (PFIs), to investment and working capital loans 
under the Rural Finance Component of the project.  
Page  3
The four DAs that are involved in the implementation of the activities of RISP II have 
substantive experience in grassroots mobilization, extensive awareness about agriculture 
and off-farm investments needs in rural areas, and a solid grip in business development 
assistance techniques. The same pool of DAs will be involved in the implementation of 
the additional financing.  
 
Rural Finance (US$ 8.0 million). The component contributes to the expansion of the 
outreach of the formal financial sector to rural areas to ensure broader access to 
investment financing for farmers and rural entrepreneurs. The proposed additional 
financing will continue lending activities under the RISP II credit line which is expected 
to be fully disbursed in the second quarter of 2009. The rationale for scaling-up lending 
activities stems from the fact that long-term funds are
 scarce in Moldova’s commercial 
banking sector, while the demand for investment loans continues to be high. To address 
the issue of lack of long-term resources, funding to the financial intermediaries will be 
provided for up to 15 years. The PFIs will be responsible for identifying prospective sub-
borrowers, will have full autonomy in sub-project approval and determination of lending 
terms, and will bear the lending risks. The component will be implemented through the 
same eligible PFIs that operate under RISP II. The intended beneficiaries will be those 
with a commercially viable and bankable business proposal, adequate collateral, 
satisfactory rates of return and demonstrated repayment capacity.  
 
Project Management (US$0.1 million). Under this component the additional financing 
will finance incremental operating costs necessary to ensure satisfactory implementation 
and achievement of the PDO.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The additional financing will be implemented countrywide, based on demand for services 
and credit resources, and will not be located in protected and/or culturally and socially 
sensitive areas. If potential sub-projects are proposed in the vicinity of protected areas or 
critical habitats (highly unlikely) a specific and full environmental assessment will be 
required.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bank’s OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the 
additional financing has been classified as a Category FI for environmental assessment 
purposes. Overall, no significant or large-scale environmental impact is expected to occur 
given the relatively small size of the sub-projects to be supported.  
 
The additional financing will be used to finance technical assistance, as well as sub-
loans to small rural entrepreneurs channeled through a number of Participating Financial 
Institutions (PFIs). Due to the demand driven nature of these loans it is not possible to 
determine in advance exactly what types of loans will be financed. However, experience 
from the implementation of RISP II has demonstrated that the loans are on average under 
US$51,000 of which more than half are directed towards investments in services and 
other small-scale non-agricultural activities. About 90% of the investments go into 
financing equipment and activities that do not cause any significant environmental 
impact, such as: land cultivation machinery, various transportation means, beekeeping 
equipment, storage facilities, repair shops, woodworking, and others. RISP II also 
supports a limited number of small scale subprojects (less than 10%) which might have a 
minor adverse environmental impact, such as: poultry meat production, small scale 
horticulture and viticulture projects, small cattle breeding farms (with and/or without 
grazing), production of construction materials (bricks and concrete products), swine 
breeding, and small-scale irrigation on previously irrigated land. The potential 
environmental impact of these activities is manifested mostly in terms of water and air 
pollution, and land degradation. These potential effects on the environment are easily 
avoided and/or minimized by applying environmentally friendly agricultural practices, 
and the implementation of special mitigation measures.  
 
As all proposed activities are to be implemented within existing agricultural land and 
settlement boundaries, the additional financing will not have an impact on wildlife and 
natural habitats and thus OP/BP 4.04 “Natural habitats” is not triggered. It is also 
expected there will be no impact on physical cultural resources, which are generally not 
Page  5
placed in the vicinity of agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 “Physical Cultural 
Resources” is not triggered.  
 
Private rural businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the 
condition that they have not acquired and/or would not acquire land for the needs of 
activities to be supported with the project proceeds through a process which involved 
and/or would involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally, project funds will 
not support any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the 
involuntary displacement of existing occupants or economic users of any plot of land, 
regardless of its current ownership, or loss of or damage to assets including standing 
crops, kiosks, fences and other. The project operational manual will be adjusted to define 
a
screening procedure to be filled by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely 
monitor the screening procedure, with the support of the Bank task team. With these 
restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 “Involuntary Resettlement”.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impact of the activities proposed under additional financing are 
mostly positive and include improved knowledge on best agricultural practices, with 
consequent improvements in the status of water and soil conservation in the country.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The task team has analyzed the possible implications of a “no project” scenarioand 
concluded that in the absence of the additional financing there is an increased probability 
for negative economic and social consequences in rural areas, stemming from the 
deterioration of country’s macroeconomic situation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Sector Environmental Review (SER) and General Guidelines for Determining and 
Addressing Potential Environmental Impacts of Loan Activities (Guidelines), prepared 
for the First Phase of the Rural Investment and Services Program, were reviewed and 
updated in 2005 for RISP II. Furthermore, these documents were revised again for the 
RISP II additional financing for supporting drought adaptation activities which was 
approved in May, 2008. These reviews provided an update on: (i) the adequacy of the 
legal framework for environmental assessment; (ii) the institutions that are responsible 
for sub-loan Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA); (iii) technical assistance and 
training needs for such institutions to adequately implement sub-loan EIA requirements; 
and (iv) proposed improvements in procedures for environmental screening, EIA 
preparation and implementation, possible mitigation measures for certain sub-loan types, 
and monitoring and evaluation requirements for the implementation for the EIA. The 
revised documents include a framework for the assessment of the potential impact of 
proposed investments, recommended mitigation measures, an outline of a monitoring 
plan, and organizational responsibility for the implementation of mitigation measures. 
Public consultations and a disclosure process were undertaken in accordance with World 
Page  6
Bank policies and guidelines. Furthermore, in order to ensure that the project 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is fully implemented, the borrower has hired an 
Environmental Specialist (ES) which is fully responsible for environmental management 
issues. Hence, it is proposed that these documents continue to be used since this 
additional financing will simply scale up the same type of investments as under the 
original RISPII.  
 
A
review of the status of the SER implementation and environmental safeguards 
compliance for RISP II sub-loans was carried out in October, 2008 during a Bank 
implementation support visit. The overall conclusion of the review was that the project is 
successfully implementing the EMP requirements, providing a solid basis for ensuring 
the environmental sustainability of the implemented activities. There have been no 
environmental complaints related to the project implementation. At the same time, while 
existing human and institutional capacity in the implementing agencies, as well as other 
participating institutions, for implementing the provisions of the SER are solid, further 
training is necessary. Training should include an overview of past experience, lessons 
learnt and case studies on conducting environmental screening and assessment of sub-
loans, as well as on environmental monitoring. In order to improve further environmental 
monitoring and supervision, the implementing agency will strengthen cooperation with 
local environmental inspectors, including performance of joint supervision, and provide 
to them information about forthcoming sub-loans.  
 
Since October, 2008, the recommendations of the review were generally implemented. 
In February 2009, the Government prepared and presented to the Bank a report which 
highlighted the following actions: (i) the implementing agency organized a series of 
meetings with all EA stakeholders  (representatives of the implementing agencies, 
Development Agencies, Participating Finance Institutions (PFIs), State Ecologic 
Inspectorate, and the project Environmental Specialist) to clarify the institutional settings, 
roles and responsibilities in the EA process; (ii) a regular and ex-ante process for 
providing feedback to the DAs on environmental assessment issues with a view of 
improving EA compliance was put in place; and (iii) all 205 new business plans prepared  
by the DAs in the third and fourth quarters of 2008 were reviewed by the ES to determine 
an EA project category, and provide relevant recommendations for improving 
compliance. As DAs are getting feedback from the ES early in the business plan 
preparation stages, a general positive trend has been observed in regard to the quality and 
timeliness of preparation of the environmental sections of the business plans. Overall, 
environmental supervision and monitoring has improved markedly, as the ES has been 
conducting regular field trips to project locations. Last but not least, the ES organized a 
screening and environmental assessment workshop for DA officers in December, 2008.  
An additional workshop is planned for March, 2009, aimed at increasing environmental 
awareness on issues related to on-farm irrigation and pest management, and strengthening 
the capacity of project stakeholders to ensure that potential environmental impact can be 
recognized, avoided and/or minimized through mitigation.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The SER for the first and second phases of the Rural Investment and Services Program 
was discussed with a number of stakeholders from the Ministry of Environment and 
Natural Resources, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry, local authorities, 
NGOs and farmer organizations, and disclosed in-country. Minor comments were 
received, and incorporated into the final document. Further public and stakeholder 
awareness on environmental requirements in lending will be ensured through information 
campaigns carried out by the RAS Service Providers and the DAs. The SER was 
disclosed in-country on March 27, 2008 on the web-site of the Consolidated Agricultural 
Project Management Unit, and in the WB Infoshop on April 1, 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Olivier Colleye 
03/17/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
03/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/17/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
