Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3548
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P110421 
Project Name:  Rural Investment & Services Project 2 - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Olivier Colleye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (75%);Micro- and SME finance (15%);Agricultural 
extension and research (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The Development Objective of the overall RISP APL is to provide long-term 
support to accelerate agricultural recovery and growth, so that Moldova’s agricultural and 
rural sector can play their full role in providing the underpinnings for future income 
growth and poverty reduction.  The specific PDO of the second phase of the APL (“the 
Project”) it to continue to foster the post-privatization growth in the agricultural and rural 
sectors of Moldova by improving access of farmers and rural entrepreneurs to know-how, 
knowledge and financial services, while building the capacity of the private and public 
institutions to ensure the sustainability of these activities”.  The proposed Additional 
Financing will allowthe restructuring of RISP II, by adding a Drought Adaptation 
Component to support the Project’s PDO’s, through ensuring that farmers have the 
resources and knowledge necessary to adapt to and minimize losses from severe weather 
phenomenon such as drought and to ensure the long-term viability of the country’s 
agricultural sector.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing proposes the restructuring of RISP II by adding a Drought 
Adaptation Component with two Sub-Components: (i) Irrigation Finance Services; and 
(ii) Drought Adaptation Advisory Services.  
 
•
Sub-Component 1: Irrigation Finance Services. In respect to investments for 
small-scale on-farm irrigation, the proposed activities would rely on the experience and 
institutions of the original RISP II Rural Finance Component, using the same 
implementation set-up and eligible PFIs. PFIs will charge real interest rates and apply the 
same prudence standards towards potential borrowers as they do for other RISP II 
supported sub-loans. The only proposed change to the current credit line set-up is the 
availability of a small grant portion (20%) to match the loans, in order to alleviate 
borrowing costs for beneficiaries. The proposed approach is in compliance with the 
Bank’s Operational Procedure 8.30 (OP8.30).  
 
•
Sub-Component 2: Drought Adaptation Advisory Services. In respect to 
advisoryservices, the proposed activities would also rely on the experience and 
institutions of the original RISP II Rural Advisory Services Component, using the same 
implementation set-up and approaches. The National Rural Development Agency 
(ACSA) would engage in a series of activities aimed at raising awareness, knowledge and 
management capacity of small farmers to cope with the challenges posed by drought.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project provides funds for small-scale on-farm irrigation throughout Moldova. 
Therefore, the project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for services 
and credit. Selected farms may be situated nearby the main two transboundary rivers in 
Moldova, the Nistru River which Moldova shares with Ukraine, and which further flows 
into the Black Sea; and the Prut River which Moldova shares with Romania, and which is 
a
major tributary of the Danube River that is shared by 14 countries. Thus the AF triggers 
OP 7.50, Projects on International Waterways.  
 
Project activities will not be located in protected or culturally/socially sensitive areas. If 
potential projects are proposed in the vicinity of protected areas or critical habitat (highly 
unlikely), a specific environmental assessment will be required.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01  -
 In accordance with the World Bank’s OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, 
the project has been classified as a Category FI for environmental assessment purpose. 
The project will finance through commercial banks small scale on-farm irrigation 
equipment along with the drought adaptation advisory services that are not expected to 
have significant environmental and social impacts. In order to ensure the sustainability of 
the proposed AF subprojects, CAPMU updated the Sectoral Environmental Review 
(SER) and Environmental Guidelines (that have been prepared for the RISP I and II 
projects) as guiding documents to analyze the potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts of the proposed AF activities as well as to recommend relevant mitigation and 
monitoring measures.  
 
Overall, no significant or large-scale environmental impacts are expected to occur 
during the AF project implementation, given the relatively small size of most of the sub-
projects to be supported. The proceeds of the project will be used to finance both drought 
adaptation advisory services (about 11%) and on-farm irrigation equipment (e.g., valves, 
small pumps, sprinklers) that will replace deteriorated non-functional parts of existing 
irrigation schemes. Advisory services would include: cropping patterns and crop mix; 
land cultivation techniques; introduction and adoption of drought resistant varieties; 
extension of knowledge on irrigation, conservation of water; community involvement in 
drought mitigation; and facilitation of formation of Water Users Associations (WUAs). 
The on-farm irrigation equipment will be purchased through credit lines (about 87% of 
the AF costs).  
 
Significant negative impacts to environment are not expected, as most of the works 
would be carried out on the existing irrigated lands and will be small scale. These impacts 
will be mostly temporary and reversible in nature and can be mitigated by adopting 
adequate environmental management measures. Furthermore, the RISP II additional 
financing project would contribute to environmental enhancement through the work of 
the extension officers who promote various sustainable on-farm irrigation practices as 
well as extension of knowledge on water conservation and drought mitigation.  
Page  4
Improper pump and irrigation machines operations may provoke accidental water spills, 
both from the main and distribution pipelines, thus accelerating soil erosion, landslides 
and ravines formation. Poorly planned irrigation machines and tractors maneuvering on 
the fields may damage crops and also compact top soil. Also as the pumping equipment 
and engines/tractors normally are being plac
ed just at the water bodies’ banks and even 
insignificant leakages of lubricants, oils or diesel from poor maintained tractors or 
engines may pollute surface water and floodplains.  
 
Project interventions will be exclusively within existing irrigated areas. Taking this into 
account and also the project activities are not expected to impact the seepage of water 
into the wetlands, the project would not have any adverse or beneficial impact on wildlife 
and natural habitats. Thus OP 4.04 “Natural habitats” is not triggered. There will be no 
impacts on physical cultural resources which are not placed in the vicinity of the existing 
irrigation schemes and respectively OP 4.11 “Physical/Cultural Resources” is not 
triggered.  The “Involuntary Resettlement” safeguard OP 4.12 also is not triggered since 
all subprojects will be conducted on the existing irrigated lands, and there will be no 
temporary or permanent loss of agricultural lands and/or involuntary resettlement. 
Therefore, there will be no compulsory land acquisition under the project.  
 
Although the project area covers two international waterways, the Dniester and Prut 
Rivers, the proposed investments under the project are only for purchasing modernized 
irrigation equipment, which are not expected to change the volume of 
extraction/discharge water or quality of water of these rivers. It is evidently that water 
abstraction, in order to suit demand for new small-scale on-farm irrigation schemes, 
would not exceed established in the past limits and permissions for the respective large 
scale pumping stations and irrigation schemes. Due to application of modern irrigation 
technologies (like drip or movable sprinklers) the water consumption would be less in 
comparison of former big-scale irrigation machines. Water losses would be also reduced 
and mitigated. The project is proposes advisory service to the participating farmers, thus 
provide better local knowledge on efficient use of irrigation machinery, better planning of 
irrigation schedule, application of optimized irrigation norms and water/energy savings. 
Therefore, given the rehabilitation nature of the activities under the project, no 
notification to other riparian states is required under the Bank policy. However, the 
OP/BP 7.50 policy on “International Waterways” applies to this project andfalls within 
the exemption to the notification requirement under paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy. The 
team prepared and received clearance of such exemption in a memo addressed to the 
ECA VP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
On farm irrigation activities may also require the increase of fertilizers and pesticides 
usage in order to protect highly-valued crops and increase yields. This ultimately may 
cause additional pollution to the environment and can result in human health problems as 
well as impacts on aquatic ecosystems and soils.  
 
Irrigation by water with increased salt content (typical for Moldovan small internal 
water courses) may provoke degradation of soil, salinization of productive lands and 
Page  5
consequently (in long-term perspective) damage to agriculture: crop lost, lower 
agricultural incomes and lower value of agricultural lands.  
 
The expected cumulative impacts of the on farm irrigation activities and the application 
of the SER and Environmental Guidelines are mostly positive and include: more efficient 
use of water and higher productivity due to improved water management practices, and 
trainings and better performing irrigation equipment; improved knowledge on water and 
soil conservation; and improved use of pesticide and pest management practices. At the 
same time, if not properly designed and implemented on farm irrigation activities can 
lead to environmental adverse impacts. These impacts may have various scale and 
evidence. If drainage is not managed effectively this may lead to salinization and water 
logging (in case of poor water quality or high groundwater table in combination with 
extensive water application to the ground).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The following two options were considered during the project design: (i) no project; and 
(ii) doing a project using the existing small on-farm infrastructures and methods. Both 
options were rejected as the existing on farm irrigation schemes and equipment have 
deteriorated over time and needs immediate attention and the recognition that trying to 
deliver through an existing system, that has had, at best, limited impact, was not 
appropriate. With no project there would be negative social impacts. With no project 
there would be no improvements in the agricultural sector and in ensuring food safety of 
the country. Under such a scenario, agriculture would likely continue on its current 
downward spiral: agricultural inputs would become permanently unsustainable due to 
drought which is becoming endemic in large parts of the country what may lead to 
increased poverty, especially in rural areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Institutional and human capacities assessment to perform environmental and social 
safeguards was done in 2005 by an independent consultant based on the RISP I project 
experience. The updated Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for that project 
identified a number of issues including additional training on environmental awareness, 
environmental management and monitoring to PFIs, staff of the Implementing Agency, 
and development officers.  
 
Within the initial stage of the RISP II implementation an important role in reviewing the 
quality and implementing of EIAs and EMPs for proposed sub-projects was given to the 
associated with RISP Program GEF-funded Agricultural Pollution Control Project 
(APCP), which is currently under implementation and aims to reduce potential nutrient 
pollution of investment financed under the Program. In 2006 CAPMU has organized 
several trainings for various stakeholders involved in RISP II project implementation: 
staff of the Participating Financial Institutions, CAPMU staff, ACA, CCA, CDR, MEGA, 
CRF, DLC and 7 involved PFIs, Technical Unit representatives, responsible for the 
Credit Line implementation. Altogether there were organized 10 training seminars 
Page  6
implemented by Environmental NGO “Biotica. At these workshops there were discussed 
the following  issues:  
 
•
Potential environmental and social impacts of the RISP II sub projects;  
 
•
Use of grazing and haying lands, soil degradation;  
 
•
Specific physical and chemical pollution and potential impacts;  
 
•
Potential specific environmental risks;  
 
•
Agriculture, environment and economics;  
 
•
National ecological legislation, agriculture and rural businesses;  
 
•
World Bank Safeguard Policies; rules and procedures;  
 
•
Getting environmental permits for agricultural businesses;  
 
•
Preparing business-plans and assessment of potential environmental and 
socialimpacts.  
 
Furthermore, in 2007 APCP has assisted MAFI and Ministry of Ecology and Natural 
Resources (MENR) to draft a Moldovan Code of Good Agriculture Practices that was 
approved, published and largely distributed among broad public and interested parties.  
 
A
special attention in ACSA activities will be given to promoting best pest management 
practices. It is known from one hand in the case of irrational use the social costs of 
pesticides might be high, including occupational poisoning, pesticide residues on food, 
drinking water contamination, pest resistance, loss of biodiversity, and costs of 
prevention and abatement measures and awareness campaigns. From other hand, 
pesticides usage is important in ensuring agricultural yields. The use of pesticides in the 
project area could increase as project interventions improve availability of water with 
corresponding increase in cropping intensity. To rationalize the use of chemical 
pesticides, ACSA will conduct a series of training and information dissemination 
activities, including introducing the concept of Integrated Plant and Soil Nutrient 
Management (IPSNM) to reduce the use of chemical fertilizers. The main ACSA 
activities in this regard would be training of farmers in IPM practices, introduction of 
IPSNM, monitoring of pesticide residues on selected crops (horticulture 
produce/vegetables), and dissemination of information, which would be undertaken as a 
part of the subprojects implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NGOs are key actors in the implementation of the project. Local NGOs will support and 
stimulate farmer participation in the technical advisory and financial components.  
 
The draft SER for the RISP I and Environmental Impact Assessment for the RISP II 
projects as well as for the proposed RISP II additional financing project were discussed 
with a number of stakeholders from the MENR, MAFI, local authorities and NGOs and 
farmer organizations and disclosed in country. Minor comments were received, which 
were integrated in the final document. Further public and stakeholder awareness of 
environmental requirements in lending will be ensured through information campaigns 
carried out by the Rural Advisory Service Providers and Business Development 
Agencies. The final vesrion of the SER based on proposed additional financing on March 
Page  7
27, 2008 was publicly disclosed in Moldova at the local web-sites of CAPMU and REC 
Moldova.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Page  8
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Olivier Colleye 
03/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
03/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
03/27/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
04/01/2008 
Comments:   
