Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/26/2009 
Report No.:  AC4488
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P116187 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Competitiveness Enhancement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alexander Pankov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 29, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Banking (50%);General industry and trade sector (30%);Micro- and SME 
finance (20%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (67%);Small and medium enterprise 
support (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
24.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The revised PDO is to assist Moldova in enhancing competitiveness of enterprises 
through improvements in the business environment, enhancement of access to finance, 
and creation of adequate standards, testing, and quality improvement services available to 
enterprises.  
 
The additional financing will build upon and expand on the existing CEP activities, with 
the overall objective of facilitating growth of export-oriented real sector with higher 
value added in Moldova through a combination of: (i) the line of credit through qualified 
commercial banks to support investment and working capital needs of exporting 
enterprises; and (ii) the expanded matching grant scheme to assist enterprises with 
upgrading their labor skills and management practices, and introducing new products.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will be used to finance the following activities:  
 
New Line of Credit component (tentative amount $22.5 mln).  This new component will 
provide funding to qualified banks for on-lending to eligible exporting enterprises in 
Page  2
support of their working capital and investment financing needs. The funding will not be 
provided to any particular sub-sector and it will be open to all enterprises meeting the 
financial eligibility criteria. Drawing from the demand analysis and taking into account 
other line of credits already available in MD, it is expected that most sub-projects will be 
with large and medium-size companies in manufacturing and agro processing sectors. 
The addition of the line of credit represents proactive project restructuring, given that the 
original credit amount is insufficient to cover this activity, which has become highly 
relevant in the crisis conditions.  In the current market conditions, it is expected that the 
vast majority of sub-loans will be used for working capital purposes, as opposed to 
investment.  
 
Scale-up of the existing Matching Grant Component of CEP (tentative amount $1.5 
mln).  Until now, this successful component was only co-financing the costs of 
international certification of quality (ISO, etc.) by eligible enterprises. As foreseen 
already in the original project design, the expanded facility would reimburse beneficiary 
enterprise for up to 50 percent of expenditures in the following two broad areas: (i) 
consulting services for preparation of business plans, feasibility studies, marketing, and 
development of new products and services; and (ii) on-the-job training of management 
and personnel.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand by beneficiary 
enterprises for services and credit. Project activities will not be located in protected or 
culturally/socially sensitive areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including OP/BP/GP 
4.01 Environmental Assessment, the New Line of Credit Project's component relates to 
the Bank's FI Category which is applied to all proposed projects that involve investment 
of Bank funds through a participating financial intermediary (FI) to be used for 
subprojects environmental impacts from which cannot be determined during appraisal of 
the World Bank project.  
 
The project might support different types of subprojects, including in the area of 
industrial and agricultural production, and agro-processing. Several of them (e.g., 
industrial plants-large scale,and industrial estates, including major expansion, 
rehabilitation, or modification, or manufacturing activities involving use or generation of 
hazardous wastes) might cause significant environmental impacts which fall under the 
Category A projects and for which a full EA would be required. However, majority of 
projects/projects components would fall under the Category B projects (agro-industries 
(small scale); rehabilitation, maintenance, and upgrading projects-small scale, 
rehabilitation or modification of existing industrial facilities-small scale, etc.) which 
might cause less significant impacts, for which the Bank requires a simple Environmental 
Assessment and/or a preparation of an Environmental Management Plan. It is also 
expected that many of supported subprojects will not have environmental impacts at all 
and will fall under the Category C projects. Generally investments in agricultural 
production, agro-processing and manufacturing sectors, are not expected to cause 
significant adverse environmental and social impacts; they will not be located in 
protected areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas. Their potential 
adverse environmental impacts might be summarized as follows: (a) agricultural 
production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil compaction, soil pollution, 
surface and underground water pollution, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: 
contribution to surface water pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) manufacturing: air 
pollution, waste waters, solid  waste generation; (d) construction: soil and air pollution; 
acoustic, aesthetics impacts, etc. All these impacts are expected to be easily mitigated 
through sound project design and implementation practices.  
 
It is also necessary to mention that  sub-projects that are to be supported under the New 
Credit Line Project Component will generate a great number of both direct and indirect 
positive social impacts. Direct positive impacts will be generated by increased production 
of products and goods which could result in creation of new jobs and, respectively, more 
employment and increased income. Indirect positive impacts will relate to the overall 
improvement of business environment, increased exports and enterprises# secured 
domestic market position, introduction of advanced technologies and techniques, creation 
of new opportunities for access to foreign markets, enhancement of competitiveness of 
domestic production and products, contribution to poverty reduction and food security, 
and an improvement of country's socio-economic conditions.  
 
Page  4
As all proposed activities are to be implemented within the existing agricultural land 
and settlement boundaries, the additional financing will not have an impact on wildlife 
and natural habitats and thus, OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also 
expected there will be no impact on physical cultural resources, which are generally not 
placed in the vicinity of agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources" is not triggered.  
 
Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition 
that they have not acquired and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be 
supported with the project proceeds, through a process which involved and/or would 
involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally, project funds will not support 
any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the involuntary 
displacement of existing occupants or economic users of any plot of land, regardless of 
its current ownership, or loss of. or damage to, assets including standing crops, kiosks, 
fences and other. The project operational manual will define a screening procedure to be 
filled by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely monitor the screening 
procedure, with the support of the Bank task team. With these restrictions in place, the 
project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement".   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impact of the activities which might be supported by the 
additional financing is mostly positive and includes improved knowledge on best 
agricultural and manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the status of the 
environment in the country.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The task team has analyzed the possible implications of a "no project" scenario and 
concluded that in the absence of the additional financing there is an increased probability 
for negative economic and social consequences in the country, stemming from the 
deterioration of country's macroeconomic situation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to address safeguards policy issues the borrower hired an independent local 
consultant who prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF). The EMF 
document outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for 
the subprojects which will be supported by the CEP. It provides details on procedures, 
criteria and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing 
and monitoring. The document also includes Environmental Guidelines for different 
types of proposed subprojects providing analysis of potential impacts and generic 
mitigation measures to be undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
processing and manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and selection, 
through the design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results.  
Page  5
Furthermore, the EMF provides a monitoring plan format which considers monitoring 
indicators, timing, methods, institutional responsibilities, etc. in all phases of project's 
implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) has disseminated the draft summary EMF to the 
Ministry of Economy and Trade, Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources, and other 
relevant ministries for their review and comments, and also, on June 9, 2009, the 
document was posted on websites of the Ministry of Economy and Trade 
(www.mec.gov.md) and Regional Ecological Center (www.rec.md) for its access to a 
wide public. On June 17, 2009, the PIU has organized a consultation on Draft EMF. After 
the consultation, draft document was revised to consider inputs from consulted parties. 
On June 18, 2009, the final draft EMF was posted on the website of the Ministry of 
Economy and submitted to the World Bank for its disclosure in the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/18/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/26/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander Pankov 
06/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
06/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/25/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
06/23/2009 
Comments:   
Page  7
