Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated
:
02/19/09
 
Report No.: 47693 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  
Moldova 
 
Project ID: 
P109459 
Project Name: 
Community Forestry
 
Task Team Leader:   
Estimated Appraisal Date: 
03/09/09
 
Estimated Board Date: 
04/09/09
 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: 
Carbon Finance
 
Sector: 
Forestry (100%)
 
Theme:  
Other environment and natural resources management (P); Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount   (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount   (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount   (US$m.):                  
2.60
 
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
0.00 
 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [
X
]
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [
X
]
2. Project Objectives
:
The project’s development objective is to restore degraded land to 
economic and environmental use for the benefit of rural communities. In addition to community 
benefits, the project's forestation activities would support through restored productivity and 
conservation of soil the global objectives of carbon sequestration and reduction of atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations. 
 
3. Project Description: 
The project aims to 
achieve
 
forestation of about 8,000 hectares of 
degraded agricultural and community land with an aim of creating new community forests and 
protective forest belts; and to build community-based capacity to manage the newly created 
forests. 
The project
 
will have a single component with two main activities: 
 
A. Creation of community forests and protective forest belts.
 
The project would forest some 1,300 
plots scattered throughout the country. The plots are located in 265 mayoralties (primarias) in all 
the rayons of the country. The land to be forested is largely “refused land” – land that has not 
been privatized and the primarias are unable to restore to productive uses due to a lack of 
financing and technical know-how. The local communities have contracted Moldsilva for periods 
of 5 to 10 years for the execution of forestation works on their behalf. Following contract expiry, 
forest management activities will be continued by the primarias. Moldsilva will apply 
environmentally sound forest management practices, well-developed in Moldova, to ensure the 
maintenance of healthy plantations, while developing a sustainable flow of wood and non-wood 
products for subsistence and commercial purposes. Maintenance cuttings will be carried out from 
Page  2
canopy closure to maturity stages, while improvements in phytosanitary conditions through the 
control of forest pests and fires. 
 
B. Technical Assistance to Communities on Forest Management.
 
The project would build 
capacity and improve the enabling environment for community forest management by providing: 
(i) Technical assistance for the development of community forest management on community 
land; and (ii) Direct technical support to communities for creating new forests and protective 
forest belts. For this purpose the project beneficiary has received a grant from the PHRD Climate 
Change window. 
 
4. Project Location
:
The project plots are located in different administrative regions 
and geographical zones scattered the country. For each plot (polygon), geographic co-
ordinates (GPS) are recorded and photographic evidence is collected and archived, as 
per the quality assurance and control requirements of the project data and 
information systems. 
 
Environmental Classification: 
B
(Partial Assessment) 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Mr. Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Disclosure Policy (OP 17.50) 
X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Activities under the 
project are not expected to generate significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental impacts 
and the project is therefore classified as Environmental Category B. It is expected that the 
project’s environmental impact will be mostly positive and substantial, through the following: (a) 
the reduction of soil erosion (from water and wind) and stabilization of land at risk of gully 
formation and landslides, with associated improvements of aquatic ecosystems currently affected 
by soil erosion and nutrient flows; (b) the restoration of soil productivity and horizon 
development of favorable soil hydrology; (c) the restoration of vegetative cover, wildlife habitat, 
and biodiversity value;  and (d) improvements in microclimatic conditions and carbon 
sequestration. The potential for an adverse environmental impact will be minor and only due to 
Page  3
soil preparation works at the initial stage of forestation activities. However, this can be easily 
managed through a series of specific agro-technical measures.
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
 The project will have long term positive impacts associated with the 
restoration of vegetative cover, soil productivity and providing carbon sequestration. 
Additionally, the project will produce long term positive social impacts by providing forestry 
benefits to the local population.
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.  
 
N/A 
 
4
.
Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues. 
Prior to project 
appraisal, an EA Report and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were prepared by the 
project beneficiary (State Forestry Agency “Moldsilva”), and discussed in-country with key 
stakeholders. The implementation of the EMP is a requirement of the Emissions Reduction 
Purchase Agreement. The EMP includes steps to mitigate identified potential adverse impacts, 
together with a respective monitoring plan, budgets, responsibility and schedules of execution.  
The proposed mitigation activities are mostly related to avoidance measures and include the 
following:  
·
Strict  observance of forestry normative documents during the implementation of 
forestation activities: (a) soil preparation; (b) planting; (c) maintenance and trees 
protection; (d) thinning and harvesting; 
·
Application for sites preparation of soil conservation processing technologies (such as 
contour plugging, conservation tillage) and minimization of  mechanical soil preparation; 
·
Limited use of exotic species and of the mixture of attendant indigenous species (trees 
and bushes); increase habitat diversity; 
·
Implementation of tending activities (harvesting of wooden mass from the tending 
cuttings) in the periods less disturbing for fauna (late fall and winter); 
·
Creation of margins and bush overgrowths using 
Rosa canina
,
Prunus spinoza
 etc. as 
places for reproduction, food,  shelter for various fauna species; 
·
Connection of afforested lands to ecological networks, to other  forests, natural habitats 
and protected areas; 
·
Systematic provision of information to local authorities and communities about the status 
of project implementation, publication and dissemination of public awareness materials 
in order to get public support. 
 
The EMP also includes a Monitoring Plan which describes the environmental indicators to be 
monitored, along with the monitoring methods, frequency, as well as the monitoring and 
reporting procedures, including institutional arrangements for the implementation of this plan. 
The environmental monitoring will be handled by the PIU in close cooperation with the MENR, 
and forestry enterprises.  It will be based on the baseline survey undertaken during preparation 
phase of the project and will cover three aspects: status of forests, their biodiversity and soil 
conservation.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 All interested parties 
were frequently consulted. Among them are the following:  Members of the Parliamentary 
Page  4
Commission for Public Administration, Ecology and Territory Development; Representatives of 
the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR); Representatives of territorial offices of 
the Land Relations and Cadastre Agency; Specialists from Soil Science and Agro-Chemistry 
Institute, Institute of Botany and of Zoology of the Academy of Sciences of the Republic of 
Moldova; Forest Engineers from the Territorial Forest Enterprises; Representatives from 
Environmental NGOs, and Local communities; Mayors and Members of Local Councils; Districts 
administrations, including authorities responsible for environment protection, cadastre, and 
agriculture. These stakeholders were visited individually and/or in groups. Extensive consultative 
meetings were held during project preparation and the inputs of these groups have helped in the 
outcome of project design.   
 
The Summary of the draft EA&EMP has been disseminated by Moldsilva to its affiliated 
institutions and to other relevant ministries for review and comments and posted (on December 
15, 2008) for wide public review on the webpage of the Forestry Research and Management 
Institute (
www.icas.com.md
).
 On February 12, 2009, Moldsilva has conducted a public briefing 
and consultation meeting on the document. The meeting was attended by representatives of the 
environmental NGOs, representatives of the government bodies, such as MENR, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Industry, and others. The meeting concluded that the draft EMP document 
covered practically all potential impacts and possible mitigation measures. The final version of 
the EMP was provided to the World Bank, and will be used by the Moldsilva in the project 
implementation. The Romanian and English version of the EA and EMP reports are available in 
Moldsilva and was posted on the Forestry Research and Management Institute
’s website 
(
www.icas.com.md
)
on February 20, 2009. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
February 20, 2009 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
February 20, 2009 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety of Dams 
policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and 
approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and 
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local 
NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been 
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the monitoring 
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and 
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Anatol Gobjila 
February 20, 2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr. Arcadie Capcelea 
February 20, 2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms. Agi Kiss 
February 27, 2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr. John Kellenberg 
February 27, 2009 
Comments:   
Approved 
