Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC3782
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P112908 
Project Name:  Health Services and Social Assistance Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Rekha Menon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project development objective will remain the same, that is, to increase 
access to quality and efficient health services with the aim of decreasing premature 
mortality and disability for the local population and improve the targeting of social 
transfers and services to the poor in line with the MTEF for 2007-09.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
The development objective of the Project remains unchanged.  The Additional 
Financing will help mitigate the impact of food price shocks.  This includes protecting 
and improving health and nutritional status of particularly poor and vulnerable 
populations in Moldova in the face of food price shocks.  
 
2. 
Proposed Components for Additional Financing.   The proposed additional 
financing envisages an additional component linked to the original project components as 
follows: 
 
3. 
Component 4: Protecting Health and Nutritional Status (total estimated costs 
US$7 million).   The objectives of this component would be to protect and improve 
Page  2
health and nutritional status of vulnerable populations in the face of global food price 
shocks, by providing nutritional supplements to pregnant and lactating women, infants 
and young children.  The focus of nutrition interventions would be on protein energy 
malnutrition: i.e., under-nutrition, caused by inadequate intake of quantity of calories and 
protein.  Priority population groups include pregnant and lactating women, infants and 
young children, reflecting the fact that the group most at nutritional risk comprises pre-
school age children (0-36 months of age), increased nutritional needs for women during 
pregnancy and lactation, and the high prevalence of child poverty.  
 
4. 
In terms of delivery mechanisms within this framework, nutritional supplements 
could be executed effectively using the primary health care system.  There is solid 
evidence that these systems work well and reach a majority of the population with few 
geographic or financial barriers to access although in some areas they would need to be 
supplemented by Social Assistants’ network who will be provided training to identify at-
risk women and children for nutritional risks.  This will also build on the recent 
experience of the successful procurement of MMR vaccines by the MOH through the 
UNICEF which were distributed using similar channels with an 8-10 weeks period 
between February and April, 2008.  The detailed mechanism for the procurement and 
distribution of nutritional supplementation will be outlined in an operational manual. 
 
5. 
UNICEF will procure the necessary supplements pursuant to their own procedures 
and will deliver them to the authority responsible for distribution as identified in the 
operational manual in collaboration with MOH.  The reason this option is being 
considered is that UNICEF have proven experience in the supply of large volumes of 
such supplements and therefore are able to offer a competitive price.  Secondly, UNICEF 
has mechanisms in place to carry out a preliminary analysis and testing to ensure that the 
supplement offered would have an acceptable taste.  Finally, pursing this option will 
allow delivery of the supplements in a far quicker timeframe that than allowed for in the 
usual ICB procedure even if this was to be accelerated due to emergency nature of this 
supply. 
 
6. 
This component will also support a temporary cash transfer will be provided to 
social institutions which provide food to poor and vulnerable populations  including 
children between three and five in kindergartens, poor children and orphans in boarding 
schools, mentally and physically severely handicapped persons, the homeless, elderly and 
victims of domestic abuse and trafficking.  A list of institutions was provided by the 
Ministry of Finance which have been reviewed jointly with the UNICEF and only those 
focusing on the poor and vulnerable were selected for support.  The institutions to be 
supported under this project are within the scope of the de-institutionalization program of 
the Government supported by the UNICEF.  The2006 poverty profile indicates that 
poverty is the highest among families with 2 or more children and elderly.  Other 
vulnerable groups targeted here are those in institutions and rely entirely on the state for 
their food. 
 
7. 
The proposed component would mainly provide financing to cover expenses 
related to procurement of commodities (nutritional supplements) and cash transfers to 
Page  3
institutions. In addition, it will support training for social assistants and technical 
assistance for the development of risk mitigation mechanisms.  It will also fund some 
incremental operating costs for the MOH staff and consultants (fuel for cars, 
consumables, oversight of the program, etc.), audits as well as an external monitoring and 
evaluation contract.  These expenses could fairly easily be embedded in the existing 
Project.  The commodity procurement could be done through UNICEF on a sole-source 
basis for expedited response.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
N/A   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. 
The Additional Financing will invest in nutritional supplements targeted to 
mothers and children as well as the financing of targeted cash transfers to social 
institutions.  No safeguard policies are envisaged to be triggered; therefore, an 
Environmental Category “C” rating has been established by our Regional Safeguards 
Unit for this additional financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project does not trigger any of the World Bank Safeguards Policies.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
N/A 
Page  5
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rekha Menon 
07/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
07/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anita M. Schwarz 
07/15/2008 
Comments:   
