Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3522
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P108768 
Project Name:  Mongolia Mining Sector Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Graeme Eric Hancock 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (60%);Central government administration (40%) 
Theme:  Macroeconomic management (P);Other financial and private sector development 
(P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Tax policy and 
administration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
9.30 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project is seen as the first phase of long-term (on the order of 10 years) 
engagement to support the Government in this key sector.  The project development 
objective for this first phase project is to assist the Government to develop further the 
policy, fiscal, legal, regulatory and institutional framework for the mining and extractive 
sector that meets the needs of government, industry, and civil society. This includes the 
operation of Erdenes MGL LLC according to good international practice associated with 
a
commercial entity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components: (a) Strengthening the Capacity to Manage 
Mining Revenues and Develop Economic and Sector Policies, (b) Improving Regulatory 
Capacity to Manage Mining Sector Development, (c) Developing the Capacity for 
Management of State Equity, and (d) Project Management.  In addition, there will be a 
parallel but closely linked activity, funded by the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory 
Facility (PPIAF) and AusAID, to support the development of a Southern Mongolia 
Regional Infrastructure Strategy.  
Page  2
The project includes support for activities in four main agencies: Ministry of Finance 
(MoF), the General Department of National Taxation (GDNT), the Ministry of Industry 
and Trade (MoIT) and the Mineral Resources and Petroleum Authority of Mongolia 
(MRPAM). In addition there will be collaboration with the Ministry of Nature and 
Environment (MoNE).  Project assistance would address a range of issues across these 
agencies, including development of mining sector policy and strategy; review and 
simplification of the institutional framework for mining; establishment of a modern legal 
and regulatory regime for mining, including the need for the Government to introduce a 
robust mechanism for the promulgation of regulations by Cabinet; management of 
macroeconomic impacts of large mining sector developments to reduce the potentially 
harmful impacts of commodity cycles and “Dutch disease”, including improved minerals 
sector tax collection and audit capacity to ensure that taxes are properly assessed and 
paid; clarification and improvements in minerals sector benefit distribution so that 
mineral districts and mining communities are able to better share in the benefits of 
mining; and capacity building to minimize and mitigate the negative environmental and 
social impacts of mining (including artisanal and small-scale mining). Another core focus 
of all project activities will be the development of human resources capacity within 
Government agencies which is needed for both shorter term and longer term effective 
administration of the sector. In addition to on-the-job training provided under each 
component, the project will support formal training programs as well as training 
workshops and participation in targeted learning events and conferences. The project will 
also support study tours and staff twinning or secondment programs for government staff 
into counterpart agencies in other countries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project will be located in Ulaanbaatar and in mining impacted communities in both large 
scale and small scale and artisanal minng areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Giovanna Dore (EASRE) 
Ms Adriana Maria Eftimie (COCPO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As technical assistance, the project will not finance any direct exploration or exploitation 
of mineral resources as such; it will not have any direct environmental impacts. However, 
the project is being implemented in a sector that is known to be controversial with respect 
to environmental and social issues. The environmental problems associated with mining 
in Mongolia relate primarily to pollution management and physical disruption of pasture 
lands and water resources by both artisanal and larger mining operations. Many ongoing 
operations are not managed in an optimal way leading to environmental damage and 
production losses. In addition, despite the fact that the sector’s financial contribution to 
the economy is substantial, little has been done to systematically assess and address the 
costs of possible environmental damage from the sector’s ongoing and planned activities. 
This is mostly due to paucity of available data, uncertainty about the long-term impacts 
of mining activities, lack of coordination across responsible agencies, and a general lack 
of awareness of the fact that many of the negative impacts frequent in Mongolia could be 
offset by utilizing better production methods.  
 
With regard to social issues, the project will not be financing any direct exploration or 
exploitation of mineral resources; so no resettlement or adverse social impacts are 
anticipated. In addition, the entire population is considered indigenous, and no adverse 
impacts are expected for indigenous groups. There are both opportunities and risks for 
local communities affected by both large-scale mining and artisanal and small scale 
mining (ASM) activities.  The opportunities relate to the benefits from mining, which 
typically consist of direct and indirect employment, mining-related financial transfers, 
and improved access of mining communities to services including, in particular, health 
and education services.  The risks relate to environmental harm, loss of pasture for 
grazing, loss of traditional livelihoods, social disruption, increased crime, domestic 
violence, and cultural harm.  A gender bias also generally exists whereby the bulk of the 
benefits accrue to men whereas the bulk of the risks fall upon women and children. Youth 
also tend to be disadvantaged in that mining development raises expectations of mining 
employment and careers, but in practice there are relatively few job opportunities 
available which results in disappointment and frustration because of unfulfilled 
expectations.  
 
Also, despite the shift to a free market economy and the passing of equity legislation, 
distortions in the labor market remain. These have led to discrimination against women, a 
persistent wage gap across all sectors, inefficiencies in investments in education, and the 
loss of potential contributions from women to economic growth. Employment 
opportunities remain limited, and the small, peri-urban soums and aimags now have a 
high proportion of increasingly poor and often female-headed households.  The project 
will support gender-sensitive reforms in the mining sector to protect women from 
discrimination in the workplace and promote employment equity including affirmative 
action steps to increase the proportion of women in decision-making positions. The 
project will also encourage separate consultation with women so that their needs and 
Page  4
interests are addressed in planning policies and in implementing and monitoring 
programs at the local community level.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Bank has conducted an overall review of the status of environmental and social 
issues, and policies in the mining sector to identify institutional and regulatory gaps that 
should be addressed to strengthen existing compliance monitoring with regulations, and 
to investigate whether additional resources and standardized procedures might be needed 
to mitigate any identified risks. Based on the findings of the completed review, in the 
context of the project particular attention will be given to (i) institutional strengthening 
actions to deal with environmental and social impacts associated with the growth and 
development of the mining sector (including artisanal and small scale mining); (ii) 
measures to overcome policy, institutional and budgetary constraints that result in limited 
enforcement and implementation capacity; and (iii) ways to improve public participation 
and monitoring processes.. In addition, the project will benefit from the findings of a 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the Southern Gobi Region; 
this exercise will be conducted to help frame a vision for a sustainable natural resources 
management in the context of the planned mining developments in the region.  
 
In the context of assisting the Government to build and strengthen the regulatory 
framework and capacity to manage mining sector exploration and development, the 
proposed project would (i) support MRPAM capacity building efforts to regulate, 
manage, and audit mineral developments, including inter alia environmental and 
occupational health and safety aspects; and (ii) help address the capacity, regulatory and 
institutional needs of line ministries and agencies whose mandate relates to the mining-
social and environment/natural resources management nexus. Environmental and social 
capacity building activities are intended to be complementary to those that World Bank 
and other multilateral and bilateral donors are developing and/or implementing as part of 
their respective environmental and social programs.  
 
Furthermore, the project would support the Government to implement the new 
regulatory framework for artisanal and small scale mining and establish extension 
services for education and training of artisanal and small scale miners, including best 
practice techniques related to environmental, health, and social impacts, in complement 
to activities under the Swiss Development Coo
peration’s ASM project. Project activities 
will also address the institutional challenges, through an assessment of institutional 
capacity, to identify the gaps and areas for intervention. Actions, such as training 
Page  5
programs (including on the job training), workshops and knowledge sharing will be 
considered for improving the institutional response to the development of the mining 
sector, the project creating the platform for a more collaborative framework between 
relevant organizations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During project implementation further consultation will take place with NGOs, 
landowners, and industry representatives regarding mining sector environmental issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/08/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  6
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Graeme Eric Hancock 
04/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Giovanna Dore 
04/03/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Adriana Maria Eftimie 
04/03/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/01/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anwar B. Ravat 
05/02/2008 
Comments:  Mr. Anwar Ravat is Acting Sector Manager for Mr. Paulo de Sa on May 2-6, 2008 
