Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4204 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/04/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mongolia 
Project ID: P115119 
Project Name: Index based Livestock Insurance Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Andrew D. Goodland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Non-compulsory pensions, 
insurance and contractual savings (50%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Social analysis and monitoring (P);Natural 
disaster management (P);Regulation and competition policy (S);Other financial and 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
KOREA, Govt. of 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
4.01
4.01 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This ISDS is for the Additional Financing of the on-going Index-based Livestock Insurance 
Project (P088816). The existing PDO from the on-going project remains valid: the objective of 
the scale up would be to ascertain the viability of index based livestock insurance in Mongolia to 
reduce the impact of livestock mortality for herders’ livelihoods.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project structure would remain the same as for the on-going parent project:  
 
Component 1: Pilot Index-Based Livestock Insurance Programs  
 
The core component of the project would be the piloting of the IBLI products. Specific 
activities to be supported under the project would include:  
Page  2
•
Livestock data collection: undertaking semi-annual censuses that will serve as the basis 
for calculation of all settlements to herders and/or insurance companies;  
 
•
IBLI software development and the necessary testing, technical support and modification 
during the project period;  
 
•
Training on pilot implementation: the provision of technical support for the training of 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and insurance company staff, together with the provision of 
essential materials;  
 
•
Contingent Debt Facility (CDF): approximately US$15 million would be available in a 
Government-held CDF to be used to fund indemnity payments to herders to meet any shortfall in 
indemnity payments under the BIP; and,  
 
•
Pilot performance, review and refinement: The project would provide technicalassistance 
to finalize the legal and institutional arrangements for project implementation, and subsequently 
to refine the technical design and legal arrangements for implementation, as required and 
appropriate.  
 
Component 2: Promotion and Public Awareness Component  
 
Under this component, a range of promotion and public awareness (PPA) activities would be 
conducted to create awareness and educate key stakeholders on the details of the insurance 
product and the IBLI pilot. These activities will target herders and herder groups, livestock 
services providers (e.g., veterinarians), parliamentarians, government officials, insurance 
companies, commercial banks and other micro-finance institutions, NGOs and donor 
organizations.  
 
Feedback from the monitoring and management information systems will also be used as a 
basis for tailoring promotion activities in subsequent years of the project.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Capacity Building Component  
 
This component would provide support to establish the institutional framework and capacity 
necessary for the potential expansion of the insurance products following demonstration of the 
viability of the concept. Under this component, the project would support:  
 
•
Strengthening livestock data systems. The project would support the introduction of 
alternative data collection systems, based on sample surveys, with the objectives of helping NSO 
to reduce costs and improve accuracy of mortality data.  
 
•
Developing legal and regulatory framework:  Activities under this sub-component would 
include support for developing the necessary legislation and regulation for IBLI.  This would be 
done in close collaboration with the Financial Regulatory Committee;  
 
Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Component  
 
This component would be targeted at following and involving a range of stakeholders during 
the program to track access by different social groups, to monitor responses to the products and 
to determine if and how herders modify their behavior. Findings will be shared with relevant 
project stakeholders (e.g. government and donors) to promote learning and project improvement. 
The M&E component will complement the technical and output-oriented Management 
Information System (MIS), and support the PPA component, by focusing on target group 
perceptions, behaviors and the process and impact of insurance delivery.  
 
Page  3
Component 5: Project Management Component  
 
The final component would provide support to the PIU to enable it to function effectively and 
provide adequate management for the implementation of the project. Support would include 
operational costs for the PIU, international and Mongolian technical assistance, training for 
project staff, communications and auditing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The current project has been piloting insurance in three aimags: Khentti, Uvs and Bayankhongor. 
From 2009, this will expand to one additional aimag: Sukhbaatar. The aim of the project 
Additional Financing is to scale up significantly, preferably (depending on available finance) to 
the national level (all 21 aimags) by 2012.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The current project (P088816) does not trigger any policies and is rated as category C. Under the 
Sustainable Livelihoods Program, however, the Government has demonstrated the necessary 
institutional capacity for safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The proposed additional financing would support the scaling up of the insurance to additional 
provinces (to be decided). Under the Second Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P096439), which 
is also a national program, a social assessment concluded that the one group within Mongolia 
that met the Bank definition of an Indigenous People are the Tsaatan people, who mostly inhabit 
one soum in Hovsgul aimag. They are reindeer herders. An IPPF will be necessary to ensure the 
Tsaatan are not excluded from the project benefits, if the project is extended to Hovsgul aimag. 
For implementation of the project in Bayan-Olgii province, all documentation would needed to 
be translated into Kazakh.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/12/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
IPPF was completed by end January 2009. Will be finalized by February 6, 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew D. Goodland 
02/03/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/04/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
02/05/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
