Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3564
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P101446 
Project Name:  Enhanced Justice Sector Services Project - Mongolia 
Task Team Leader:  Robert Buergenthal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LEGES 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (100%) 
Theme:  Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (P);Other rule of law (S);Legal 
services (S);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
0.95
1.95 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To support Mongolia's justice sector institutions enhance their efficiency, transparency 
and accountability through capacity improvements.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Enhancing Public Legal Education on the Justice Sector - US$0.5 million  
 
(US$250,000 IDA; US$250,000 Japan PHRD Co-financing Grant)  
 
The proposed Project will support the development of comprehensive legal education 
reform program and the implementation of a national public information strategy. The 
proposed Project will also support the development of a special bilingual legal 
information program for the Kazakh speaking population of the Bayan-Ulgii Aimag.  
 
Component 2: Increasing Transparency through Improved Access to Legal Information 
-
US$1.4 million (US$1.26m IDA; US$0.15m Japan PHRD Co-financing Grant)  
Page  2
The proposed Project will improve access to legal information by implementing national 
justice sector information and networking strategies for both the Supreme Court and 
MOJHA’s Court Enforcement Agency.  
 
Component 3: Enhancing Judicial Operations, Enforcement and Monitoring of Court 
Decisions - US$4.79 million.  (US$3.34m IDA; US$0.45 m Japan PHRD Co-financing 
Grant; and US$ 1.0m GoM)  
 
The proposed Project will strengthen and modernize the Court Enforcement Agency   
and also contribute to the construction of a new Supreme Court facility.  
 
Component 4: Project Management - US$0.25 million  
 
(US$0.15m IDA; US$0.10 m Japan PHRD Co-financing Grant)  
 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) established under the LJRP will be strengthened 
to enable it to ensure quality implementation, management, monitoring and evaluation 
and supervision of all proposed Project activities under each component.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will finance minor construction and refurbishment of court enforcement 
facilities in Ulaanbaatar and selected Aimags. Refurbished facilities of the Court 
Enforcement Agency will entail works in existing buildings and should there be a need to 
construct new facilities such work will be undertaken on sites not causing resettlement. 
There will be no land acquisition and resettlement-related impacts caused by the project.  
The environment guidelines applied in the bidding documents of the Legal and Judicial 
Reform Project (CR 3595-MOG) will be reviewed and adopted for the proposed Project. 
In following EAP Safeguards Secretariat guidance, the project will apply best practices in 
construction.   The client’s submission of best practice guidelines in construction have 
been reviewed and are found to be adequate.  
 
With respect to Indigenous Peoples, extensive research and consultations has 
determined that the Kazakh ethnic minority group residing in Bayan-Ulgii Aimag merit 
special attention via imparting legal information in their (Kazakh) language.   A Social 
Assessment (Dec 2007) and Community Consultations (March 2008) were carried out to 
provide a baseline towards understanding the centrality of the Kazakh language in 
accessing information. Based on the SA and consultation findings, recommendations to 
enhance public legal education for this group have been developed.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Bhatt (EASSO) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Bank’s Safeguard Policies on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Indigenous 
Peoples (OP 4.10) apply. OP 4.01 is triggered since the Project is expected to finance the 
construction of one court building and refurbishment or construction of selected Court 
Enforcement Agency offices.  There will be neither land acquisition nor resettlement 
under this Project.  The Bank’s Indigenous Peoples Policy applies since project 
beneficiaries include Kazakhs, an ethnic group with a distinct language but with 
commonality of lifestyle with rural Mongolians.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The environmental impacts are minimal (dust, debris removal etc) for the refurbishment 
of buildings with possible new construction work only on government lands.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address and mitigate impacts under OP 4.01, the Project will adopt a reviewed and 
revised version of the environmental guidelines included in the bidding documents of a 
similar Bank Project (Legal and Judicial Reform Project (CR 3595-MOG). Since 
language has been identified as the key distinguishing factor of the Kazakhs, ensuring 
equitable and culturally appropriate outreach of legal education and awareness-raising is 
a
feature of this Project and is central towards meeting OP 4.10 principles. The Project, 
therefore, includes a separate sub-component ensuring equitable treatment, benefit and 
representation of the Kazakhs of Bayan-Ulgii Aimag via its outreach and 
communications design. An ethnic-specific approach emphasizing language 
Page  4
considerations are summarized in an Indigenous Peoples Plan which stresses the need to 
develop materials and outreach on the justice system in the Kazakh language.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
In place of an EA, best practices in construction guidelines will suffice since the project 
is category C and based on a review of the EA section of the safeguards minutes, the 
environmental impacts are minimal (dust, debris removal etc) for the refurbishment of 
buildings with possible new construction work  which would happen only on government 
lands.  The best practice guideline was reviewed on 04/10/08 by a Bank Environmental 
Specialist and was considered acceptable towards mitigating the environmental effects 
that may be caused by this project.   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Buergenthal 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Nina Bhatt 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Bakhitgul Musaiv 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:  Delegated project.  Approval from Safeguards Secretariat not needed 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anthony G. Toft 
 
Comments:   
