Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2758 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mongolia 
Project ID: P101446 
Project Name: Enhanced Justice Sector Services Project - Mongolia 
Task Team Leader: Robert Buergenthal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: LEGES 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (100%) 
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (P);Other rule of law (S);Legal 
services (S);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
0.95
1.95 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will assist the Government of Mongolia to mainstream the results achieved and 
lessons learned through the Mongolia Legal and Judicial Reform Project. The proposed project is 
specifically designed to scale-up the main activities of the on-going Legal and Judicial Reform 
Project, to enhance the pilot areas which have demonstrated positive results, and to introduce 
complementary activities reflecting lessons learned throughout the justice sector.  The project 
will strengthen the capacity of the Judiciary, by working through the Supreme Court and General 
Council of Courts, and the Executive Branch, through the Ministry of Justice and Home Affairs 
(MOJHA) and its specialized agencies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Mainstreaming the development of the justice sector will be supported through inter-related 
components and a strengthened PIU, through the following activities:  
 
I. Enhancement of the Judiciary.  (Supreme Court in coordination with General Council of 
Courts) This component will assist the Judiciary and the General Council of Courts to improve 
Page  2
its facilities and information technology for capital city and regional courts, build justice sector 
management skills, and increase rural population access to justice sector services. Given 
Mongolia's complex physical, geographic and climatic conditions, developing access to 
information and an effective justice sector is a particularly formidable task. The isolation of 
much of the population, poor access to infrastructure and basic services, and the existence of a 
nomadic culture in many parts of the country creates unique challenges for the development of 
an effective justice sector.  
 
II. Strengthening the Institutional Capacity of the Ministry of Justice and Home Affairs 
(MOJHA) and Selected Justice Sector Agencies  
 
The Ministry of Justice and Home Affairs (MOJHA) has a broad mandate to support and 
develop the justice sector. Its mandate is implemented through its central offices as well as its 
eight key agencies  and their regional offices and local branches.  Given its far reaching mandate 
and complex organizational structure, the MOJHA has requested technical assistance to 
strengthen both its core institutional capacity and the performance of those selected justice sector 
agencies, in particular the Enforcement of Judicial Decisions Office.  
 
III. Enhancing Legal Education for Select Urban and Rural Populations (MOJHA, Supreme 
Court, General Council of Courts)  
 
Dissemination to Law Schools of the enhanced law syllabus.  
 
IV. Strengthening the Project Implementation Unit   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrowre has capacity to implement actions necessary to comply with the safeguard 
policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The appropriate Environmental Assessment Category will be determined during preparation.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The appropriate category will be determined during preparation.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/31/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos Ricardo Escudero 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anthony G. Toft 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
