Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3197 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/20/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mongolia 
Project ID: P108768 
Project Name: Mongolia Mining Sector Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Graeme Eric Hancock 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 8, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (60%);Central government administration (40%) 
Theme: Macroeconomic management (P);Other financial and private sector development 
(P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Tax policy and 
administration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are (i) to support the institutional development and 
strengthening of the main institutions administering the mining sector to improve sector 
governance; and (ii) to build the capacity of the government to develop policy and operational 
responses to maximize the development impacts of mineral revenues and to minimize potential 
economic and political risks.  
 
If successfully implemented, the project will assist the Government of Mongolia to achieve the 
following outcomes:  
 
-
improved quality and effectiveness of governance in the mining sector;  
 
-
maximize the development impact of mining revenues and minimize the impacts of the 
risks and factors contributing to the resource curse;  
 
-
develop the mining sector by attracting additional exploration and mining investment 
from good quality investors;  
 
-
improved environmental and social performance of mining operations, both large and 
small scale;  
Page  2
-
increased rural incomes and enhanced environmental and social outcomes from ASM 
activities;  
 
-
more financial resources available for government to promote economic development, 
develop key infrastructure, provide social services, reduce poverty and raise incomes;  
 
-
improved investment climate resulting from legal, regulatory and fiscal reforms, 
including the development of a Draft Standard Investment Agreement;  
 
-
improved transparency and effectiveness in the management of mineral tenements.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will assist the government in three primary areas:  
 
1) Building the regulatory framework and capacity to manage mining sector exploration and 
development:  
 
-
establish a panel of expert advisors to provide short term specific technical advice on 
mining related impacts, including 1) mining and mineral processing operations, 2) environmental 
and social management, 3) direct and indirect mining infrastructure and 4) legal and economic 
aspects of mineral development  
 
-
design and develop regulations and a standard mining investment agreement in support of 
the Mining Law;  
 
-
support the government to implement the new regulatory framework for small scale 
mining and establish extension services for education and training of miners;  
 
-
develop the role and essential corporate governance arrangements of Erdenes MGL LLG.  
 
-
build capacity in MRPAM to regulate, manage, and audit mineral developments 
including environmental, occupational health and safety and mines inspection and technical audit 
capacity;  
 
-
develop and implement a strategy for preparation of geological promotional materials and 
programs for sector investment promotion;  
 
-
support and develop high quality tertiary training programs and facilities to support mineral 
and related services sector growth;   
 
2) Establishing a sound macroeconomic framework for enhanced development resulting from 
mining sector development:  
 
-
provision of expert mining sector economic advisors to assist the Ministry of Finance to 
manage fiscal and economic issues associated with new large scale mineral developments;  
 
-
assist the Ministry of Finance to review and prepare arrangements to manage revenue 
fluctuations from cyclical commodity prices;  
 
-
assist the government to prepare monitoring and evaluation indicators to track progress 
against the medium term expenditure framework that is consistent with it's approved Public 
Investment Program and the objectives of the National Development Strategy;  
 
-
assist the government to develop capacity to identify and address the impacts of fiscal 
decisions on the investment climate for the mining sector;  
 
-
build capacity for mineral sector taxation assessments and audits in GDNT  
 
-
build capacity on revenue projections and modeling, economic and development 
statistical monitoring and reporting;  
 
-
build capacity within Mongolia for independent policy development and comment 
through support to "Think Tanks" in Universities and other institutions  
Page  3
3) Managing mineral development issues:  
 
-
assist the Government to prepare and implement an Integrated Regional Development 
Planning framework for the South Gobi region within which the Government can facilitate the 
coordinated development of transport, energy and urban infrastructure catalyzed by mineral 
developments, to maximize national and regional and economic linkages, and minimize negative 
environmental and social impacts.  
 
-
assist the Government to develop the framework for 1) intergovernmental fiscal transfers 
and 2) functional responsibilities with respect to the provision and maintenance of infrastructure 
and services in mining areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Mongolian mining sector regulatory framework for environmental safeguards is reasonably well 
developed although institutional responsibilities require definition.  Social safeguards are weak 
and require development. Evidence exists of recent human rights abuses in small scale mining 
areas by both companies and government.  Capacity problems remain for environmental 
management, particularly with the financial resources available to the Ministry of Environment 
to monitor compliance.  The project will assist the Government to revise the regulatory 
framework to include provisions to address social and environmental risks.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is proposed to be rated as category B for environmental purposes.  The project 
will not involve direct investment in mining activities but through its policy and regulatory 
strengthening it could have indirect environmental impacts by encouraging increased commercial 
scale mining and ASM activities in the future.  The project is expected to strengthen the 
Government's capacity to address environmental issues in the mining sector.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/24/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Proposed Approach to Manage Potential Environmental and  
 
Social Safeguards Issues and Risks Document will be disclosed before appraisal, which is 
tentatively scheduled for April 10-16, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Graeme Eric Hancock 
10/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
03/13/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
