Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3444
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Montenegro 
Project ID:  P106906 
Project Name:  Land Administration and Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gavin P. Adlington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing finance and real estate markets (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (30%);Central government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
16.11
16.11 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project would be: to improve the efficiency of 
permitting and property registration. The beneficiaries of the investment will be: (a) the 
public living within the municipalities as more order is brought to the built environment; 
and (b) the business community as more transparent and efficient processes are 
facilitated. The level of informal development should be drastically reduced, such that 
unsustainable and unattractive developments are curtailed, yet the business community 
and the private citizen will be able to develop their own assets with greater ease and 
security. By the end of the Project it should be possible for the public to easily access 
information about the processes required to develop a business or property and to have 
access to the legal situation concerning a property, and the zone plans and forms and 
procedures for applying to develop a property or obtain the necessary permits. This 
should result in less illegal developments and greater investment through formal 
procedures. The outcomes will be measured by a reduction in percentage of time spent on 
the compliance with the regulatory requirements, reduction in the number of steps and 
days required for permits or other documents, and better access to information.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
A
specific investment loan (SIL) is to be used as it has been shown in similar projects in 
the region to be more suited to building effective land administration systems. The 
Project will focus on improving the registration and cadastre system, implementing new 
urban plans and improving contruction permitting and inspection. A single intervention is 
suited for this task.  
 
The Project will have three components as follows:  
 
(A)Real Estate Administration. This component concentrates on improving registration 
services to the public by improving the facilities at local offices, especially in Podgorica 
where the majority of transactions occur. Nationally there will improved service 
standards through improved technology and completion of at least 100,000 hectares of 
cadastre and registration records in selected areas. The Project will help READ to bring 
all forms of land and property records available to municipa
lities and other users ‘on-
line’ and ensure that the READ will be able to provide basic maps in a timely manner to 
municipalities for planning and management purposes. The activities under the Project fit 
within the READ five year plan for 2008 to 2013, and includes four subcomponents: (i) 
improving registration services; (ii) information system development; (iii) provision of 
basic maps; and (iv) building the real estate cadastre REC).  
 
(B)Improving Planning and Permitting. This component will support the Ministry of 
Economic Development (MED) to improve the planning and permitting processes and 
strengthen the capacity of MED to support the planning sector in Montenegro.This 
component will also support those municipalities that have limited funds to develop 
spatial and general plans in line with the recently approved national spatial plan. 
Podgorica municipality and the coastal municipalities can afford to develop their own 
urban plans, but all municipalities will benefit from the Project-sponsored planning 
standards and manuals and information systems that will streamline and improve the 
planning and permitting process. There are four subcomponents: (i) improving the 
planning process and support to the Ministry of Economic Development; (ii) improving 
the planning process at municipal level and completion of plans; (iii) improving 
construction permitting and inspection; and (iv) support to the business environment.  
 
(C)Project Management. This component will support a Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) to assist MED and the municipalities with implementation of Component B; and 
the existing Technical Services Unit (TSU) under the MOF that will be responsible for 
fiduciary control and management. The PCU will also be responsible for monitoring and 
evaluation of Project activities and results.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project will cover the whole country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On balance, the proposed project is expected to be positive from an environmental 
standpoint.  Registration and cadastre mapping would induce a series of behavioral 
changes among property owners, and many of these would be environmentally positive. 
Any adverse impacts such as intensive use of agriculture input and increase in urban 
development would be more than adequately compensated by the environmental benefits 
generated by the project.  
 
The project has been assigned as Environmental Category B, due to the limited building 
renovations and construction, a Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been 
prepared to ensure that the building rehabilitation and modernization works will be 
environmentally acceptable and cause no, or minimum, damage to the environment.  The 
EMP will be publicized and filed in electronic archives by appraisal.  
 
Component B, Planning and permitting, will support the preparation of local and urban 
plans. Currently there are large numbers of illegal buildings constructed that do not fit in 
with existing urban plans. The new urban plans are mainly expected to provide the basis 
for legalizing, however, it is possible that some strucutres will not be able to be legalized 
after the new urban plans are developed because they are in protected areas or for some 
other valid reason. The project will only be providing TA and capacity building and there 
is no direct link to preparation of any future investments, thus OP4.12 is not triggered by 
this project and no resettlement policy framework is required.  
 
However, it is agreed that any TA provided will be consistent with Bank Safeguard 
Policies (including that the plan development includes a participatory process). An 
agreement will be made with each municipality to which the project provides assistance 
in developing urban plans that no illegal structures will be demolished during the period 
of preparartion of the urban plan and until the plan is disclosed for public comment and 
approved (as a condition of disbursement for preparation of the respective plans). The 
project will also include measures to help strengthen and improve (as necessary) national 
and local policies, laws/ regulations and practice relating to the treatment of illegal 
structures and those who own and/or occupy them.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Plan to minimize 
environmental impacts.  The document has been reviewed and discussed with the Bank 
and has been disclosed before appraisal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project preparation includes a social survey in the municipalities in which the project will 
be supporting the development of a general urban plans. The survey is expected to 
provide more data on the socio-economic profile of residents who may be impacted by 
the development of general urban plans and to what extent illegally constructed buildings 
represent primary residences, weekend houses or sources of rental income.  
 
Two studies have provided additional background social data for the project. With 
UNDP support, a local NGO conducted focus groups in all municipalities on the issues 
related to spatial planning, illegally constructed buildings, and a proposed law on 
legalization.  
 
User satisfaction surveys have been conducted in conjunction with the GTZ project 
under implementation. The majority of respondents considered the process of obtaining 
the necessary information from the cadastral office as requiring longer than they expected 
and necessitating multiple trips. There were significant variations among municipalities 
as to what additional information respondents needed; documentation and duration were 
the most commonly raised issues for which users would like more information.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/05/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gavin P. Adlington 
03/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Nikola Ille 
03/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/04/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
03/05/2008 
Comments:   
