Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC4494
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P082223 
Original Project Name: Healthcare System 
Improvement Project (Montenegro) 
Country:  Montenegro 
Project ID:  P114275 
Project Name:  Health System Improvement Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Kari L. Hurt 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 1, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (55%);Central government administration (30%);Compulsory health 
finance (10%);Non-compulsory health finance (5%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (33%);Administrative and civil service reform 
(33%);Other accountability/anti-corruption (17%);Injuries and non-communicable 
diseases (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
7.11 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.81
2.81 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDOs) is to put in place the first steps towards a 
reformed health system in the Republic of Montenegro, giving priority to increasing 
capacity for policy  
 
planning and regulation; stabilizing health financing; and improving primary health care 
service delivery.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project Development Objective is supported through three components: (A) support 
for health reform; (B) phased implementation of the primary health care development; 
and (C)  
 
project management. More specifically, the proposed loan would finance (Component 
A) technical assistance, training, communications support and equipment to further build 
the technical and institutional capacity of the key health sector institutions (Ministry of 
Page  2
Health (MoH), Health Insurance Fund(HIF), Institute of Public Health (IPH), and the 
Montenegro Drugs Agency), particularly focused on developing the information base and 
strategy for reform of the secondary and tertiary care health sector, regulation and 
oversight of the pharmaceutical sector, and establishing the base for quality assurance; 
(Component B) technical assistance, training, equipment and civil works to further the 
primary health care reform through monitoring and evaluation of the sector,  
 
development of the specialization program within the medical faculty, and expansion of 
the primary health care reorganization and investments outside of Podgorica, including 
the reconstruction and expansion of a Health Center in the municipality of Bijelo Polje; 
and (Component C) the technical assistance, training and incremental operating costs 
required for the continued operation and development of the Project Management 
Network (PMN) used by the Ministry of Health to technically manage the Project and the 
fiduciary services of the Technical Support Unit under the Ministry of Finance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Health Center to be reconstructed is placed in the center of Bijelo Polje city and is 
surrounded by a number of residential units intended for collective and individual 
residence. It is located on municipality owned and otherwise unused land and the 
extension of the building will remain within the property limits.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including OP/BP/GP 
4.01 Environmental Assessment, the proposed Project is classified as the Category B 
Project for environmental assessment purposes as it is not expected to generate 
significant environmental impacts.  
Page  3
Possible adverse environmental impacts are related to reconstruction and operation 
phases and are the following: (a) Dust and noise due to the demolition and construction; 
(b) Dumping of demolition and construction wastes, accidental spillage of machine oil, 
lubricants, etc; and, (c) Risk associated with handling wastes during operation 
(municipal, hazardous, medical, etc). All these potential environmental impacts are minor 
and could be easily managed during the project implementation. The reconstruction, 
expansion and superstructure of Bijelo Polje Health Centre will be executed on the 
available land owned currently by the Centre, and thus will not imply any of involuntary 
resettlement issues.  
 
The Project will also provide positive social impacts. The rehabilitation and expanding 
of the Centre will improve social conditions for the population and would contribute to 
improving local population livelihoods.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project long term impacts are positive and related only to improving local population 
social conditions   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to address the safeguards issues the borrower has hired an independent local 
consultant who conducted an Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA) and prepared an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP covers: (a) short description of 
applicable laws, policies on environment procedures for environmental screening, EIA 
preparation and implementation, as well as EIA institutions and responsibilities; (b) 
description and evaluation of the proposed project site; (c) Environmental Guidelines 
(EG), specifying: (i) potential  environmental and social impacts of the reconstruction 
activities;  (ii) proposed mitigation and monitoring measures to be applied during the 
project implementation; and (iii) description of EMP implementing arrangements, 
institutional capacities as well as procedures for supervision, monitoring, and reporting.  
It is proposed that the contractor will ensure the workers safety, will undertake relevant 
measures for preventing dust and noise pollution, proper handling, transportation and 
disposal of construction and medical waste materials.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
All interested parties were consulted. The Ministry of Health disclosed the draft EMP for 
wide public on the web-page of the Ministry(www.mzdravlja.vlada.cg.yu) on February 
13, 2009, inviting all the interested parties to attend the public discussion on the posted 
document. The invitation was also e-mailed directly to municipality of Bijelo Polje and 
its secretariats for urban planning, environmental protection, residential-communal 
affairs, communal police, and local environmental NGOs. One week later, on February 
Page  4
20, 2009, the PMN conducted a public briefing and consultation meeting on the 
document. The meeting concluded that the draft EMP document covered practically all 
potential impacts and possible mitigation measures. The draft EMP was revised after the 
meeting, taking into account inputs from the consultation. The final version of the EMP 
was provided to the World Bank, and will be used by the government agencies in the 
project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/12/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/13/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  5
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kari L. Hurt 
06/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
06/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/08/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abdo S. Yazbeck 
07/07/2009 
Comments:   
