Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3724
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Montenegro 
Project ID:  P107473 
Project Name:  Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening 
(MIDAS) 
Task Team Leader:  William R. Sutton 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P110602 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 20, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.73 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.22
4.22 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve delivery of government assistance for 
sustainable agriculture and rural development in a manner consistent with the 
EU’s pre-
accession requirements. Key outcome indicators are: (i) improved MAFWM capacity to 
disburse and track the use of rural development funds and to evaluate their impact; (ii) 
matching rural development grants paid to farmers through an EU IPARD compatible 
Paying Agency; (iii) increased number of agricultural producers and processors using 
modern agriculture technologies and practices; and (iv) an EU compatible food safety 
system.  
 
The Global Environment Objective is to mainstream sustainable land use and natural 
resource management into MAFWM’s policies, programs and investments. These efforts 
will be concentrated in particular in the north, where there are sensitive mountain 
ecosystems of global importance, and where poor rural residents are largely dependent on 
the natural resource base for their livelihoods.  Key outcome indicators are: (i) expanded 
Page  2
capacity of Rural Development Unit staff to integrate environmental measures into the 
rural development program and evaluate their impact; and (ii) increased capacity of 
extension services to introduce agri-environment measures.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components:  
 
(1) Strengthening MAFWM’s rural development program. The component would 
support the implementation of a multi-annual and EU IPARD compatible Rural 
Development Plan (RDP). IBRD funds would support rural development measures 
compatible with EU IPARD priority Axis 1 (Improving Market Efficiency and 
Implementation of Community Standards) and priority Axis 3 (Development of the Rural 
Economy). GEF grant resources would mainly support (i) agri-environmental measures 
compatible with both the EU IPARD priority Axis 2 (Improving the environment and 
countryside) and the GEF Land Degradation window; and (ii) cross-cutting measures to 
improve the environment under EU IPARD priority Axes 1 and 3.  
 
(2) Strengthening MAFWM’s administrative and management capacity in accordance 
with EU pre-accession requirements.  This component would help build the capacity of 
the extension and advisory services under the Biotechnical Institute in Podgorica to 
support the implementation of the EU IPARD compatible rural development program; 
and to further develop the existing Market Information System and Economic 
Analysis/Farm Management/Accounting (rural business support) program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would operate country-wide, but most of the beneficiaries would likely be in 
the mountainous north.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Under Component 1, civil works may include the rehabilitation of some government-
owned buildings (e.g. Marine Biology Laboratory) and/or construction of a building 
("House of Agriculture") for the new Proto-Paying Agency and other MAFWM units. 
Small scale civil works and other activities with some environmental implications may 
also be financed under the rural development grants program. MAFWM has confirmed 
that land would not be acquired for the House of Agriculture. Only existing public land 
would be used for this purpose. Nevertheless, a Resettlement [Land Acquisition] Policy 
Framework has been prepared. The PF reviews the fit between Montenegro's laws and 
procedures for land acquisition and its fit with Bank policies on Involuntary 
Resettlement, gap-bridging measures,  and the institutional arrangements for delivery of 
compensation. Under Component 2, in case there are sub-project proposals from state-
owned enterprises that may involve land take, the land acquisition process would be 
guided by the PF as well. However, in reality, there will soon be only one state-owned 
agricultural enterprise, and MAFWM has stated that the state-owned enterprise would not 
benefit from the project grants program.  
 
Most of Montenegro lies within either the Tara River Basin (Danube catchment)or the 
catchment for the Adriatic Sea, both of which are international water bodies.  OP 7.50 is 
triggered, but an exemption from notification based on Para 7(a) of the policy was 
approved by the ECA VP on 9/24/2008.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no known potential negative indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project Operational Manual (OM) and legal agreements will specify that the project 
will not finance any new irrigation systems or extension of existing systems, or any agri-
processing or other activities which could result in increased contamination of 
international water bodies (any such proposals will be rejected through the environmental 
screening process).  An exemption from notification of riparian countries under OP 7.50 
was received from the ECA VP on this basis.  
 
Financing of pesticides will be excluded through the OM.  At the same time, the 
TA/training aspects will include education/promotion on integrated pest management, 
and matching grants could be considered for supporting adoption of integrated pest 
management approaches.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Because specific investments and investment sites are not yet known due to the demand-
driven nature of the project (investments will be based on successful applications 
submitted by beneficiaries for IPARD-compatible measures), an Environmental 
Assessment (EA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared. A 
sample Environment Management Plan will also be prepared (for either one of the 
Reference Laboratories or Border Inspection Posts under the food safety sub-component). 
The environmental and social mitigation and monitoring measures will be incorporated in 
the OM.  The EF and RPF cover both the matching grants and direct investment elements 
of the project.  Given the unfamiliarity of the implementing agency with World Bank 
safeguards procedures, the EF puts particular emphasis on specifying the institutional 
mechanisms, responsibilities, existing capacities and capacity-building measures for 
environmental screening and for preparation, evaluation/approval and monitoring of sub-
project/investment-specific EAs and EMPs.   The SG team will review draft versions of 
the EF, RPF and OM when they are available.  
 
Specific resettlement [land acquisition] plans for the above activities will be prepared by 
the client if required and submitted to the Bank for prior approval.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA, TOR for EMP, and Resettlement Policy Framework were disclosed on the 
MAFWM website on June 17, 2008, prior to Appraisal, and will be replaced by final 
versions when completed. Civil society, including NGOs operating in Montenegro, 
particularly in the mountain areas, were invited to a consultation workshop that was 
organized by MAFWM on June 20, 2008 to discuss the safeguard policy issues and 
measures taken to address them. No objections to the project were raised by the 
participants.  
 
After receiving clearance from the client, the draft EA and RPF were disclosed at the 
Bank InfoShop on 07/30/2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2008 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  6
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William R. Sutton 
09/24/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Nikola Ille 
09/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
09/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
09/25/2008 
Comments:  cleared on behalf of Agi Kiss 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
09/25/2008 
Comments:  reviewed and cleared 
