Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4282 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/25/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Montenegro 
Project ID: P114275 
Project Name: Health System Improvement Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Kari L. Hurt 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 1, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (55%);Central government administration (30%);Compulsory health 
finance (10%);Non-compulsory health finance (5%) 
Theme: Health system performance (33%);Administrative and civil service reform 
(33%);Other accountability/anti-corruption (17%);Injuries and non-communicable 
diseases (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
7.11 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.81
2.81 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDOs) is to put in place the first steps towards a reformed 
health system in the Republic of Montenegro, giving priority to increasing capacity for policy 
planning and regulation; stabilizing health financing; and improving primary health care service 
delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is supported through three components:  (A) support for 
health reform; (B) phased implementation of the primary health care development; and (C) 
project management.  
 
More specifically, the proposed loan would finance (Component A) technical assistance, 
training, communications support and equipment to further build the technical and institutional 
capacity of the key health sector institutions (Ministry of Health (MoH), Health Insurance Fund 
(HIF), Institute of Public Health (IPH), and the Montenegro Drugs Agency), particularly focused 
Page  2
on developing the information base and strategy for reform of the secondary and tertiary care 
health sector, regulation and oversight of the pharmaceutical sector, and establishing the base for 
quality assurance; (Component B) technical assistance, training, equipment and civil works to 
further the primary health care reform through monitoring and evaluation of the sector, 
development of the specialization program within the medical faculty, and expansion of the 
primary health care reorganization and investments outside of Podgorica, including the 
reconstruction and expansion of a Health Center in the municipality of Bijelo Polje; and 
(Component C) the technical assistance, training and incremental operating costs required for the 
continued operation and development of the Project Management Network (PMN) used by the 
Ministry of Health to technically manage the Project and the fiduciary services of the Technical 
Service Unit under the Ministry of Finance.  
 
With respect to Environmental Safeguard Policies, note that with the Additional Financing for 
the Project, the Ministry of Health proposes to support the reconstruction and expansion 
(additional wing and superstructure) of a Health Center in Bijelo Polje (under Component B  
(iii), supporting expansion of the PHC reform outside of Podgorica).  The Health Center is 
located on municipal owned land and the extension of the building will remain within the 
property limits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implementated nationally.  The investment in primary health care 
infrastructure will be located soley in the the north-eastern municipality of Bijelo Polje.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Health has good experience with ensuring environmental compliance, having 
undertaken rehabilitation and reconstruction work on PHC centers in Podgorica.  A supervision 
of the original Project with respect to environmental compliance concluded that the Ministry had 
complied with national environmental regulations and that no environmental harm occurred 
during Project implementation.  The Project's Environemental Management Plan, including a site 
specific environmental assessment and mitigation plan, has been prepared by the Minstry.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EIA for the proposed project has been conducted, based on which a simple 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP)has been prepared and disseminated nationally.  
 
Potential Environmental Issues during the reconstruction activities. The most important 
potential environmental issues during the reconstruction activities are as follows: (a) Dust and 
noise. To avoid these impacts it is needed to follow up the existing best construction activities 
which are well known and applied in the country; (b) Contaminated Soil. During the construction 
activities might be cases of some hydrocarbon contamination of the soils, and moving them 
during construction, which also could lead to contamination of ground and surface water. Special 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
measures to avoid that should be undertaken by the constructors; (c) Waste handling and spill 
response. Routine construction activities will generate solid and liquid wastes including drywall, 
machine oil, paints, and solvents.  Minor spills of fuel and other materials are likely to occur 
during the course of construction.  Improper handing of on-site wastes and response to spills 
could result in adverse effects on the local environment including groundwater, surface waters, 
terrestrial ecosystems, and local residents. (d) Soil Erosion. If erosion is not adequately 
controlled during construction, adjacent river can suffer reduced water quality as a result of 
sediment and contaminated runoff; and (e) Traffic rerouting. Reconstruction of the center might 
require some rerouting of local traffic which may affect the neighboring population access to 
their houses. Taking this into consideration the project should propose a traffic scheme to be 
discussed and agreed with the local population.  
 
Environmental impacts during operational phase. The following are potential environmental 
impacts during center#s operation phase: (a) Medical Waste Handling. Medical wastes include 
Sharps (discarded needles/syringes, scalpel blades, empty glass vials, or other sharp objects); 
Laboratory wastes (including specimens, urine and blood, cultures and materials that they have 
contact with, hazardous chemical waste, and biological reagents). To minimize their impacts it is 
necessary to follow-up the rules and procedures of their handling specified in the Regulation on 
Medical Wastes management; (b) General Waste Handling and Spills. Health Center facilities 
may generate a stream of non-infectious solid and liquid waste, and experience occasional spills 
of machine oils, paints and other similar substances.  If improperly handled these materials can 
negatively affect terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and expose local residents to health hazards 
and nuisance.  
 
The EMP addressing the above issues has been prepared and includes: (a) short description 
of applicable laws, policies on EIA preparation and implementation, as well as EIA institutional 
responsibilities; (b) site-specific EA; (c) potential environmental and social impacts of the 
construction and operation of the Health Care Center; (c) proposed mitigation and monitoring 
measures; and, (d) description of EMP implementing arrangements, including procedures for 
supervision, monitoring, and reporting.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/24/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Assessment mission has taken place:  December 2008  
 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP), acceptable to the Project Team including 
Environmental Safeguards specialist, has been prepared:  dated February 24, 2009  
 
The EMP has been discussed with members of the community that may be affected by the 
construction activities:  March 11, 2009  
 
Following the approval of the regional safeguards coordinator, the EMP will be sent to the 
WB PIC:  On or about June 24, 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kari L. Hurt 
06/16/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/25/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Daniel Dulitzky 
06/17/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
