Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3358 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Montenegro 
Project ID: P107992 
Project Name: Montenegro Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader: Husam Mohamed Beides 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 4, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (S);Access 
to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
4.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
4.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to improve energy consumption performance in 
public sector buildings in Montenegro in order to produce energy and financial savings in the 
targeted buildings as well as to provide better energy services for their end users.  This will be 
achieved by financing (i) energy efficiency improvements in public buildings such as schools 
and hospitals throughout Montenegro; (ii) applications of new energy efficiency and supply 
technologies (including thermal solar technologies) in public sector buildings.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would consist of the following two components:  
 
•
Component 1:  Energy efficiency improvements in public sector buildings focusing 
primarily on schools, educational centers, hospitals and clinical centers.  The investment 
packages for the candidate buildings will finance energy efficiency measures designed to have 
demonstrable energy savings including, among others, retrofitting for improvements of heating 
systems, insulation, thermostatic valves and other installations in these buildings, as well as heat 
Page  2
substations and networks. During identification missions, the Bank team has identified, assessed, 
and ranked six schools and six health centers as candidates for energy efficiency improvement 
measures at a total preliminary estimated cost of Euro 3.3 million, which could be funded by this 
new lending operation.  The following evaluation criteria are expected to be used for the final 
selection of the energy efficiency projects:  
 
o
Buildings with energy savings potential, electricity substitution and environmental 
impact;  
 
o
Buildings which are not likely to be closed, or privatized;  
 
o
Buildings whose basic functions will not be significantly changed;  
 
o
Buildings with good geographical distribution;  
 
o
Buildings with significant numbers of users; and  
 
o
Buildings with substantial social and demographic impact.  
 
•
Component 2:  Technical assistance to MEEU to support the capacity buildingnecessary 
for project preparation and implementation as well as implementation of a monitoring and 
evaluation program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The energy efficiency investments are targeted all over Montenegro, mainly focusing on energy 
efficiency improvements in schools, and hospitals buildings.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The energy efficiency investment projects will focus mainly on schools and clinic centers and 
will involve retrofitting for improvements of heating systems, insulation, thermostatic valves and 
other installations in these buildings, as well as heat substations and networks. The investment 
and project groups in the Ministry of Education and Science and in the Ministry of Health, Labor 
and Social Welfare will be responsible for the design and implementation of energy efficiency 
improvement projects in buildings of their respective ministries.  Staff in these groups has 
already implemented similar projects which in general do not have any significant safeguards 
issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECAVP) 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project is rated category B.  The implementation of the energy retrofitting projects is not 
expected to have any significant safeguards issues. The implementing groups in the Ministry of 
Education and Science and in the Ministry of Health, Labor and Social Welfare will ensure that 
construction contracts will include clauses that will require contractors to comply with building 
safety rules in Montenegro and safeguards standards of Montenegro as well as of the Bank.   
Potential negative environmental impacts of the energy efficiency component would involve 
handling of asbestos, waste disposal and minor construction related disturbances.  No new 
constructions are envisioned under the pr
oject.  An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
checklist will be prepared to address the environmental issues and will serve as the 
Environmental Management Framework for the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be confirmed whether any of the buildings chosen for 
rehabilitation are designated cultural property.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/01/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Project is expected to be rated category B.  The implementation of the energy retrofitting 
projects is not expected to have any significant safeguards issues.  The implementing groups 
in the Ministry of Education and Science and in the Ministry of Health, Labor and Social 
Welfare will ensure that construction contracts will include clauses that will require 
contractors to comply with building safety rules in Montenegro and safeguards standards of 
Montenegro as well as of the Bank. Potential negative environmental impacts of the energy 
efficiency component would involve handling of asbestos, waste disposal and minor 
construction related disturbances.  No new constructions are envisioned under the project.  
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) checklist will be prepared to address the 
environmental issues and will serve as the Environmental Management Framework for the 
project   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Husam Mohamed Beides 
02/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
02/19/2008 
Comments:   
