Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3304 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Montenegro 
Project ID: P107473 
Project Name: Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening 
(MIDAS) 
Task Team Leader: Julian A. Lampietti 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P099749 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00
4.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to improve delivery of government assistance for agriculture, rural 
development, and su
stainable land management in a manner consistent with the EU’s pre-
accession requirements. Key outcome indicators would be: (i)improved MAFWM capacity to 
disburse and track the use of rural development funds and to evaluate their impact; (ii) increased 
number of agricultural producers and processors using modern sustainable agriculture 
technologies and practices; and (iii) establishment of river basin authorities, and preparation and 
initial implementation of Tara and Lim river basin management plans.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would include an IBRD Specific Investment Loan of around US$15 million, to be 
implemented over a four-year period. In addition, a possible GEF contribution of about US$5 
million for sustainable land management activities in the basins of the Tara and Lim rivers would 
be blended into the project. Details of component costs remain to be worked out, mainly because 
MAFWM’s 2008 budget andactivities under the EU’s IPA 2008 program for the agriculture 
Page  2
sector have not yet been finalized. At the request of MAFWM, the Project Team organized a 
donor coordination workshop during its last mission to help define, in collaboration with the EU 
and other development partners, indicative component costs and opportunities for parallel and/or 
co-financing.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening the MAFWM’s administrative and management capacity in 
accordance with EU pre-accession requirements.  
 
Administering EU compatible agriculture and rural development support programs.  
 
This sub-component will help establish a Rural Development Unit responsible for planning, 
programming, implementing, and organizing the monitoring and evaluation of the rural 
development and land management programs within MAFWM. It will also support the 
development of an EU IPARD compatible agriculture and rural development payment system. 
The system will administer support for agriculture and rural development and environment 
schemes and gradually make them EU compliant. Expenditures may include consulting services 
for the organizational and technical design of the Rural Development Unit and payment system, 
training, information technology (hardware and software), office equipment, and possibly civil 
works.  
 
Modernizing agriculture information management systems.  
 
This sub-component will help build, in coordination with ongoing and future donor assistance, 
key elements of an Integrated Administrative and Control System (IACS) and Agriculture 
Information System (AIS). Support for the IACS may include the design and implementation of 
the agricultural census, the development of a Farm Registry and Animal Identification and 
Registration System. In addition, it may include the establishment of a pilot cadastre for wine, 
olives, and/or fruits, which will form the basis for a Land Parcel Identification System. Support 
for the AIS may include developing MAFWM’s capacity to collect market and Farm 
Accountancy Data Network (FADN)-like information to help the Ministry monitor and evaluate 
the impact of the rural development grants program. Expenditures may include consulting 
services for the organizational and technical design of the IACS and AIS, training, information 
technology (software and hardware), office equipment, and possibly civil works.  
 
Creating a modern food safety system  
 
This sub-component will strengthen the State Veterinary Directorate and possibly the Food 
Safety Commission with a view to harmonizing and enforcing veterinary and phytosanitary 
regulations, standards and controls, and ensuring cross-compliance with environmental, animal 
and plant health standards by rural development grant beneficiaries. Project support may also 
upgrade, based on detailed business plans, veterinary and plant health reference laboratories to 
enable them to implement, in line with EU pre-accession requirements, residue monitoring 
systems and methodologies for testing according to ISO standards. It may also help the 
Agricultural and Veterinary Field Inspectorates modernize their information management 
systems and operational procedures using a risk-based approach in order to improve enforcement 
of food safety rules and on-the-spot controls for rural development grants. Expenditures may 
Page  3
include consulting services, training, information technology (hardware and software), inspection 
and sampling equipment, logistical support, and possibly civil works.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening the MAFWM’s rural development program.  
 
Increasing rural development funds for target measures and areas.  
 
This sub-component will finance grants to support target measures and areas identified in an 
EU IPARD compatible Rural Development Plan (RDP). Target measures may include farm 
investment to improve agricultural competitiveness (such as improving human and physical 
potential and quality of production) and diversification; modernization of processing industries; 
and sustainable land management. Grants are not for financing inputs and operating costs and are 
therefore not expected to be used to purchase pesticides. GEF co-financing will be used to 
support the restoration and improved management of selected degraded forest and riverine 
ecosystems, and other targeted measures with global environmental benefits identified in the 
RDP. Expenditures may include consulting services for the design, preparation and 
dissemination of the RDP, including Tara and Lim river basin management plans, and grants for 
investments by rural inhabitants and communities.  
 
Strengthening extension and advisory services.  
 
This sub-component will support the enhancement of the extension services' ability to provide 
potential grant beneficiaries with support and guidance on preparing application packages and 
meeting cross-compliance requirements, including for environment and good agricultural 
practices, and to obtain information required for the economic analysis and market information 
systems. It will also train bank staff in EU IPARD requirements to facilitate access of potential 
grant beneficiaries to pre- and co-financing sources. Expenditures may include training, 
information technology (hardware and software), and logistical support.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has demonstrated through previous projects their ability to address the majority of 
the safeguards issues. Once the design is finalized and the investments are known, the team will 
work with the client to review relevant current practices and the existing legal framework to 
identify appropriate mitigating measures or modify the project design as appropriate.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Safeguard may be triggered by (a) rehabilitation of buildings associated with components 1 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and 2; (b) disposal of laboratory waste associated with component 1, and land management 
activities in the Tara and Lim watersheds associated with GEF co-financing. An EA will be 
prepared once these activities and investment locations have been more fully defined as project 
identification/preparation proceeds.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The entire Tara River Basin within Montenegro is a Biosphere Reserve, and it contains two 
of Montenegro’s four National Parks (Durmitor NP and Biogradska-Gora NP).  It includes many 
relatively pristine and natural areas and dramatic landscapes with high biodiversity value.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
GEF financing will likely support restoration and management of degraded forest and 
riverine ecosystems.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be determined if new civil works or land management 
activities will require land acquisition or access zoning activities.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be assessed if any activities supported by the project will 
need to trigger the international waterways safeguard.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/01/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The documents expected for disclosure by appraisal include the Environmental Assessment 
and the Environmental Management Plan. A checklist (EMP) for subgrants will included in 
the operational manual for the grants. This is expected to be an output of the first year of the 
project and will likely be a disbursement condition.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
01/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
02/08/2008 
Comments:   
