Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/21/2008 
Report No.:  46732
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Montenegro 
Project ID:  P107992 
Project Name:  Montenegro Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Husam Mohamed Beides 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (S);Access 
to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
9.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to improve energy efficiency performance in 
targeted public sector buildings in order to provide demonstrated basis for development 
of a sustainable energy efficiency improvement programs in the public sector in 
Montenegro   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of the following two components:  
 
(i) Component 1: Energy Efficiency Improvement in Public Sector Buildings across 
Montenegro (Euro 6.0 million). This component will focus on financing energy 
efficiency retrofitting in public sector buildings. The investment packages for the 
candidate buildings will finance energy efficiency measures designed to have 
demonstrable energy savings including, among others, retrofitting for improvements of 
heating systems, insulation, thermostatic valves and other installations in these buildings, 
as well as heat substations and networks. A list of buildings that are candidates for 
financing during the first year of the project have been identified and assessed. This list 
Page  2
includes six schools and six health centers as candidates for energy efficiency 
improvement measures at a total estimated cost of Euro 3.3 million.  During the project 
implementation further buildings will be assessed and selected for financing by the 
project.  
 
(ii) Component 2: Technical Assistance for Project Implementation (Euro 0.5 million). 
This component includes providing technical assistance to support project 
implementation include the following:  
 
•
Support to the Project Steering Committee, the Project Coordinator and the 
Technical Service Unit in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Project, 
through the provision of goods, consultants’ services and training, the carrying out of 
audits required under the Project and the financing of Operating Costs ,  
 
•
Support for carrying surveys and energy audits required under the Project, and  
 
•
Support to the Ministry of Education and Science and the Ministry of Health, 
Labor and Social Welfare, through the provision of consultants’ services, for the design, 
procurement and implementation of energy savings measures under Component 1.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The energy efficiency investments are targeted all over Montenegro, mainly focusing on 
energy efficiency improvements in schools and other buildings for educational purposes, 
hospitals, clinics and facilities for social care throughout Montenegro.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Minor potential adverse impacts that may occur during implementation of financed 
energy efficiency retrofitting projects in targeted buildings. An Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) including a sample Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP)/Checklist was prepared identifying mitigation measures for the minor 
environmental impact associated with project implementation. These will be 
appropriately included in the design and technical specifications and their implementation 
included in the respective contracts. These measures at most will require some safety 
steps and disposal of debris and leftovers of the construction materials from the project 
site, which will be considered in the contractors’ contracts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project design and specifications will ensure that materials and equipment used in 
retrofitting comply with requirements of the EMP which will be included in the bidding 
documents and contract of work.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) including a sample Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP)/Checklist is prepared to provide mitigation measures for the 
minor potential adverse impacts that may occur during implementation of financed 
energy efficiency retrofitting projects in targeted buildings. To allow the flexibility to 
accommodate the minor work involved in retrofitting and improving of heating system or 
to address environmental hazards as they may be encountered (e.g. asbestos), the project 
is rated as environmental assessment Category B, requiring only an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) including a sample Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP)/Checklist prepared before appraisal and the finalizing of the EMP/Checlist for 
each site when it is selected for retrofitting,  according to the World Bank safeguard 
policy on environmental assessment (EA, OP 4.01).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultation on the EMF was carried in Podgorica on June 20, 2008.  In country 
disclosure of the EMF was completed on July 25, 2008. The EMF was submitted for 
disclosure in the World Bank infoshop on July 31, 2008.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/31/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Consultation on the EMF was carried in Podgorica on June 20, 2008.  In country 
disclosure of the EMF was completed on July 25, 2008.  The EMF is now posted on the 
Website (www.minekon.vlada) of the Montenegro Ministry of Economic Development. 
The EMF was submitted for disclosure in World bank infoshop on July 31, 2008   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  5
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Husam Mohamed Beides 
08/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
08/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
08/05/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
08/13/2008 
Comments:   
