Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/23/2009 
Report No.:  47915
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Montenegro 
Project ID:  P107473 
Project Name:  Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening 
(MIDAS) 
Task Team Leader:  William R. Sutton 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P110602 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 20, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.22
4.22 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve delivery of government assistance for 
sustainable agriculture and rural development in a manner consistent with the E
U’s pre-
accession requirements. Key outcome indicators are: (i) MAFWM capacity to disburse 
and track the use of rural development funds and to evaluate their impact; (ii) EU IPARD 
compatible rural development measures fully integrated in MAFWM support programs; 
and (iii) a food safety system upgraded in an EU compliant manner.  
 
The Global Environment Objective is to mainstream sustainable land use and natural 
resource management into MAFWM’s policies, programs and investments. These efforts 
will be particularly critical for the north of Montenegro, where there are sensitive 
mountain ecosystems of global importance, and where poor rural residents are largely 
dependent on the natural resource base for their livelihoods.  Key outcome indicators are:  
(i) agri-environmental measures integrated into MAFWM’s rural development program; 
Page  2
and (ii) improved capacity of extension and advisory services to introduce agri-
environment measures.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two main components, with a number of sub-components, plus a 
small third component to support project management.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening MAFWM’s rural development program  
 
Sub-component 1.1. Increasing rural development funds for target measures and areas:  
 
This sub-component would finance on a cost-sharing basis rural development sub-
projects through the provision of grants to private farmers, processors, other rural 
enterprises, farmer organizations, and community groups to support targeted rural 
development measures that are compatible with the three priority Axes of the EU IPARD 
program.  In particular, the project would support investments in agricultural holdings 
and the processing and marketing of agriculture and fishery products to strengthen the 
overall competitiveness of commercially-oriented producers and processors in 
Montenegro (EU IPARD priority Axis 1).  In addition, the project would support the 
development of the rural economy in Montenegro by financing investments in income 
diversification activities in rural areas (EU IPARD priority Axis 3).  Furthermore, GEF 
grant resources would be fully blended in the rural development grants program and be 
used to finance sub-projects, on a cost-sharing basis, through the provision of grants to 
support agri-environmental measures that are compatible with priority Axis 2, as well as 
the GEF Land Degradation window.  These include: (i) on-farm investments to protect 
water resources, prevent soil erosion, and regenerate pasture; and (ii) community-based 
agri-environment initiatives. Private individual farmers and rural enterprises, as well as 
producer organizations, NGOs, tourist associations, and community groups, would be 
eligible to apply for GEF-financed grants under Sub-component 1.1 to support 
environmental investments.  
 
Sub-component 1.2. Strengthening extension and advisory services:  
 
This sub-component would strengthen the extension and advisory services' ability to:  
(i) provide potential beneficiaries of rural development grants with support and guidance 
on meeting cross-compliance requirements and EU standards, developing business plans, 
and preparing grant applications; and (ii) obtain information required for the further 
development of the existing Market Information System (MIS) involving collection and 
dissemination of price information, and development of a Farm Management and Record-
Keeping Program.  The project would finance technical assistance, training, study tours, 
Information Technology (IT) and office equipment for the staff of the 12 regional centers 
and headquarters, refurbishment of facilities, and logistical support for the extension and 
advisory services as well as workshops and training for potential grant beneficiaries.  In 
addition, GEF grant resources would be used to strengthen the extension and advisory 
services’ capacity in relation to agri-environment, to build the capacity of farmers in agri-
environment, and to develop and implement a Code of Good Agricultural Practices 
Page  3
(CGAP) that will mainstream sustainability into agricultural practices.  GEF resources 
would also finance technical assistance, training and study tours for extension and 
advisory officers as well as workshops and training for farmers and rural communities on 
the CGAP.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening 
MAFWM’s administrative and management capacity in 
accordance with EU pre-accession requirements  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Administering EU compatible agriculture and rural development 
support programs:  
 
This sub-component would support the establishment of an EU IPARD-compatible 
Rural Development Unit/Management Authority responsible for planning, programming, 
and organizing the rural development program within MAFWM, as well as evaluating the 
results.  It would also support the establishment of a financially independent and EU 
IPARD-compatible agriculture and rural development payment system to manage the 
grant funds provided by the project and GEF as well as by national support programs.  
This system, consisting of the Rural Development Unit and the Proto-Paying Agency, 
would administer support for agriculture and rural development measures and gradually 
move towards EU IPARD compliance.  Furthermore, this sub-component would support 
the development and implementation of MAFWM’s broader Systematization Plan.  The 
project activities would complement EU support under IPA 2008 for the establishment of 
an EU IPARD programming and implementation system.  The project would finance 
renovation or construction of appropriate facilities; IT and office equipment; office 
refurbishment; logistical support; technical assistance and training; and workshops and 
other information activities to inform stakeholders about MAFWM’s rural development 
programs.  In addition, GEF grant resources would finance technical assistance and 
training in agri-environment for the Rural Development Unit.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Modernizing agriculture information management systems:  
 
This sub-component would support the preparation and implementation of the main 
Agricultural Census and the publication of the results.  This is necessary in order to 
accurately identify the number and size of agricultural households, farm types, assets and 
production levels, and is a fundamental requirement for the preparation of rural 
development policies and for designing effective rural development support programs.  In 
addition, it would help build key elements of an Integrated Administrative and Control 
System (IACS) through:  (i) the development of an integrated Farm Register on the basis 
of a unique farm code; and (ii) the preparation of associated cadastre maps for vineyards, 
and olive and/or fruit orchards.  The existing Animal Identification and Registration 
System for bovines would be fully integrated into the Farm Register.  The project would 
finance technical assistance, training, operational, and publication costs for the 
preparation and implementation of the main Agricultural Census; farm register software 
development; IT and office equipment; office refurbishment; workshops for local 
stakeholders; and logistical support.  
 
Page  4
Sub-component 2.3: Creating a modern food safety system:  
 
This sub-component would support a series of investments in food safety infrastructure 
in Montenegro.  It would help upgrade National Reference Laboratories (NRLs) in the 
area of veterinary and seafood diagnostic testing in accordance with international 
standards.  In addition, it would help upgrade the phytosanitary and veterinary Border 
Inspection Posts (BIPs) in the Port of Bar and establish a system for the safe disposal of 
animal by-products.  The project would finance technical assistance for the preparation of 
feasibility studies and business plans; laboratory equipment; IT and office equipment; 
logistical support; and civil works.  The project would also support a preliminary 
screening of private food processing establishments in Montenegro. Investments would 
generally aim to improve food processing facilities, infrastructure, equipment and 
procedures 
–
particularly by introducing GHP/GMP pre-requisite programs and Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP)-based procedures.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Administration and Monitoring:  
 
This component would build capacity within MAFWM to manage the day-to-day 
implementation of the project as well as monitor and evaluate its impact.  It would 
support the establishment of a minimal Project Management Team (PMT) under the 
direction of the Deputy Minister of MAFWM and comprising a Project Manager, a 
Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and a part-time Environment Specialist.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would operate country-wide, but most of the beneficiaries would likely be in 
the mountainous north. There are several nature protected areas (PAs) with different 
designations in northern Montenegro, including national parks Durmitor and Biogradska 
Gora and Tara Biosphere Reserve (the entire Tara river basin is designated as UNESCO’s 
Biosphere Reserve). Under the forthcoming revision of the Law on National Parks, 
proclamation of a new national park Prokletije is expected. In addition, there are many 
pristine natural areas with high biodiversity values. The new Law on Nature Protection 
will set a basis for Natura 2000 network and will eventually lead to other changes in 
distribution and coverage of protected areas. Protected and areas with valuable 
biodiversity (e.g. National Parks Skadar Lake and Lovcen) are also located in other 
regions of the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSSD) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential adverse environmental impacts have been identified for the following project 
activities (Sub-components): (1) Disbursement of grants to support competitiveness of 
agricultural holdings and food processors, rural development and implementation of agri-
environment measures eligible under the GEF Land Degradation window (Sub-
component 1.1); (2) Civil works for the rehabilitation of the existing or construction of 
new facilities for a number of institutions (Sub-components 2.1. and 2.2.); (3) Disposal of 
animal by-products (Sub-component 2.3.); (4) Upgrading of facilities and infrastructure 
for food processing industries (Sub-component 1.1 and 2.1.); and (5) Provision of 
equipment to Veterinary Diagnostics and Marine Biology Institute Laboratories (Sub-
component 2.3.).  
 
The project is classified as Environmental Category B. In accordance with the Bank’s 
Operational Policy 4.01 an Environmental Assessment (EA) Report has been prepared for 
the Project as part of the project preparation activities to identify potential direct and 
indirect environmental issues associated with the project.  Several other environmental 
Operational Policies were also triggered based on issues identified in the EA, particularly 
relating to agricultural, rural development and income diversification activities to be 
financed under sub-component 1.1:  OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP 4.36 (Forests) 
because of the potential for loss or degradation of natural forest and other natural habits, 
and  OP 4.09 (Pest Management) because support for increasing agricultural production 
could lead to increased use of pesticides by some farmers.  OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural 
Resources) was triggered because the Marine Biology Laboratory at Kotor (to be 
rehabilitated under sub-component 2.3) is a protected building.  
 
Operational Policy OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is triggered due to the possibility 
that land will be acquired for construction of a building for the Paying Agency (possibly 
shared with other MAFWM departments) under Component 2.  Currently the necessity of 
constructing a building for the Paying Agency has not yet been confirmed. Thus, a 
Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) instead of a Resettlement Plan (RP) has been 
Page  6
prepared and disclosed since: a) it is not clear if land will be taken; and b) in case there 
will be any land acquisition, the size and the location are not known at this point nor 
those who will be affected. This framework describes the legal basis for resettlement, the 
principles to be applied, land acquisition plans and procedures, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation, valuation of land and non-land assets, as well as an 
entitlement matrix and eligibility of effected persons. For Sub-Component 1.1, an RPF 
will not be required.  Instead, a screening process will be put in place to ensure that only 
sub-projects that do not trigger application of OP 4.12 are eligible for funding.  
 
Most of Montenegro lies within either the Tara River Basin (Danube catchment)or the 
catchment for the Adriatic Sea, both of which are international water bodies.  OP 7.50 is 
therefore triggered.  However, an exemption from notification based on Para 7(a) of the 
policy was approved by the ECA VP on 9/24/2008, based on the assessment that water 
requirements for water-related infrastructure to be rehabilitated under the project will not 
adversely affect the quantity or quality of water flow to other riparians, and will not be 
adversely affected by the other riparians’ possible water use. In addition, the Loan and 
Grant Agreements specify that “the Borrower shall ensure that no Loan proceeds are used 
to finance: (a) any new irrigation systems or extension of existing irrigation systems; or 
(b) any agri-processing or other activities which could result in increased contamination 
of international water bodies.”   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no known potential negative indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project Loan and Grant Agreements specify that the Borrower shall ensure that no 
Loan/Grant proceeds are used to finance the purchase of pesticides.   At the same time, 
the TA/training aspects of the project include education/promotion on integrated pest 
management, and matching grants could be considered for supporting adoption of 
integrated pest management approaches.  
 
For Component 1.1, a screening process will be put in place to ensure that only sub-
projects that do not trigger application of OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) are eligible 
for funding.  Eligibility criteria for the selection, approval and implementation of sub-
projects include the following condition, namely that no sub-project shall be approved for 
implementation on land that is formally or informally occupied or used by third parties, 
where implementation of the sub-project would result in their displacement (as defined in 
the World Bank's Operational Policy 4.12).  Screening will also be used to ensure that 
subprojects which would support economic activities within protected areas or zones are 
consistent with the relevant PA management plans and regulations and are consistent 
with the areas’ conservation and management objectives.  Any enterprises involving 
exploitation of non-domestic flora or fauna will have to demonstrate that the materials 
will be obtained from a sustainably managed source.  The screening is reflected in the 
Page  7
client's OM, and will be reflected in the Grants Operational Manual to be prepared during 
implementation as well.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Because specific investments and investment sites are not yet known due to the demand-
driven nature of the project (investments will be based on successful applications 
submitted by beneficiaries for IPARD-compatible measures), an Environmental 
Assessment (EA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared. The 
EA presents an overview of the Montenegrin agricultural sector; project description; 
overview of the national policy, legal and administrative framework in agriculture, 
environment and physical planning, construction and natural resources; national EIA and 
other permitting procedures relevant to activities that will be financed by the project; the 
Bank’s environmental procedures and other safeguard policies; assessment of possible 
project components, main impacts and likely significance of such impacts. The Report 
lists potential negative environmental impacts for each type of project activity and 
provides a list of recommended mitigation measures in the form of an EMP. A separate 
EMP was prepared for the Marine Biology Institute, Kotor, which will be upgraded with 
funds allocated to Sub-component 2.3.  
 
The RPF describes the legal basis for resettlement, the principles to be applied, land 
acquisition plans and procedures, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, valuation 
of land and non-land assets, as well as an entitlement matrix and eligibility of affected 
persons.  
 
The environmental and social mitigation and monitoring measures have been 
incorporated in the client's OM.  In relation to Sub-component 1.1, they will also be 
incorporated into the Grants Operational Manual to be prepared during implementation.  
Given the unfamiliarity of the implementing agency with World Bank safeguards 
procedures, the EA puts particular emphasis on specifying the institutional mechanisms, 
responsibilities, existing capacities and capacity-building measures for environmental 
screening and for preparation, evaluation/approval and monitoring of sub-
project/investment-specific EAs and EMPs. According to the RPF, specific resettlement 
(land acquisition) plans for relevant activities will be prepared by the client if required 
and submitted to the Bank for prior approval.  
 
With respect to Sub-components 2.1. and 2.2., adverse environmental impacts are 
related to execution of civil works for refurbishment or construction of offices at 
locations that are currently not specified. The locations are expected to be in an urban 
area and major impacts will be related to elevated levels of noise, dust emissions and 
management of construction debris. The contracts for civil works under these Sub-
components will be subject to screening for environmental impacts by the competent 
national environmental entity and the EIA procedure will be applied if needed/required. 
In case an EIA is not necessary, an EMP will be prepared for each construction phase 
(design, construction and operation) once the locations for civil works are specified and 
before design work begins. The EMPs will be prepared in line with the Bank’s 
Page  8
environmental assessment requirements under OP 4.01, and will be subject to the Bank’s 
approval prior to beginning any construction activity. An example of the possible format 
and type of information to be taken into account in EMP development is provided in the 
EA report. All bidding documents and contracts will include measures to minimize or 
mitigate environmental impacts. Good engineering practices will be applied.  
 
With respect to Sub-component 2.3., disposal of animal by-products may cause 
significant adverse environmental impacts. Activities to support this particular 
intervention within sub-component 2.3. (d) will include the preparation of a separate EIA, 
which will identify and assess negative environmental impacts of an optimal solution that 
will be determined through the separate feasibility study, and propose mitigation 
measures. The EIA will be prepared in line with the national EIA and the Bank’s 
environmental assessment requirements (OP 4.01), and will be subject to both national 
and Bank approval prior to the beginning of any construction activity. Implementation of 
the prescribed mitigation measures will be a precondition for acquisition of an 
operational permit.  
 
Support for upgrading of food processing facilities and infrastructure under Sub-
component 1.1. and 2.1 to bring them in line with EU standards is going to generate 
environmental improvements, especially when implemented in conjunction with 
introduction of EU compliant food safety procedures. However, in executing these 
interventions and due to possible scaling up of capacities, negative environmental 
impacts such as increased emissions could occur. Some of the facilities in question may 
be on a national list of facilities for which any change or expansion in the existing 
capacities requires a separate EIA. EIA procedures as regulated under the national 
legislation will be applied to all investments that will be supported under Sub-component 
1.1. In case the investment will not require a separate EIA, environmental screening will 
be carried out in line with World Bank OP 4.01 and appropriate assessment instruments 
applied.  
 
The provision of equipment to Veterinary Diagnostics and Marine Biology Institute 
Laboratories under Sub-component 2.3., including equipment for microbiology, 
biochemistry and virology, and equipment for safe disposal by incineration of potentially 
infective or hazardous materials and samples, may result in indirect negative 
environmental impact through the generation and disposal (incineration) of veterinary 
wastes. Mitigation measures to address these impacts include development of procedures 
for dealing with various waste types and their implementation (in compliance with 
existing national regulations), and eventual certification of laboratories under ISO 
standards. Mitigation measures for this type of activity are presented in the EMP, which 
forms part of the EA Report. There is a separate, site-specific EMP that has been 
prepared for activities that will be executed using project funds at the Marine Biology 
Institute in Kotor. The future work of laboratories needs to be monitored regularly.  
 
Project funds will be used to hire a part-time Environment Specialist in the Project 
Management Team specifically to ensure the monitoring and reporting of safeguards 
compliance of project activities.   
 
Page  9
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The draft EA, TOR for the EMP for the Marine Biology Institute in Kotor, and RPF were 
disclosed on the MAFWM website on June 17, 2008, prior to Appraisal.  Civil society, 
including NGOs operating in Montenegro, particularly in the mountain areas, were 
invited to a consultation workshop that was organized by MAFWM on June 20, 2008 to 
discuss the safeguard policy issues and measures taken to address them. No objections to 
the project were raised by the participants.  After receiving clearance from the client, the 
draft EA and RPF were disclosed at the Bank InfoShop on 07/30/2008. Following the 
incorporation of comments received after public discussion, the final EA Report was 
submitted to the Bank in October 2008 and disclosed in accordance with its policies, and 
the final RPF was submitted to the Bank in November 2008 and disclosed in accordance 
with its policies.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  10
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  11
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William R. Sutton 
02/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Nikola Ille 
02/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
02/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/25/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
02/25/2009 
Comments:   
