Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC3941
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Morocco 
Project ID:  P095714 
Project Name:  Morocco Basic Education Reform Support Program II 
Task Team Leader:  Rachidi B. Radji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (50%);Primary education (50%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3,627.25 
 
African Development Bank 
93.75 
 
EC: European Commission 
116.25 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
250.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
62.50
4,149.75 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project responds to the vision that the King has set for the country to have rapid 
growth, less poverty and better social conditions.  Integral to this vision is endowing the 
Moroccan society with a better education system that will contribute to the 
competitiveness of its labor force in the global economy.  In the long run, education will 
also help reduce the incidence of poverty and provide the basis for inclusive growth.  
 
To this end, and as mentioned above, the government has recently put in place an 
Education Emergency Plan to accelerate the pace toward the achievement of the 2000 
Education Charter. The Emergency Plan aims to complete the compulsory education 
policy for children up to 15 years old by 2015 while gradually expanding access to upper 
secondary and higher education, in a sustainable manner. The Emergency Plan lays out a 
coherent and sound policy framework which is articulated around four strategic 
directions: (i) implement compulsory education to all children up to the age of 15 years; 
Page  2
(ii) stimulate ingenuity and excellence in upper secondary and higher education; (iii) 
tackle the institutional cross-cutting system issues; and (iv) mobilize and engage the 
necessary means to ensure success.  
 
In assisting the government of Morocco to the implement the Education Emergency 
Plan, the project’s main objectives will be to increase completion of compulsory 
education for children 6 to 15 years old and improving efficiency and effectiveness 
measures in the education system, while progressively increasing access to upper 
secondary education.  Specifically, the project will contribute (i) to increasing  net 
enrollment rates for primary,  lower secondary and upper secondary education  from 
93.5%, 47.4% and 20.0% in 2007/2008 to 96.6%, 79.2% and 48.2%, respectively by 
2012, (ii) improving the education quality with a focus on restructuring teachers’ training 
and learning evaluation; and (iii) improving  management capacity and promoting 
accountability of results at all levels within the context of decentralization.  
 
The overall assessment of progress in achieving the project’s development objectives 
will be based on a results-framework which comprises the sector’s performance 
indicators and monitoring indicators.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 supporting Strategic Direction 1 Implement Compulsory Education to all 
children up to the age of 15:  
 
The overall objective of this strategic direction is to achieve compulsory education for 
children aged 6-15, to guarantee a place in school for all children aged 4 under a pre-
school development program and to limit repetition and dropouts.  Specific activities 
include the development and promotion of pre-schools through a strategic public-private 
partnership framework.   
 
While access to primary education is almost universal and access to secondary 
education has significantly improved, school retention remains low and a large number of 
school-aged children remain excluded from the system.  Repetition and dropout rates are 
high.  The project will support the expansion of access through approaches that will 
promote quality of service delivery, tackling the supply side as well as the demand side.  
The supply side will be met through a construction and equipment program based on 
Ministerial norms and standards.  Given the volume expected under the school 
construction program, the AREF system implemented under PARSEM I for equipping 
schools is limited.  The MENESFCRS is aware of the challenges and is considering 
different scenarios that include options to outsource construction, equipping and/or 
management of the schools.  While the 2008/2009 construction program continues to be 
managed by the AREF, PARSEM II will assist the MENESFCRS in finding new 
approaches that will be gradually applied for the construction and equipping program.  
Technical assistance will be sought to examine and assess different scenarios, using 
international best practices, and will develop new approaches that are responsive to needs 
and cost-efficient. Construction priority will be given to communes who have lower net 
enrollment rates.  At the same time, a number of innovations will be carried out to 
Page  3
respond to the demand side of education, notably conditional cash transfers, provision of 
boarding facilities, partnership with communities on transportation, distribution of 
educational materials, etc.  PARSEM II will also implement strategies and measures to 
improve children’s retention in schools and learning.  
 
To improve the quality of education and increase school retention, teachers and 
principals will be trained to better assess the learning skills of their pupils.  Teachers’ 
workload will be reorganized to focus on children who have learningdifficulties.  In 
addition, PARSEM II will continue to support the institutionalization of learning 
evaluation and benchmarking mechanisms. Other relevant measures are being addressed 
under component 3 to tackle generic cross-cutting issues  
 
Component 2 supporting Strategic Direction 2 - Stimulate ingenuity and excellence in 
upper secondary education:  
 
Progress in achieving compulsory basic education is resulting in growing pressure to 
respond to the demand by youth for education beyond the age of 15 at the upper level of 
secondary education and higher education.  Enrollment at these levels of education 
remains relatively low (in comparison to other countries in the Region) with weak 
external efficiency.  Less than half of the children aged 15-17 are enrolled.  PARSEM II 
will support the scope of Strategic Direction 2 that is related to the development of 
quality upper secondary education, through increased supply of upper secondary schools.  
It will also assist in the development of a strategy for the development of a “reference 
upper secondary school” (lycÃ©es d’excellence) by first defining the criteria used and 
assessing the overall social impact of the existence of such schools before proceeding 
forward with this strategy.  In parallel, a strategy to provide quality upper secondary 
education adapted to the country’s long-term needs will be developed.  
 
Component 3 supporting Strategic Direction 3 - Tackle the institutional issues cutting 
across the system:  
 
Under this strategic direction, the Emergency Plan confronts the structural weaknesses 
that have impeded the acceleration of the reform program and the improvement of 
education outcomes. It puts forward a wide reform agenda, ranging from human 
resources, decentralization, and sector management to the language of instruction and 
student information and orientation.  PARSEM II will support policies and areas of action 
that strengthen the institutional performance of the education sector, including 
decentralization, human resources management, and monitoring and evaluation.  
Specifically, the process of deconcentration/decentralization of the sector’s management 
will be pursued with an eventual transfer of job positions and staff under the AREF’s 
management, implement a budgeting process based on results, and improved governance.  
The responsibilities and qualifications of the Inspectorate and the pedagogical corps will 
be redefined so that they can monitor, inspect and teach in an effective manner.  The job-
competency-based framework will be used to hire and redeploy teachers and other 
administrative and technical staff.  Concerning the teaching force, PARSEM II will 
support strategies to revamp the pre-service training system, with the integration of  bi-
Page  4
subject teaching force  in lower secondary education.  At the onset, administrative and 
pedagogical aspects along with curricula and teacher profiles will be developed with the 
aim to launch the regional training center in 2012. The project will also strengthen in-
service training.  In addition, the reform agenda will be incorporated into the school 
system with the creation of School Management Committees.  PARSEM II will support 
school-based initiatives whereby the related financial resources will be managed directly 
by the schools .  
 
Component 4 supporting Strategic Direction 4 - Mobilize and Engage necessary means 
to ensure success (financing, partnership, communication and social mobilization, private 
sector):  
 
Achieving the ambitious objectives set by the Emergency Plan will require an additional 
public financing but also strong mobilization of all stakeholders.  While the use of a 
rolling medium-term expenditure framework will be used to ensure appropriate annual 
allocations to the sector in the National Budget, the project will assist the MoE in closely 
monitoring the execution of a number of savings and efficiency measures which are put 
forward in the Plan, e.g. decreased repetition rates, bi-subject teachers in lower secondary 
education, teacher deployment and utilization measures, human resource management 
decentralization, and contract-based management.  In this context, a sectoral PER and/or 
possibly a PETS along with a beneficiaries’ assessment survey will be implemented 
during the four-year period (to be confirmed during negotiations).  In addition, PARSEM 
II will provide technical assistance to promote private sector partnership in the provision 
of non-public education, with a view to share the financial and performance 
responsibilities of the expansion of the sector.  Mobilizing all stakeholders to provide 
support and commitment to improving education will be essential.  To this end, 
PARSEM II will support an internal and external communication strategy, and strengthen 
and institutionalize stakeholder partnerships, particularly those in proximity to the 
schools, notably local governments, associations, NGOs, and local communities.  A 
charter, establishing the relations between the schools and the parent associations, will be 
instituted.  In addition by the project mid-term date, there will be an evaluation of a 
sample of partnership conventions between the MENESFCRS and other institutions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
National education reform program will be implemented throughout national territory. 
The government selects sites for specific intervention based on various information 
systems (school maps, regional plans, etc.). Project to be implemented in the following 
regional academies (regional education jurisdictions):  
 
Rabat-Sale-Zemour-Zaer, Al Gharb-Chrada-Bni H’sine, Tanger-Tetoun, Fes-Boulmane;  
 
Meknes- Tafilalet, Taz-Al Hoceima-Taounate, Orientale, Sous-Mass-Daraa, Marrakech-
Tensift- Elhaouz, Tadla- Azilal, Grand Casablanca, Chaouia-Ouardigha, and Doukkla-
Abda.   
 
Page  5
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNACS) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main environmental issues implied by this operation are related to the establishment  
of new schools in particular during the construction phase. Consequently it is considered 
that the Environment Assessment Policy (OP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
(OP 4.12) policies need to be triggered.  
 
The education sector, like other sectors in Morocco, faces the issue of arrears in the 
payments of compensation for land taking due to the existing institutional settings. 
During PARSEM 1, the Government has acquired land through expropriation for the 
purpose of building schools. Compensation and indemnification for land taking has 
slowly been implemented and many cases are still pending because of procedural and 
other regulatory hurdles. The Government at both MEN and MOF are dealing with the 
issue of arrears. The Government reported that more than 700 cases of indemnification 
have been resolved to the satisfaction of expropriated land owners. The Ministry of 
Education has launched an inventory of lands (on which schools have been built) whose 
ownership has not been transferred and has started to allocate adequate budget required to 
indemnify expropriated land owners. To date, four hundred and three (403) cases have 
been treated out of a total of about 1700. 
 
The implementation of the Bank’s Asset Management Reform Loan contributed to 
reducing the incidence of arrears.   However, the arrears have yet to be completely paid 
off and the payment program implemented by the treasury (“Direction des Domaines” of 
the MOF) shall continue under the proposed PARSEM II in order to liquidate all arrears 
by the end of 2013.  It is expected that under PARSEM II a comprehensive database will 
be developed and installed to provide for the monitoring of the status of land parcels on 
which schools or education infrastructure have been built.  
Page  6
Finally, the Government has adopted a policy which gives preference to undertaking   
construction of school on government owned land or on land for which the acquisition 
process has been completed and title deeds issued to the Government.For the purpose of 
acquiring the marginal land that may be needed to build new schools, OP 4.12 is 
triggered and a RPF developed.   
 
In addition, the list of AREF that will benefit directly from PARSEM II is the following; 
Grand Casablanca, Chaouia-ourdigha, Doukala-Abda, Fks-Boulmane, Gharb-chrarda-
bani hassan, Marrakesh-Tansift-Alhaouz, Meknes-
Tafilalt, L’ Oriontale-Oujda, Rabat-
Salk-Zemmour-Zair, Souss-Massa-Draa, Tadla-Azilal, Tanger-Tetuan, Taza-El 
Houseima-Taounate. Casablanca, Chaouia-ourdigha, Doukala-Abda, Fks-Boulmane, 
Gharb-chrarda-bani hassan, Marrakesh-Tansift-Alhaouz, Meknes-Tafilalt, L’ Oriontale-
Oujda, Rabat-Salk-Zemmour-Zair, Souss-Massa-Draa, Tadla-Azilal, Tanger-Tetuan, 
Taza-El Houseima-Taounate   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While the process of liquidating arrears will be pursued in PARSEM II, the Ministry of 
Education has launched an inventory of lands (on which schools have been built) whose 
ownership has not been transferred and has started to allocate budget for the assessments 
required by the “Direction des Domaines” Four Hundred and three (403) cases have been 
treated out of a total of about 1700. During PARSEM II, it is expected that a 
comprehensive database will be finalized that will indicate the status of the parcels of 
land on which schools or education infrastructure have been built.  
 
Directives from the Ministry have been sent to the Academies in order to avoid 
proceeding with construction on parcels of land for which the acquisition process has not 
been completed or at least initiated. Considering the need to continue efforts initiated 
during PARSEM I, PARSEM II will therefore pursue the application of the ESSF. In 
particular the revised ESSF mandates the total resorption of the arrears at the end of the 
four-year implementation period of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
An ESSF (Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework, which includes the 
mitigating and monitoring as well as capacity building measures to be applied during 
Project implementation), and a RPF (Resettlement Policy Framework ,which describes 
Page  7
the land acquisition procedures in case land has to be purchased for the construction of 
school infrastructures) have been prepared.  Also, a chance find procedure will be 
included in the operations manual to ensure that in case of discovery of physical cultural 
resources the appropriate steps will be taken by the contractors and relevant parties.  The 
ESSF and RPF have been disclosed in the country through the Ministry’s website 
(www.men.gov.ma) as well as through the Bank Information Center (Infoshop).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  8
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Rachidi B. Radji 
03/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
03/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
03/11/2009 
Comments:  No reviewer as project has been transferred. 
