Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4257 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P100397 
Project Name: Morocco Urban and Rural Water Systems 
Task Team Leader: Pier Francesco Mantovani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Access to urban services and housing 
(50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are to increase sustainable access to potable water 
in rural areas, and strengthen water supply capacity and reliability to meet urban and rural 
demands.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The investments being considered by national operator ONEP pertain to: i) the bulk production 
and transmission of potable water, and to ii) rural water supply. The project consists in 3 
subprojects aimed at developing, upgrading or renewing regional bulk water 
production/transmission systems in the Safi/El Jadida, Nador and Errachidia provinces, and at 
expanding the coverage of rural water supply to new portions of the Safi/El Jadida and Nador 
provinces. In these areas, the project may equip rural schools with individual water service 
connections and on-site sanitation facilities. In villages demanding household connection (HC) 
service as opposed to simple standpipe (SP) service, the project will assist ONEP in promoting 
community mobilization towards implementing village distribution networks and in establishing 
viable network financing and operation options for the communities to chose from. The project 
Page  2
does not include any investment in urban or rural distribution systems.  Infrastructure 
components are summarized and quantified in Table 1 below, and hereby described:  
 
#
Safi/El Jadida subproject:  This subproject will complete RWS coverage in the two 
provinces already benefitting from the on-going Bank-funded Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
(RWSS) project, using community-based demand-driven approaches.  In addition to rural water 
supply pipelines, pumping stations, storage tanks and public fountains to serve 740 villages, the 
project must build new production/transmission capacity, by developing a water treatment plant 
(500 l/s), and a regional bulk transmission pipeline (75 km, 700mm).  
 
#
Nador subproject: This subproject will double the transmission capacity and existing 
trunk pipeline (120km, 400-160mm) to supply fast growing urban demands along the Nador-
Midar axis, as well as new rural demands to be covered in the area. The project will also include 
the development of new rural pipelines to connect villages, and may include an Output-Based 
Aid (OBA) revolving fund to facilitate prefinancing of HCs and village networks to be 
developed by communities.  
 
#
Errachidia subproject:  This subproject focuses on the upgrade and renewal of an existing 
regional trunk pipeline (88 km, 600-300mm) serving the towns of Errachidia and Erfoud, as well 
as numerous urban and rural centers and tourist resorts in the Tafilalet valley. The subproject 
does not entail development of new RWS lateral pipelines, nor expansion in SP or HC RWS 
service.  
 
Capacity building components, likely to be needed to strengthen ONEP#s capacity to 
implement community-based and demand-driven approaches, as well as to enable communities 
and local private entrepreneurs to take on the development of small village networks, have not 
yet been identified.  
 
Considering the yet to be quantified components, project cost is estimated at about $190m. 
Financing need is estimated at $150m, in the form of a SIL to ONEP with sovereign GOM 
guarantee.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project locations are known, and pertain to the El Safi/El Jadida, Nador and Errachidia 
provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
ONEP is a repeat and current borrower, demonstrating high capacity for project preparation and 
implementation, as well as for fiduciary compliance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSO) 
Mr Abdel Mourhit Lahbabi (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Rating "B" is proposed on the basis that the Project (i) does not include specific financing of 
household connections but rather financing of bulk water to villages; (ii) that it supports the 
preparation of an overall rural sanitation strategy for ONEP and specific studies relative to 
management models for providing individual connections; and (iii) that it supports TA activities 
that ONEP would provide to municipalities in order to implement household connections duly 
integrated with proper sanitation measures depending on specific circumstances.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although acquisition of private land will be very limited, a Resettlement Policy Framework 
will be prepared and will be part of the negotiation package.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Partial environmental assessment, EMP and RPF will be prepared before appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani 
09/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
09/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francis Ato Brown 
09/15/2009 
Comments:   
