Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3479
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Morocco 
Project ID:  P104265 
Project Name:  MA-ELECTRICTY TRANSMISSION 
Task Team Leader:  Silvia Pariente-David 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (90%);Renewable energy (10%) 
Theme:  State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
(a) 
The objective of the Project is to increase the efficiency, reliability, and quality of 
electricity supply to all electricity consumers, while protecting the environment.  
 
(b) 
The proposed project is consistent with the CAS objectives of (a) accelerated 
growth and job creation and (b) reduction of poverty and exclusion.  It will ensure 
uninterrupted and high quality supply of electricity to households and firms. As a result, 
households will enjoy a higher quality of life, industry will be more competitive and, 
more generally, economic growth will be sustained.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will consist of the following main components:  
 
(i) 
Reinforcement of the electricity transmission network to reduce bottlenecks and 
improve system’s reliability and quality;  
 
(ii) 
Strengthening of the distribution system through the addition of three substations;  
 
(iii) 
Promotion of CFLs as part of ONE’s DSM program;  
 
(iv) 
Equipment in hardware and software of a trading desk;  
 
(v) 
Creation of a database of certified wind data;  
 
(vi) Technical 
assistance. 
 
Page  2
1. Infrastructure Investment Components  
 
•
Transmission and distribution network (loan amount 123 million $): network 
reinforcement over the period 2008-2012. For the transmission, the Bank will finance:  
 
(i) 
Construction of 392km of 400kV lines and 76 km of 225kV lines  
 
(ii) 
A 400/225 kV substation in Chamia (2x450MVA)  
 
(iii) 
Expansion of 400/225 kV substations at Mediouna and Tensift II.  
 
For the distribution network, the Bank will finance the following substations:  
 
(iv) 
225/22 kV substation at Dar Bouazza (2x70MVA)  
 
(v) 
225/22 kV substation at Dar Ouled Zidouh (2x20MVA)  
 
(vi) 
225/22 kV substation at Tamansourt (2x20 MVA)  
 
(vii)  
 
•
Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFL)-(loan amount: 8.4 million $): Under the 
proposed component, CFL lamps will be procured and distributed through accredited 
marketers to ONE customers.  
 
•
Trading Desk (loan amount: 7 million $):  ONE is setting up a trading desk for 
fuel purchasing for its own power plants and for trading electricity with Spain, as well as 
for price risk management.  
 
•
Wind data base (loan amount: 1 million $): this component finances a data base of 
certified wind data.  
 
2
Technical Assistance Components  
 
•
Adaptation of ONE to the new market environment (loan amount: 1.1 million 
$).This technical assistance will comprise (i) the development and implementation of 
contractual arrangements with other operators in the sector and (ii) a tariff study.  
 
•
Upgrade of procurement function (loan amount 1 million $): ONE is seeking 
technical assistance to ensure its procurement processes are “state of the art” andare 
adjusted to the evolving requirements of the company as the market liberalizes, in order 
to ensure the best possible performance in terms of cost, timeliness and quality.  
 
•
Valorization of rural electrification (loan amount for TA: 400 000 $): The 
objective of the next rural electrification program is to develop new uses which have a 
higher value added. Several activities have been already identified by ONE, such as 
participation in regional and local development initiatives or using the network to 
develop telecommunication services.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Country wide (the legal agreement will contain language that will ensure that activities to 
be financed under the proposed loan are not implemented in disputed territories)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNACS) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On social safeguards, the component related to transmission lines and sub-stations (400 
and 225 kV network) will require so
me land acquisition and thus trigger the Bank’s 
policy on involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12).  These lines and sub-stations will mainly be 
situated in sparsely populated rural areas, with the exception of 2 sub-stations located in 
urban areas.  None of the proposed sub-station sites are inhabited, consequently there is 
no resettlement expected.  Procedures for entitlements and compensation are described in 
the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for this project.  
 
On the environmental side, the transmission lines and sub-stations (400 and 225 kV 
network) component will entail potential impacts on the natural and human environment 
of the areas on and through which these infrastructures will be established. Some of the 
corridors proposed by ONE pass close to areas of ecological and general environmental 
significance.  Alternative layout avoiding these sensitive areas has been proposed and 
will be taken into consideration in the execution of the project.  
 
At concept stage, the triggering of the Safeguard Policies (OP 4.04 and OP 4.11) was 
still to be determined, however, during preparation and finalization of the EIA, it was 
made clear that both policies 4.04 and 4.11 would not be triggered in this operation.  
However, the EIA still mentions by mistake the triggering of these policies. This has been 
brought to the attention of the client.  
 
The other components of the project have not been found to have significant 
environmental nor social negative impacts. An environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA) following a framework approch has been commissioned by ONE.  
The assessment includes precise recommendations for limiting the impacts during 
execution of the works both for lines and sub-stations, as well as for limiting impacts 
(health) during operation of the lines.  The ESIA also includes environmental 
management plans and monitoring plans indicating the mitigating and monitoring 
measures, responsible parties and timing (project phase for the EMP and frequency for 
the monitoring plan).   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With  regard to social impacts, there will be some land acquisition for the sub-stations, 
the loss of agricultural revenue due to the placement of tower bases, the possible re-
location of structures underneath transmission lines (in case the legal height restrictions 
are not observed), and the use of land currently used for agricultural purposes during 
project construction works. The RPF addresses all of these issues, and will be followed 
by a Resettlement Action Plan to determine those eligible for compensation.   
 
The project’s environmental impacts have been found to be related essentially to the 
issue of the layout of the proposed lines and to some impacts during the construction and 
implementation phases as well as to the issues of construction and operation of sub-
stations.  The ESIA addresses these in great detail and proposes clear mitigation and/or 
compensation measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As mentioned above, some of the corridors proposed by ONE in the context of the 
transmission lines and sub-stations (400 and 225 kV network) component will entail 
potential impacts on the natural and human environment of the areas as they pass very 
close to areas of ecological and general environmental significance.  Alternative routing 
has been proposed and will be taken into consideration in the execution of the project.  
 
In the case of the sub-stations, proper measures for their construction and operations 
have been specified in the ESIA. Monitoring measures have also been specified in the 
ESIA EMP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During project preparation, the Bank reviewed the capacity of ONE regarding the 
implementation of the environmental and social mitigating and monitoring measures and 
found it satisfactory.  
 
On the environmental side, the ONE Environment and Renewable Directorate has a 
long experience in commissioning Environmental Impact Assessments, the last of which 
is the Solar-Thermal Power Plant of Ain Beni Mathar co-financed by a GEF grant 
implemented by the World Bank.  On social safeguards, ONE has experience and internal 
guidelines with regard to acquisition of land and compensation, and has followed these in 
the past including in the Ain Beni Mathar project, which required a RAP.  
 
On the environmental side, the ONE Environment and Renewable Directorate has a 
long experience in commissioning Environmental Impact Assessments, the last of which 
is the Solar-Thermal Power Plant of Ain Beni Mathar co-financed by a GEF grant 
implemented by the World Bank.  On social safeguards, ONE has experience and internal 
guidelines with regard to acquisition of land and compensation, and has followed these in 
the past including in the Ain Beni Mathar project, which required a RAP.   
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Moroccan Legal system includes an Eminent Domain Law that is very precise in the 
case of acquisition of land for Public Use. ONE is used to follow this regulation which 
provides fair conditions to owners and lawful users. In the case of this operation and 
consistent with the Moroccan Eminent Domain Law the key stakeholders include ONE, 
the local authorities (communes), local governments units, and local communities. Public 
consultation will be particularly carried out at the level of each area to be impacted by the 
project and will include information of the population, concerned governmental agencies 
as well as municipalities. Registers will be available in each of the concerned 
municipalities for collecting comments by the population.  
 
Once the RAP is prepared to determine those eligible for compensation, ONE will 
launch a process of dissemination of information and consultations with the affected 
communities through their local representatives to ensure that they are both informed and 
able to provide inputs to the compensation process.  ONE will communicate the 
information regarding the passage of the transmission lines to the community in question 
and inform the local authorities, and ensure that they are aware of the impacts and risks 
associated with the project as well as the compensation planned.  
 
During project preparation, ONE has conducted public information through disclosure 
of the ESIA on its website and through the Bank Infoshop and also through proper 
communication to the different municipalities affected by the project. In turn the 
municipalities are informing and consulting potentially affected people according to the 
local regulations and practices.  
 
After the detailed layout of the transmission lines is finalized, ONE will conduct 
consultation through making available registers for the concerned public to express their 
views and concerns.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/12/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/12/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Silvia Pariente-David 
03/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
03/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
03/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
03/27/2008 
Comments:  Mr. Jaafar Friaa is Acting on behalf of Mr. Chalal 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
 
Comments:   
