Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4327 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/21/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P098459 
Project Name: MA-OUM ER RBIA SANITATION 
Task Team Leader: Alexander E. Bakalian 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2010 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (90%);Irrigation and drainage (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The immediate and most direct objective of this project is to improve the access to sanitation and 
pollution reduction services for the dwellers of seven small towns in the Oum Er Rbia river 
basin. This will be achieved through the construction of new wastewater collection networks and 
treatment plants.  
 
The larger objective of the project is to pilot a number of innovative approaches to make the 
implementation of the larger National Sanitation Program more effective. Specifically , the 
project will help introduce and pilot a) appropriate (low cost) technologies for wastewater 
collection and treatment for these seven towns b) the reuse of treated wastewater in productive 
uses (agriculture or industry) and c) the reduction of greenhouse gases (methane) and odors from 
existing plants 
–
while redirecting these gases for household uses -  and the generationof carbon 
credits.  
 
Benefits derived from water sanitation and pollution control service typically include improved 
living standards (convenience and clean living environment), public health benefits (reducing 
Page  2
epidemic possibility and bad odor from open sewage, reducing possibility of polluting surface 
and ground waters, and increasing safety of agricultural products by reducing direct drainage of 
wastewater into agricultural production), improved public goods and environment (less pollution 
of water resources, and potential reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists in 4 main components aimed at i) upgrading and developing sanitation and 
pollution control systems in seven small towns, ii) piloting wastewater reuse options (residential 
wastewater only), iii) piloting odor management in existing wastewater lagoons through covering 
the anaerobic ponds and capturing the methane for carbon credits and potential use in households 
and iv) capacity building in ONEP and impact evaluation for replication. The details 
–
so far– for 
each component are as follows:  
 
•
Component 1. Wastewater collection and treatment:  This component will rehabilitate, 
and expand existing sanitation systems (collection networks and treatment plants) for seven 
towns serving around 200,000 new dwellers. More importantly the component will introduce and 
test the applicability of appropriate sanitation technologies (e.g. condominial systems and 
decentralized wastewater treatment). The Bank team is already planning to have a study tour for 
Moroccan officials to familiarize themselves with these non –conventional options already in 
place in Latin America. This component will also include the costs supervision of works.  
 
•
Component 2. Pilots on Wastewater reuse. This component will pilot the potential for 
reuse of treated wastewater in two or three locations. The component will finance the additional 
costs for treating and transporting the treated wastewater to the point of use. Since reuse of 
wastewater has been identified as a priority in the NSP, there is an urgency to start implementing 
projects and testing their feasibility – both technical and financial. The pilot nature of this 
component and the necessary involvement of other actors (agricultural agencies, farmers, 
industries), it may need to mobilize additional funding from theses agencies to make the program 
viable. This will be investigated further in the preparation phase.  
 
•
Component 3. Piloting Odor Control and Carbon capture in treatment plants: There are 
about 70 small treatment plants (mostly ponds) in Morocco – of which 40 are managed by 
ONEP. More than 40% of the plants in Morocco do not operate well, if at all. Many present odor 
problems. ONEP is considering the covering of the anaerobic ponds a measure to reduce odor 
and capture the methane for possibly productive uses. A pilot is considered for covering 3 ponds 
in order to generate carbon credits. The preparation phase will look into the feasibility of this 
approach and the minimum size project that would be necessary to tap into these carbon credits. 
In addition, the project will explore the possibility to provide cooking gas to beneficiaries who 
may be connected to the proposed system of methane capture. Biogas is proven to be a practical 
and low cost technology and has been used in many countries (e.g. China and India).  
 
•
Component 4. Capacity building, Communications strategy and Impact Evaluations. 
Capacity building elements for the all three components above are needed to strengthen ONEP’s 
confidence to implement similar projects in the future as part of its ambitious plan to bring 
service to more than 200 towns. Demand-driven approaches to wastewater management, as well 
as establishing partnerships with municipalities and agricultural agencies, local private business, 
Page  3
and other stakeholders will require extensive training. Technical assistance is also needed to 
impart these new concepts to local consulting firms that prepare most of the designs and studies. 
The component will also help with knowledge and information dissemination on the benefits of 
the project, the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), climate change impacts, and strengthen 
consultation between the ONEP and other partners.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is expected to provide wastewater services in the following towns: Youssoufia, 
Chemaia, Ouaouizghet, Afourer, El Ksiba, El Brouj, and Demnat 
–
covering four provinces in 
the Oum Er Rbia basin (e.g. Azilal, Benimellal, Safi, and Settat) and serving an estimated 200 
thousand new dwellers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
ONEP is a repeat and current Borrower, demonstrating high capacity for project preparation and 
implementation, as well as for fiduciary compliance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNSSD) 
Mr Abdel Mourhit Lahbabi (MNSSD) 
Mr Andrea Liverani (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
On “Environmental Assessment” the team understands that ONEP has commissioned formal 
environmental assessments for each one of the seven towns as part of the project design 
preparation; once all are available it may prove relatively easy to consolidate and complete in a 
timely fashion, into a compliant project Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). As an 
alternative, however, and considering the advances made by Morocco’s environmental protection 
legislation and EIA regulations, and recognizing ONEPs capacity and compliance track record, 
the team has proposed the Use of Country Systems (UCS) procedures to be applied for the 
Environmental Assessment of the project, as a first application of UCS in Morocco’s water 
sector with a long-term development view. Relevant contacts have been made within the Bank to 
initiate the assessment and equivalency process. Once this work is done, it will be made clear 
whether the UCS will be relevant for this project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
During the preparation of the Environment Assessment, the applicability of this safeguard 
will be assessed   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The applicability of this safeguard will be assessed during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As for the environmental assessment, the team is working for application of the country 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
systems for involuntary resettlement. It is expected that (farm) land will be acquired to build the 
wastewater treatment plants.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November 2009   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander E. Bakalian 
04/20/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
04/21/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
