Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4097 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/27/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P107598 
Project Name: Support Program for the Development of Market-led Irrigation APL 
Task Team Leader: Patrick Verissimo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (50%);Crops (30%);Agro-industry (20%) 
Theme: Rural markets (33%);Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Rural policies and 
institutions (17%);Trade facilitation and market access (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to increase the irrigated area in the targeted Provinces and 
to enhance agricultural productivity on smallholder farms for selected food and high-value crops. 
It is expected that by further developing irrigation, the project will also contribute to increased 
farm production and higher household income. The proposed operation targets primarily 
smallholder producer organizations in Sofala and Manica provinces as well as around the city of 
Maputo. After project closing, it is expected that through the development of sustainable 
irrigation, targeted beneficiaries (incl. women) will have integrated into selected value chains by 
supplying agricultural commodities in larger quantities and of better quality, resulting in higher 
household income and improved food security. Thus, if the project is successful, agricultural 
production would have increased through enhanced agricultural and water productivity, and 
beneficiaries’ income would have risen through better market access.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Institutional Support and Capacity Development (US$ 10-12M), will, at the 
Central level, improve institutional capacity to design and implement policies conducive of 
market-led irrigation development, and enhance the regulatory framework around water for 
Page  2
agriculture. At the Provincial and District level, the focus will be on developing the capacity of 
WUA and producer associations, and on strengthening technical skills to build a critical mass of 
skilled irrigation technicians and extensionists in the field. Finally, this component will provide 
technical and financial assistance to MINAG with the implementation of its fruit fly surveillance 
action plan.  
 
Component 2: Support to Production and Value Chain Development (US$ 15-18M), will 
provide matching grants to promote/scale up new technologies in production (improved varieties, 
on-farm water management, mechanization, post-harvest handling) and well as to overcome 
bottlenecks in storage, processing and marketing. The value chains this component would 
primarily focus on are rice (around Beira); horticulture (bananas, mangoes, and high-value 
vegetables in Manica, Sofala and around Maputo); and sugar (Sofala). To integrate the value 
chain of fruits and sugar, the project will promote outgrowers schemes or similar arrangements 
that would grant smallholders at least partial support to production.  
 
Component 3: Infrastructure development and Irrigation Investment (US$ 22-40M). 
Investments financed under component 3 would include (i) mostly rehabilitation (and to a lesser 
extent new construction) of small dams (less than 8m high by Mozambican standards) and 
irrigation schemes, (ii) construction of community-managed micro dams for rainwater harvesting 
(with a focus on women), and (iii) rehabilitation of rural/feeder roads and supply of electricity to 
the pump stations. It is expected that if JICA confirms its interest in the project, the bulk of its 
financial contribution (USD25 million) will likely be allocated to this component.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$ 3-5M). This generic component (project coordination, 
Participatory M&E, fiduciary aspects, communication and public consultation and participation) 
will also include both a socioeconomic assessment of the past experiences and an impact 
evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in three regions in Mozambique: Maputo (the greenbelt zone), 
Sofala and Manica provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be under the direct responsibility of MINAG (DNSA). However, since this 
Ministry has not implemented an IDA co-financed investment project in over a decade, the 
project will require a significant amount of implementation support by the WB team throughout 
the preparation phase and during the first year of implementation.  
 
The Bank team has agreed with MINAG to a project structure that includes externally recruited 
staff, including a Socio-Environmental Specialist to manage the social and environmental aspects 
of the project. The specialist will work as a core member of the PIU integrated in MINAG. These 
arrangements will be evaluated at the end of the project preparation phase to assess its 
applicability and relevance to the implementation phase.  
 
The project will support the provision of training to all national, provincial and district level 
staff tasked with oversight and application of the project’s safeguard tools. Emphasis will be on 
Page  3
training MINAG staff (in particular the Socio-Environmental Specialist) in the PIU assigned 
with oversight of the pr
oject’ssocial and environmental safeguard policies and tools during 
project preparation and the first year of project implementation as well as throughout the project 
cycle. Such training will be extended, in a transparent and participatory manner, to select 
members of local beneficiary communities foreseen to hold primary responsibility for ensuring 
that implementation of project activities are in compliance with Bank safeguard policies.  
 
The project will rely on the PPF and an earmarked budget in Component 4 to finance the 
training. Training sessions will be provided during various phases of the project: (i) project 
preparation; (ii) the early stages of project implementation; and (ii) on demand continously 
throughout the life of the project. This is meant to ensure that new staff and beneficiaries 
engaged in project implementation are well-versed and equipped to apply and oversee the 
project’s safeguard policies and tools.  The WB safeguards specialists will work closely with all 
counterparts to provide such training when needed throughout the project cycle.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project investments are likely to generate limited site-specific impacts amenable to standard 
mitigation measures.  However, since the exact nature and location of each intervention cannot 
be determined at this stage, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts caused by project 
interventions. The ESMF will present standard methods and procedures, along with the 
institutional arrangements for screening, reviewing, implementing and monitoring and evaluation 
of all sub-project Environment Management Plans. The ESMF will ensure that any Category A 
sub-projects are excluded from project financing.  
 
The Borrower will also prepare a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) 
to address the cumulative and regional aspects of the project’s investments. The Borrower will 
use the major findings and recommendations of the SESA during the project preparation process. 
The ESMF and SESA will be prepared prior to appraisal in Portuguese and English and 
publicly disclosed in Mozambique and at the InfoShop at least 120 days prior to the Board date.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Project investments are unlikely to impact critical and non-critical natural habitats as most of 
the investments involve rehabilitation rather than new construction and are located in rural areas 
with active smallholder agricultural production not new pristine, protected or critical natural 
habitats. The initial screening carried out in early February 2009 afforded the Bank an 
opportunity to check to ensure that indeed no critical natural habitats would be impacted by the 
proposed investments. This initial screening confirmed that, at this time, no project investments 
are likely to lead to the significant loss or degradation of any natural habitats.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
All project investments will be screened in the context of the environmental and social 
screening process outlined in the ESMF to further ensure that this policy is not triggered during 
the life of the project. The ESMF will also specify measures to be adopted in the unlikely event 
that project interventions affect non-critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will exclude interventions affecting forest areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Most project activities aim to increase agricultural production and may include and/or induce 
the use of pesticides. The Borrower will prepare a Pest Management Plan (PMP) to manage and 
mitigate any adverse environmental or social impacts caused by the purchase, use or disposal of 
pesticides.  
 
The PMP will be prepared prior to appraisal in Portuguese and English and publicly 
disclosed in Mozambique and at the InfoShop at least 120 days prior to the Board date.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project may include interventions affecting Physical Cultural Resources. As such, the 
Borrower will address the impacts on physical cultural resources as an integral part of the ESMF 
process. The Borrower will identify physical cultural resources likely to be affected by the 
project, assess the project’s potentialsocioeconomic and environmental impacts on these 
resources and identify viable mitigation measures to reduce the impact on these resources as part 
of the ESMF process.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Proposed project investments will not impact any Indigenous Peoples (individual and/or 
groups of individuals).  A preliminary field assessment by the Bank and government found no 
Indigenous Peoples and/or socially, ethnically and culturally marginalized groups living in the 
areas foreseen as potential project intervention areas; therefore the proposed investment 
operations will not generate any social, economic or cultural impacts on Indigenous Peoples. As 
such, OP4.10 is not triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some project activities (e.g., irrigated perimeters, rural/feeder roads, building of small 
irrigation infrastructures, such as small dams (max. 8m high) and canals, may involve land 
acquisition or lost of economic assets that could lead to temporary or permanent resettlement of 
project affected persons. However, since the exact nature and location of all project interventions 
cannot be determined at this stage, the Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) to identify the procedures required to avoid any involuntary resettlement and/or loss of 
assets.  The RPF is a statement of the policy, principles, institutional arrangements and 
procedures that will guide and govern the project as subprojects are selected for inclusion, and 
that the Borrower will follow in each subproject involving resettlement. The RPF will present the 
procedures to be followed when an investment is identified as having impacts on land rights, 
assets or access to assets and that will entail voluntary ceding of land and assets by affected 
persons or entities in return for replacements or other forms of restoration. The RPF sets out the 
elements that will be common to all the subprojects. The policy covers direct economic and 
social impacts that are caused by the taking of land.  
 
Like the ESMF, the RPF will be prepared in consultation with beneficiary local 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
communities, and will be disclosed in Portuguese and English in Mozambique and at the 
InfoShop before appraisal and at least 120 days prior to the Board date.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Once the outcome of the Small Dams Strategy is completed and the project has selected the 
small dams to be financed, the Borrower will adopt generic dam safety measures for all small 
dams to be constructed. The project will not finance any dams greater than 8 m.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project will support rehabilitation of irrigation schemes with interference in international 
watersheds. As such, the Borrower will prepare and issue a Riparian’s Notification (RN) to all 
co-riparian countries prior to appraisal and atleast 120 days before the Board date.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/13/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard tools developed for this project (ESMF, PMP, RPF and SESA) will be 
finalized prior to appraisal and disclosed in Mozambique and at the InfoShop at least 120 
days prior to the Board date. The RN will be issued in accordance with OP 7.50 prior to 
appraisal and at least 120 days prior to the Board date.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Patrick Verissimo 
05/26/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/26/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
05/26/2009 
Comments:  The SMU has accepted the transfer of safeguards responsibilities. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
