Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/20/2009 
Report No.:  AC4635
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P111592 
Project Name:  Higher Education Science and Technology 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaoyan Liang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To support the Mozambique government#s policy goals of economic development and 
poverty alleviation by (a) improving the quantity and quality of graduates at the 
undergraduate and graduate levels, and (b) improving the national research capacity and 
increasing research outputs in strategic sectors   
 
3. Project Description 
The project supports three main components: (a): Strengthening system governance, 
quality, and management; (b) improving teaching, learning, and research through the 
provision of competitive funds; and (c) targeting scholarships for equity and 
competitiveness.  
 
Component A will support the development and capacity building of system oversight 
and quality assurance institutions, the implementation of key quality assurance policies, 
and piloting and financing reform.  
 
Component B will provide institutional and individual grants to public institutions or 
loans to private institutions to improve the quality of teaching, learning, and applied 
research.  
Page  2
Component C will finance undergraduate scholarships for poor but academically 
qualified students, particularly from provincial areas, and also support institutional staff 
development with scholarships for postgraduate study in national priority disciplines   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance the construction of a distance learning resource center in Manica 
under Component A. The resource center will be built on a piece of vacant public land in 
the Manica Province.  
 
It was agreed that OP4.12 will be marked as "Not Triggered" in this ISDS.  However, a 
social safeguard  mission will be visiting Mozambique to ground-truth the issues of land 
tenure for the proposed Resource Center in Manica. Should the mission's findings show 
the contrary and the land is being currently used by local farmers, a decision will be made 
to (i) trigger OP4.12; (ii) prepare an abbreviated RAP before Negotiations, and (iii) 
corrective measures taken to allow farmers to peacefully harvest their crops before any 
physical works could begin.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will finance the construction of a distance learning resource center in Manica 
on a piece of vacant public land. The construction will involve minor site specific 
negative impacts (due to the construction of learning resource center) that could be easily 
mitigated.  
 
Page  3
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was carried out by the 
Borrower for the construction area and the draft ESIA was publicly disclosed locally in 
Maputo on June 30, 2009 and soon will be disclosed in the InfoShop.  
 
The government is preparing legal documents to confirm that the land was public and 
vacant.  In the meantime, the Bank's social specialist may pay a visit to the site and 
provide independent verification on whether the OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement should 
be triggered and hence an abbreviated version of resettlement plan need to be developed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The government has hired a local consulting firm to conduct environmental assessment 
and agreed to adopt tangible mitigation measures.  The Project Coordination Unit has had 
many years of experience with the World Bank projects and is also familiar with World 
Bank safeguards policies implementation and supervision.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The draft ESIA was disclosed in Mozambique locally on June 30, 2009.  The workshop 
was attended by 30 representatives from distance learning institutions.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaoyan Liang 
08/14/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
08/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
08/13/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis Benveniste 
08/20/2009 
Comments:   
