Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3380 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P107350 
Project Name: Mozambique Water Resources Development Project I 
Task Team Leader: Leonard John Abrams 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Flood protection 
(20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Other urban development (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to address critical water resource development needs in 
Mozambique including providing the next least-cost augmentati
on
of
Maputo’s water source and 
the construction of priority medium scale water storage structures.  The project will also support 
institution building to strengthen the long-term planning and international waters functions of the 
central government and specific river basin institutions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project design has been prepared after extensive discussions with the GoM before 
and during the Identification Mission (October 29 – November 02, 2007) and is based on both 
the outcomes of the Bank’s Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy (CWRAS) and the 
implementation of the National Water Policy and Water Resources Management Strategy.  The 
priority areas for financing through this operation are proposed as the following:  
 
Page  2
a. 
Enhancing the capacity of institutional mechanisms to fulfill the mandated 
responsibilities under the new legislative provisions, with a focus on strategic planning and 
international cooperation;  
 
b.
Developing storage in strategic locations to support long-term supply needs for urban 
growth and industrial development, agricultural production, and rural development; and,  
 
c. 
Supporting long-term strategic planning and management of the Regional Water 
Authorities with specific emphasis on the Zambezi basin (ARA-Zambeze).  
 
COMPONENT 1: INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT  
 
The Bank’s proposed contribution to this component would be US$4 million, in support of the 
following activities:  
 
a. 
Water Resources Planning Function: In order to ensure the equitable and sustainable 
development of Mozambique’s water resources, the DNA requires support inthe further 
development and consolidation of an integrated planning approach.  To facilitate this planning 
process, information management systems are needed, linked to a monitoring framework that 
tracks not only the resource base but economic measures to ensure efficient utilization of water 
resources and quantitative determination of the economic impacts of water resources 
development.  
 
IDA will finance comprehensive basin studies, the development of operational systems to 
support the allocation of water for different purposes within the basin, along with decision 
support systems based on specific indicators, monitoring systems and information management 
systems.  Financing would also be provided for a training program of key DNA staff on the 
operation and maintenance of these systems.  Possible priority basins include the Meluli and 
Monapo basins in Nampula Province and the Montepuez and Lurio basin in Cabo Delgado.  
 
Key safeguard issues:  Basins to be studied will be identified and terms-of-reference (TORs) 
prepared during preparations.  Bank team to ensure that TORs address safeguard concerns 
including, but not limited to: hydrology, environmental flows, aquatic eco-systems (wetlands 
etc), groundwater, population densities, current water use, and potential international waters 
(IW) issues.  
 
b. 
International Waterways: This component would continue to consolidate strengths within 
the International Rivers Office (GRI), building on the GoMs efforts to strengthen capacity in 
relation to international waterways, and the Bank’s previous support in this area. Specific 
activities would be directed toward increasing residual institutional capacity to ensure the GoM 
has the continuity and capacity to identify and respond to issues on international waterways.  
 
IDA will finance activities like the development of negotiation and interactive skills, the 
development of analytical tools to determine the strategic needs and interests of Mozambique in 
the various international river basins and to represent these in interactions with riparian states.  
Specific assessments of existing and proposed treaties would be undertaken to address and 
incorporate issues relating to drought, benefit sharing and sustainability through agreement on 
Page  3
environmental flows.  The ability to respond to notifications of development intentions received 
from riparian states in order to safeguard the present and future interests of Mozambique.  
 
Key safeguard issues:  Mozambique is the downstream riparian on 9 international river Basins.  
Development of such skills and analytical ability is vital.  
 
c. 
River Basin Support:  The proposed Bank contribution to this activity would be US$2.5 
million and would support ARA-Zambeze in the development of strategic instruments and 
studies to ensure the development of water resources in the Zambezi basin is undertaken in a 
sustainable and equitable manner. The Zambezi basin is the focus of a number of large, 
strategically important investments in productive sectors including energy, agriculture, extractive 
industries, fisheries and environment-based tourism. It is vital that a strong water management 
function be established in the basin which is able to ensure compliance with good water 
management practice in the face of powerful competing sectoral interests. Minimizing 
competition and optimizing the productive use of water resources will require an institution with 
strong strategic planning and coordination capacity.  
 
Potential areas of IDA support include the development of a strategic basin plan, determination 
of hydrometric monitoring requirements, the determination and monitoring of environmental 
flow requirements in the basin and the identification of further investment opportunities. Other 
ARAs could be invited to participate in and benefit from courses and training activities 
developed for ARA-Zambeze.  
 
Key safeguard issues: Bank recommends that a strategic environmental assessment (SEA) be 
prepared for the Zambezi Basin as part of the strategic basin planning.  TORs would be prepared 
prior to appraisal.  
 
COMPONENT 2: WATER RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT  
 
The total Bank contribution for this component is estimated to be US$15 million. This would 
support the following:  
 
a. 
Maputo Augmentation - Completion of Corumana Dam ($6m). Securing bulk water 
sources to underpin the growth of the greater Maputo metropolitan area is a key national 
strategic requirement. IDA resources will be utilized to create conditions conducive to financing 
the completion of the Corumana Dam through the installation of the Spillway Gates, and the 
design and construction of the bulk water pipeline and treatment plant required to deliver water 
to Maputo. A feasibility study of the installation of the gates was prepared, with World Bank 
support, under the National Water Development Project (P039015). That project also supported 
safety-related rehabilitation works at Corumana Dam. GoM appointed a Dam Safety Panel 
(DSP) of Experts for advising on such measures. The latest DSP report will be consulted and its 
conclusions/ recommendations taken into account in project preparation.  
 
IDA would finance the supervising engineers, the Dam Safety Panel, and critical environmental 
and social mitigation measure identified during preparation.  This includes a livelihoods 
development program in support of fishing, farming and other appropriate activities around the 
Page  4
dam would be included to address resettlement and compensation issues in compliance with 
OP4.12. Financing for the completion of Corumana Dam civil and mechanical works would not 
be included under IDA financing. Cofinancing for those works would need to be identified and 
secured during project preparation. World Bank safeguards will apply and if triggered would be 
addressed as needed.  
 
The design and financing a bulk water pipeline, treatment works and other ancillary works 
required to deliver water to Maputo would also be investigated during project preparation. The 
DNA has agreed to work closely with the Bank to identify financing for the bulk supply system 
and develop a financing plan for inclusion in this project.  
 
Key safeguard issues:  Prior to appraisal Mozambique will prepare detailed environmental 
impact assessment (EIA), resettlement action plan (RAP), and dam safety study based on the 
original work done at the time of project design.  As the proposed reservoir, at high water, will 
flood a small area along the border of Krueger National Park in South Africa, it is critical that the 
EIA examine both the potential benefits and harms.   Mozambique will also complete the 
notification process with upstream riparians in accordance with OP 7.50.  
 
b. 
Construction of priority storage structures ($6m). Three strategic medium sized dams 
have been identified by the GoM and are in advanced stages of design and preparation.  These 
facilities include: i) Metuchira; ii) Gorongosa; and, iii) the Resanno Garcia weir. Preparation will 
require environmental and social impact assessments, together with assessment of dam safety 
requirements. IDA will finance the works for these structures, subject to confirmation that these 
are the best options to address the needs and that all related social, environmental and 
international waters requirements are attended to during preparation and appraisal. Related water 
supply works would need to be financed separately.  
 
Key safeguard issues:  During preparation EIAs, RAPs, and Dam Safety Studies will be 
prepared for each of the identified structures.  
 
c. 
Long-term Program Support to Water Resources Development ($3m). Given the time and 
resources required for the preparation of large-scale water resources development projects the 
project will include resources for facilitating the preparation of specific investments in key 
infrastructure identified through the planning process. This could include supporting the pre-
feasibility / feasibility / safeguard / design studies for larger infrastructure, such as the Pavua 
Dam in the Pungwe basin and the Moamba Major Dam in Southern Mozambique.  
 
Key safeguard issues:    EIAs, RAPs, and Dam Safety Studies would be included in the 
preparation of all identified infrastructure - the purpose of this subcomponent is to ensure that 
these activities are adequately resourced.  
 
COMPONENT 3:  
 
Project Management and Implementation Support ($1m):   The project will be managed by the 
DNA which has successfully managed the National Water Development Projects I & II through 
Page  5
an internal Project Management Unit.  Implementation will be through the DNA working with 
the relevant ARAs in the different basins in the country mainly ARA Zambeze and ARA Centro.  
 
Key safeguard issues: The project will ensure that capacity to review and oversee project 
implementation, including safeguard mitigation, is developed and maintained throughout.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
In recent years Mozambique has been affected by both drought and severe flooding.  The major 
infrastructure works under component 2 have been identified and feasibility studies have been 
prepared.  The work planned on the Corumana Dam is the completion of the dam through the 
installation of spillway gates which were in the original design.  Construction was not originally 
completed due to the Mozambican civil war.  Completion of the dam will be in terms of existing 
agreements with neighboring countries, in this case South Africa.  A feasibility study of the 
installation of the gates was prepared, with World Bank support, under the National Water 
Development Project (P039015). That project also supported safety-related rehabilitation works 
at Corumana Dam. GoM appointed a Dam Safety Panel (DSP) of Experts for advising on such 
measures. The latest DSP report will be consulted and its conclusions/ recommendations taken 
into account in project preparation.  
 
Minimum safeguard work has been completed for the proposed medium structures (Component 
2.B.); therefore, detailed EIA, RAP, and Dam Safety studies will need to be prepared prior to 
appraisal and final agreement for IDA financing.  
 
Areas of concern raised by the client during identification that will need to be addressed in the 
safeguards studies include the potential for impact on protected areas within Mozambique and on 
the South African (Krueger National Park) border, with regards to the Corumana Dam 
completion.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During identification, the Bank team met with the Environmental Management Department in 
the Ministry for Coordination of Environmental Affairs (MICOA) and reviewed the 
Mozambique Environmental Law and discussed its applicability to the proposed project.  Based 
on the information available,
 Mozambique has legislation that is in keeping with the Bank’s 
safeguard policies. The pre-appraisal missionwill look more closely into the institutional capacity 
of the DNA to apply the safeguard policies and MICOA to review and enforce existing 
legislation.  The pre-appraisal aide-memoire will also contain a detailed action plan for DNA to 
ensure full compliance with Bank safeguard policies, including dam safety, during preparation, 
prior to appraisal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr John Bryant Collier (AFTWR) 
Mr Satoru Ueda (MNSSD) 
 
Page  6
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a category A project.  During preparation detailed EIAs are required for components 
2.A and 2.B in order for IDA to appraise the options available and feasibility of moving forward 
with the proposed infrastructure.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Some critical protected areas and natural habitats are all ready identified as being close to 
and potentially affected by proposed structures in components 2.A. and 2.B.  EIAs must look at 
these and other potential areas of impact.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
At identification, the potential that this project might trigger the forests policy was discussed.  
It will be looked at more closely during preparation, particularly through the EIAs prepared for 
components 2.A and 2.B.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
At this time, the Pest Management Policy is not expected to be triggered; however, the team 
has marked it “TBD” because of the potential for scaling up this project, in which case the 
potential for financing malaria and bilharzias control under components 2.a & b is a possibility.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Mozambique is home to many important pre-historical archeological sites.  The EIA and 
social impact studies should address the possibility of such sites lying in areas affected by the 
project in order to determine if this policy is triggered.  As a first step, the national authority 
responsible will be consulted during the February 2008 pre-appraisal mission.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
RAP will be prepared for components 2.A and 2.B.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Dam Safety Studies will be prepared for components 2.A and 2.B.  A dam safety panel will 
be appointed by the client for review of all issues related to component 2.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Mozambique is the downstream riparian on 9 international rivers.  Components 2.A and 2.B 
clearly trigger this policy.  Riparian notification will be prepared.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  7
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Key safeguard issues:  Prior to appraisal, Mozambique will prepare detailed environmental 
impact assessment (EIA), resettlement action plan (RAP), and dam safety study based on the 
original work done at the time of project design. These safeguard studies will be disclosed in 
the country as well as in the bank's Infoshop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Leonard John Abrams 
02/04/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/04/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
02/04/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
