Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4071 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P115217 
Project Name: Maputo Municipal Development Program II (ProMaputo II) 
Task Team Leader: Uri Raich 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access to 
urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Increase the coverage and quality of Maputo Municipality’s services to its citizens by continuing 
to strengthen its institutional and financial capacities. Impact indicators (to be refined) will be as 
follows:  
 
•
%
improvement in coverage and quality services in specific sectors. There will be a number of 
different impact indicators (Report Card, Surveys, Department Reports)  
 
•
%
increase in own revenues over baseline (Financial Statements, Budget)   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument is a second phase of an Adaptable Program Loan. The first 
phase (3 years) focused on institutional restructuring and fundamental reforms in municipal 
finance; low cost, quick win infrastructure and service delivery improvements (mostly roads and 
solid waste); and establishment of a framework and testing systems for piloting contracting out 
and public private partnerships (with PPIAF support).  
 
The second phase (5 years) will focus on consolidation of the institutional and financial reforms 
by the municipal mayor, council, and assembly who assume office in early 2009; investment in 
Page  2
infrastructure and service delivery improvements on a larger scale; and support to decentralized 
governance, planning, land management, and service delivery at the level of municipal districts 
and neighborhoods, with a focus on poor peri-urban communities. Achievements of Phase I 
triggers will be a precondition to the effectiveness of this second phase.  
 
Component A: Institutional & Financial Strengthening/Consolidation  
 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening  
 
a. Institutional reform and strengthening  
 
b.
Improved municipal governance  
 
c. Intergovernmental/Metropolitan planning and service delivery arrangements. (Preparation of 
regional plans and service compacts linking the Maputo municipality with deconcentrated state 
structures and neighboring municipalities).  
 
Sub-component A.2: Financial Strengthening  
 
a. Revenues (property tax --cadastre, reassessment of property values, implementation of new 
fiscal law)  
 
b.
Expenditures (consolidation of IFMIS, moving from input to output-based budgeting, 
adopting MTEF frameworks)  
 
Component B. Improvements in Service Delivery in Priority Sectors  
 
This component will finance physical investments (to be determined, but potentially roads, 
buildings, and sanitation related works) selected in order to meet priority needs and achieve the 
municipality’s service delivery improvement targets. The investments will be selected in a 
participatory way (report cards, surveys, ‘manifesto electoral’, etc.)  
 
a. Financing of design, feasibility studies and investments of strategically selected investments, 
including: capital-intensive infrastructure, sectors requiring high levels of recurrent operational 
expenses, and investments in those sectors that are of a metropolitan scope.  
 
b.
Focus on using IDA to leverage additional resources and on expanding CMM use of PPPs as 
a
viable and sustainable way to provide urban infrastructure and services (to be determined, but 
potentially roads, buildings, and sanitation related works).  
 
Component C. Support to Decentralized Governance, Planning and Service Delivery  
 
The component will finance a number of activities of small scale, mostly targeted at the 
development of the City’s districts and peri-urban neighborhoods. Because of the diversity of the 
City’s districts (central districts, peripheral districts and Inhaca and Catembe districts), a menu of 
district-specific interventions will be designed, including activities such as:  
 
Sub-Component C.1: Planning and Management of the Urban Space  
 
This subcomponent will promote the use of GIS and the development of spatial development 
and sector master-plans for effective urban planning.  
 
Sub-Component C.2: Improved sub-municipal planning, administration and service delivery  
 
a. Participatory planning and budgeting for municipal districts  
 
b.
Decentralization of basic administrative and service delivery functions to municipal districts  
 
c. Increased accountability of local officials and service providers to neighborhood residents 
and businesses  
Page  3
Sub-Component C.3: Neighborhood improvements  
 
Rehabilitation of existing high density, low income neighborhoods. This will require small civil 
works in areas such as roads, public lightning, and probably sanitation.  
 
Sub-Component C.4: Land registration and land use regulation  
 
a. Ex ante land use planning: Reserve areas for future development, rights of way, etc.  
 
b.
Make service land available for residential and productive uses  
 
c. Improve land tenure and security  
 
d.
Improve the situation in the peri-urban areas and increase synergies between rural-and urban 
areas.  
 
Component D: Promotion of local economic development  
 
a. This will look into a number of areas of economic development in which the municipality 
can intervene, including:  
 
i. Support of a number of LED activities and improve the investment climate at the local level 
(e.g. reduce red tape, adjust regulations)  
 
ii. Strategic municipal interventions to unlock the potential of the private sector for local 
investments (improve security, roads, and public lightning at a small scale)  
 
iii. Make intra-municipal organizational reforms to create a more conducive environment for 
business development (e.g. reduce time to get a business license, to obtain a DUAT, etc).  
 
b.
Support of urban agriculture. This may include the use of pesticides and fertilizers.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Implementation of the project is through the City Council of Maputo and its municipal districts. 
Activities will be implemented within the boundaries of the City of Maputo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be managed within the Municipal Council of Maputo (CMM). CMM has 
managed funds from IDA during the Municipal Development Program (MDP) and the first phase 
of ProMaputo and as such if familiar with World Bank safeguards policies.  
 
The Borrower’s capacity to apply the Bank safeguard policy tools to project activities is 
adequate.  During phase I of ProMaputo, the Borrower demonstrated a solid understanding of the 
purpose of ensuring that all project investments remain in compliance with Bank safeguard 
policies as well as national legislation. The Borrower also showed strong commitment to 
applying the project’s safeguard tools throughout project implementation.  
 
Going forward, the original safeguard tools developed for ProMaputo I will be evaluated to see 
how best they might be refined to reflect the new set of activities to be financed under 
ProMaputo II. Investments in infrastructure and service delivery improvements are expected, but 
none of them will be large-scale investments like buildings or highways. Instead, it is expected 
that small to medium scale investments will be scattered throughout the city. The program may 
finance urban agriculture related-activities. Such activities are not expected to be related to any 
type of pest management that can create any harm. However, if that is the case, the ESMF will 
cover the use of pesticides and/or the program will ensure that a government pest management 
Page  4
strategy is in place and operational. However, at this point, no significant adverse environmental 
or social impacts have been identified or are expected of the Program and its various sub-
components.  
 
In addition, it will be important to ensure that sufficient training opportunities in Bank 
safeguard policies and the project’s safeguard toolsare provided forkey staff in the Municipality 
and associated implementing entities so as to ensure that all stakeholders who are responsible for 
application of the program’s safeguard tools are well equipped to implement and supervise 
compliance of the various investments with Bank policies. Such training will be developed and 
financed as part of the program. Training opportunities will be delivered on a quarterly basis to 
new staff and those staff who require a refresher course on the project’s safeguard policies, 
guidelines and tools.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
At this point, no significant adverse environmental or social impacts have been identified or 
are expected of the Program and its various sub-components. The Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) developed for Promaputo I will be reviewed and used as the 
basis upon which to identify and address any possible impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The program may finance urban agriculture related-activities. Such activities are not 
expected to be related to any type of pest management that can create any harm. However, if that 
is the case, the ESMF will cover the use of pesticides and/or the program will ensure that a 
government pest management strategy is in place and operational   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
At this point, no significant displacement/resettlement impacts have been identified or are 
expected of the Program and its various sub-components. The Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) developed for Promaputo I will be reviewed and used as the basis upon which to identify 
and address any possible impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/06/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This program will finance a number of investments in infrastructure â
 ”as well aslocal 
economic development activities that may include urban agriculture initiativesâ
 ”
in
order to 
improve service delivery coverage and quality.  
 
The investments will be financed by IDA as well as CMM from its own revenues and other 
development partners’ contributions. The exact investments and the partner contributions 
will be determined in 2009 in order to ensure that the investments are selected by the 
incoming mayor and the new administration. Investments are likely to take place at 
metropolitan level as well as highly deconcentrated municipal district level. The ESMF and 
RPF developed for ProMaputo I will be utilized as the basis upon which to elaborate the 
appropriate safeguard tools for ProMaputo II .  The PAD-stage ISDS will include specific 
details on the safeguard tools to be developed for ProMaputo II.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Uri Raich 
01/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
01/09/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
