Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/22/2008 
Report No.:  AC3523
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P099930 
Project Name:  Health Service Delivery Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jean J. De St Antoine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
27.80
27.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The ultimate objective of Mozambique’s health strategy, supported by this Program, is to 
improve health status by improving health service delivery so as to increase the country’s 
chances of reaching the health MDGs, i.e. (i) reduce the child mortality rate by two-thirds 
by 2015; (ii) reduce the maternal mortality ratio by three-quarters, by 2015; and (iii) halt 
by 2015 and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.   
 
3. Project Description 
The program would have a total cost of US$65.9 million. The program would have four 
components: (i) improving service delivery in the three Northern provinces (US$35.4 
million); (ii) boosting of malaria control (US$13.5million); (iii) updating of health sector 
investment plan (US$0.5 million); and (iv) institutional capacity building and operating 
costs(US$16.5million).  
 
Component 1 - Improvement in service delivery (US$35.4 million). There would be two 
main areas of intervention: (i) the improvement of skills and knowledge of district health 
staff in management and planning, including organization and supervision of outreach 
and community-oriented activities; and (ii) the improvement of the quality service 
Page  2
provision, particularly in the areas of maternal and child health, with the boosting of 
integrated management of child illnesses (IMCI) and safe motherhood skills. Maternal 
health would be improved through the early detection and management of pregnancy 
complications. Drugs would be provided by CMAM (Central Agency for Drugs and 
Medical Supplies that has a reliable drug procurement, warehousing, and distribution 
system  
 
Health facilities would be rehabilitated as needed. The communication system for 
improved referral of patients and for surveillance would be strengthened by acquiring 
radios, batteries and solar panels. Service would also be improved by providing better 
lighting conditions. Solar panels would be installed to ensure energy at night at least in 
delivery rooms and in emergency outpatient rooms. Water wells would be drilled, and 
pumping capacity developed for the existing reservoirs to provide water in delivery 
rooms, children’s wards and outpatient clinics, plus one water point for the general use of 
other patients. Participating districts would be provided with ambulances. Maintenance 
costs for the new vehicles would be included in the budget. Key bottlenecks in the supply 
of maternity services would be removed, principally by increasing the number of nurses, 
to ensure that the expected increase in demand for institutional deliveries can be satisfied. 
Districts would receive technical support to improve planning and supervision.  
 
The Program would help develop a network of outreach teams by broadening the 
staffing of existing outreach teams that are now largely focused on immunization. New 
outreach teams would provide a continuum of services from child health to maternal 
health, malaria control (prevention and treatment), environmental health, HIV/AIDS, and 
TB, as presented in detail in Annex 17. Outreach teams would also be responsible to 
supervise community health workers. To ensure the proper functioning of outreach 
teams, provinces would provide refresher training to existing nurses, and train additional 
ones. Teams would be provided with adequate vehicles, fuel, per diem, drugs, and solar 
kits. Additional staff would be recruited and trained to ensure that health centers remain 
staffed when the outreach team is on the road.  
 
Teams of community health workers (CHWs)  would be developed in each village. 
They would be trained to undertake growth monitoring, provide oral rehydration therapy, 
immunization, female education including the use of bed nets, and family planning, 
promote breast feeding, nutrition, good hygiene such as washing hands, avoiding risky 
sexual behavior and increase the capacity of families to recognize the danger signs of 
some common diseases so to search for help sooner. The complete list of services is 
presented in Annex 17. Outreach teams would provide technical support to CHWs when 
visiting their area.  
 
Traditional Birth Attendants (TBAs) would receive clean delivery kits. Traditional 
Healers (THs) would be given clean blades and some drugs for fever and Agentes 
Polivaentes Elementares (APEs) would receive drugs form the MOH’s Kit C, including 
oral rehydration salts and artesunate suppositories that can be used by community 
workers for the pre-referral treatment of severe malaria. All CHWs would receive 
information, education, and communication (IEC) materials. Bicycles for APEs and THs 
Page  3
would be provided and their ownership transferred to these community workers after one 
year of activity. All CHWs would have free access to bed nets. CHWs would report on 
technical matters to the headquarters of the district and to the outreach team, and to 
community health leaders on the quality of their interaction with the community.  
 
Institutional deliveries. An analysis of constraints to increase institutional deliveries 
shows bottlenecks both on the supply and the demand side. On the supply side, the 
bottlenecks are: (i) limited human resources; (ii) significant variations in productivity; 
(iii) limited capacity in hospitals; (iv) varying availability of drugs, blood supply and 
equipment; and (v) poor quality of care. On the demand side, the key limiting factors are:  
(i) long distances to reach a health facility and lack of transportation; (ii) cultural barriers 
such as the need for women to get approval of the husband to give birth in a health 
facility; (iii) long waiting times; and (iv) the perception that the quality of care in health 
facilities is poor.  
 
Assuming that the HSDP would reach 60 percent coverage of institutional deliveries by 
2013, the analysis shows the need to: (i) increase the number of MCH nurses in selected 
district maternities; and (ii) improve the management of health services to reduce the 
difference in productivity between districts.  
 
Component 2 - Boosting of malaria control program (US$ 13.5 million). This 
component would help scale up the prevention and treatment of malaria. Although 
presented as a separate component, malaria control would be implemented in an 
integrated manner at the district level as part of basic health service delivery activities 
presented above. The Program would help: (i) increase timely access to and use of 
effective treatment for malaria (both uncomplicated and severe) at facility and 
community-level; (ii) increase access to and utilization of intermittent preventive 
treatment by pregnant women; and (iii) increase access to and utilization of long-lasting 
insecticide-treated mosquito nets. The following would be financed: drugs and supplies 
(bed nets etc.), equipment (microscopes etc.), incremental operating costs, training, and 
consulting services.  
 
Nationwide, HSDP support for malaria control would be provided along four main 
lines: (i) quality control and supervision (US$3.7 million), including improvement of 
supervision (training and per diem), improved program management, laboratory 
equipment for sentinel sites, and training in case management; (ii) routine surveillance 
for management and malaria risk mapping (US$1.2 million), including training and 
expansion of geographical information system; (iii) logistics and supply chain (US$1.0 
million), including needs assessment and contracts with logistical providers; and (iv) bed 
nets, drugs and diagnostic test kits.  
 
Component 3 
–
Preparation of health sector investment plan (US$ 0.5 million). 
Currently, many health facilities are in need of repair, reconstruction and refurbishing and 
others have become obsolete. Also, geographical disparities persist in access and 
consumption of health care. To keep improving health outcomes, Mozambique needs to 
increase access to health services and reduce inequalities between provinces.  
Page  4
To address these challenges, the MOH prepared an investment plan (the PIS) of US$ 
120 million for the period 2004-8. The development of this plan was actually financed by 
the Bank under the Health Sector Recovery Program closed in 2003. The objective of the 
PIS is to: (i) extend coverage in the less-served areas of the northern region, the Zambezi 
valley and the central region; (ii) improve the distribution of drugs and reduce stock-outs; 
and (iii) improve the quality of services as a result of a good combination of inputs. The 
plan covers the following areas: health infrastructure, equipment, maintenance, training 
and support services (logistics).  
 
To take into account the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the MOH revisited the design of the PIS 
to ensure the inclusion of services to HIV/AIDS patients in the facilities to be 
rehabilitated or built. This would represent an additional US$25 million.  
 
Since the PIS was designed, time has passed. Some of the investments have been 
financed using government, PROSAUDE, and other donor funds, and some of the 
priorities may have evolved. Under this component, the Bank would help the government 
update the plan by reviewing investment needs, assessing priorities, and estimating 
financing gaps. This would provide the government with an instrument to raise financing 
for the expansion of coverage and improvement of quality.  
 
Component 4 
–
Institutional capacity building and operating costs (US$16.5 million). 
This component would help the MOH (i) strengthen its capacity in monitoring and 
evaluation of the program; and (ii) improve procurement and financial management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program would be implemented in the three Northern provinces of Cabo Delgado, 
Nampula, and Niassa.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ENV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN  
 
The HSDP is classified as Category B (a partial environmental analysis is considered 
appropriate to address specific environmental issues) for two reasons: (i) the program 
would involve vector control under its malaria control component that would need a 
vector management plan (VMP), and (ii) the program would involve the provision of 
medical supplies, which triggers concerns about healthcare waste management. The 
program will not finance any pesticides or spraying equipments as all indoor residual 
spraying activities would be covered under the President’s Malaria Initiative, executed by 
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).  
 
Environmental Assessment for Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) and Vector Management 
Plan. An international development group (RTI International) was selected to elaborate 
an environmental assessment for all indoor residual spraying operations. The EA 
documents include a programmatic environmental assessment for malaria integrated 
vector management programs, an assessment for IRS in Mozambique and a safe use 
action plan for the use of DDT, bendiocarb and lambda-cyhalothrin. The environmental 
assessment for indoor residual spraying was prepared to address the identified issues 
surrounding IRS operations. The EA/VMP was reviewed by the Bank and was be 
circulated for public consultation on May 25, 2007.  
 
This IRS program is part of the President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI) in Africa,working 
with the World Bank, the Global Fund, and other members of the Roll Back Malaria 
Partnership. Within the USAID/Mozambique Integrated Health Sector (HIS) Strategic 
Objective Agreement, an initial Environmental Assessment (2005) identified the 
distribution, use and re-treatment of Insecticide Treated Nets (ITNs) and Long-Lasting 
Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) as a major intervention for malaria control.  This intervention 
came with a number of conditions, listed in the Safer Use Action Plan, and based on 
recommendations from the Programmatic Environmental Assessment for Insecticide-
Treated Materials in USAID Activities in Sub-Saharan Africa.  
 
Under the PMI, USAID proposes to help the government of Mozambique implement an 
Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) program for malaria vector control. Mozambique is 
characterized by perennial malaria transmission, and IRS would be used to reduce 
malaria incidence in the seasons of highest transmission. This IRS program will be part 
of other vector management measures supported and implemented by the MOH that 
include the distribution and use of bed nets.  
 
Because of the potential environmental impact of the pesticides proposed for use, DDT, 
bendiocarb and lambda-cyhalothrin, this environmental assessment identifies the 
mitigating measures to minimize potential impact while achieving a significant reduction 
in malaria incidence.  
Page  6
The MOH and the Ministry for Coordination of Environmental Affairs (MICOA) will 
implement the risk reduction actions outlined in the environmental assessment (EA) and 
vector management plan and re-examine the need for DDT while considering other 
chemical options for IRS operations to achieve best vector control. The Safer Use Action 
Plan is to be implemented with relevant partners as a management tool for dealing with 
and accomplishing the objectives. IRS supervisors, team leaders, and spray operators will 
be trained according to WHO guidelines as well as Ministry of Agriculture standards.  
Insecticide poisoning management training will be provided to health workers. 
Pyrethroid, DDT and carbamate poisoning treatment medications and antidotes will be 
provided to trained health workers by the MOH. Insecticide storage facility storekeepers 
will also be trained on proper store management.  
 
Occupational exposure to insecticides will be minimized through personal protective 
equipment (according to WHO guidelines). A public awareness campaign will educate 
home owners on their roles and responsibilities during the spray campaign to avoid 
exposure, and supervisors will remind residents of these responsibilities during spray 
campaigns.  
 
Environmental contamination will be kept to a minimum through strict auditing, 
handling, washing, and disposal practices. Each insecticide sachet will be strictly 
accounted for, contaminated waste-water and rinse-water will be re-used in subsequent 
days of spraying (progressive and pressure rinsing). Empty DDT sachets will be collected 
by the MOH and returned to the supplier (if possible) or disposed of in an 
environmentally safe manner.  
 
The HSDP team will actively monitor ongoing activities for compliance with the 
requirements and recommendations in this assessment, and modify or end activities that 
are not in compliance.  
 
Project team will actively monitor ongoing activities for compliance with the 
requirements and recommendations in this assessment, and modify or end activities that 
are not in compliance.  If additional activities are added to this program that are not 
described in the EA/VMP document, an amended EA/VMP will be prepared prior to 
implementation of those activities.  This includes any commodities, pesticide products 
being considered under the program but not covered in the present EA/VMP.  
 
Health Care Waste Management Plan. The Healthcare Waste Management Plan 
developed under the HIV/AIDS Response Project will be used and monitored.  Select 
activities of the national action plan will be supported under this project to improve 
implementation of the HCWMP.  Emphasis will be placed on the three targeted provinces 
under this project.   
 
Page  7
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  8
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean J. De St Antoine 
04/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui 
04/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
05/22/2008 
Comments:   
