Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2513 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P099930 
Project Name: Health Service Delivery Project 
Task Team Leader: Jean J. De St Antoine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Other human development (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
27.80
27.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The ultimate objective of Mozambique?s health strategy, supported by this project, is to improve 
health status by improving health service delivery so as to increase the country?s chances of 
reaching the health MDGs, i.e. (i) reduce the child mortality rate by two-thirds by 2015; (ii) 
reduce the maternal mortality ratio by three-quarters, by 2015; and (iii) halt by 2015 and begin to 
reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.  
 
The specific objective of the project is to increase the coverage of health services by improving 
the population?s access to health services in the most disadvantaged provinces through (i) 
strengthening community-based service delivery; (ii) scaling up outreach services; and (iii) 
improving and expanding facility-based services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project includes the following components:  
 
(i) improving service delivery in the most disadvantaged geographical areas. This component 
includes the following activities: (a) strengthening of community-based service delivery; (b) 
Page  2
scaling up of population-based preventive and curative care through outreach services; and (c) 
improving and expanding facility-based services, including referral services.  
 
(ii) boosting of malaria control. This component will support: (a) increased timely access and 
use of effective treatment for malaria; (b) increased intermittent prophylactic treatment for 
pregnant women; (c)  increased supply and use of bed nets; (d) improved laboratory services in 
hospitals and (e) strengthen capacity of MOH at central, provincial and district levels to manage 
and supervise malaria control  
 
(iii) increasing access and reducing regional disparities in access. This component will support 
an assessment of the needs for rehabilitation of health facilities and investments in equipment to 
improve quality of care and make hospitals and health centers safer.  
 
(iv) building capacity of the Ministry of Health in Mozambique. This component will help the 
MOH strengthen its capacity in (a) planning, organization, and management of service delivery 
at central, provincial and district levels; (b) planning and management of investments in the 
health sector, including procurement, disbursement and supervision of investments; and (c) 
develop a results-oriented Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for the health sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mozambique, with an initial focus on 2-4 northern states covering 40-50% of the population.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An assessment of the management of hospital waste was carried out under the HIV/AIDS 
Response Project (MAP) and an Environmental Management Plan was developed, that is still 
valid for the present project. Financing of US$2.5 million for waste disposal and training of 
health workers was included in the MAP. The MOH has asked to include further financing for 
medical waste disposal under the present operation. As for the malaria component, a safeguard 
analysis will be conducted related to vector control and management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ENV) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The HSDP triggers the operational policies 4.01 on environmental assessment (EA) because 
of the potential environmental impact from handling toxic chemical pesticides for vector control 
and from dealing with contaminated health care medical waste.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The HSDP triggers the Operational Policy 4.09 on Pest Management because of the potential 
use of chemical pesticides for Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) under the Malaria control 
component of the project.  The project will not procure any pesticides and all IRS operations will 
be implemented under the USAID/PMI project.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA will be completed and disclosed in the country and in the Bank Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean J. De St Antoine 
04/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/13/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
04/13/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
