Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3886
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P106355 
Project Name:  MZ-Competitiveness & PS Development 
Task Team Leader:  Mazen Bouri 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 29, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (70%);Micro- and SME finance (30%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s overall objective will be to improve the business environment andenhance 
the competitiveness of targeted enterprises. This will be achieved by: (i) reducing the cost 
of doing business through support to GoM reforms and capacity building of key public 
sector agencies (ii) developing and strengthening the capacity of local intermediaries to 
deliver business services in targeted sectors; (iii) and piloting region specific 
interventions in tourism and horticulture sectors.  Indicators include results at the 
enterprise level such as increased sales; results at the intermediary level such as number 
of new business services to SMEs; and at the policy level such as through improved 
Doing Business ranking.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would consist of two technical components (promoting competitiveness and 
promoting the business enabling environment) and a third project implementation 
component.   The project components were developed to be complementary and should 
be viewed in an integrated fashion. The project recognizes the weak capacity that exists 
and has programmed extensive capacity support in the project implementation 
Page  2
component.    The private sector is an equal partner for the project and will be an integral 
element for the project’s implementation, and ultimately, success.  
 
Component One: Improving Competitiveness (US$ 17.25 million)  
 
This component would enhance the competitiveness of SMEs and promote broad based 
growth in selected regions through the following three sub-components:  
 
Business Growth Scheme (US$ 5 million IDA contribution and US$3 million 
beneficiary contribution)  
 
This sub-component would enhance SMEs growth and competitiveness in priority 
sectors.  This would be achieved by promoting access to  SMEs to of business services 
providers for the delivery of  consultancy, advisory, and linkage services. The single 
over-riding aim of the Scheme is to maximize the rate of sales growth in client firms, 
compared to the rate of growth in firms not supported.  
 
The Scheme will deliver two “products” to individual firms, intended to complement 
each other:  
 
•
50% cost-sharing grants, to buy specialized outside expertise [training, consulting, 
etc., as with PODE FCO];  
 
•
Free hand-holding, or “mentoring,” helping each firm to plan and execute a 
growth plan, stage by stage – typically based on quarterly firm visits.  
 
These two “products” will be available to any privately-controlled commercial entity, 
operating legally within Mozambique, with a priority for SMEs as defined by the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce.   These products will also be available for to co-
operatives, so long as they are commercial in nature [eg. production co-op’s, community 
tourism co-op’s], and also for sole traders, operating commercial businesses for profit. 
These two products can be used to support any commercial activity contributing to the 
economy of Mozambique, and operating for profit, including commercial agriculture and 
commercial fishing.  
 
A
third “product” will be for the benefit of representative organizations of the private 
sector, such as chambers, trade associations and professional bodies. Cost-sharing grants 
will be made available, again in order to buy outside services.  These will be for three 
specified purposes:  
 
•
To build the capacity of the organization to better serve its members, and thus to 
build its strength, membership base, and subscription income.  
 
•
To develop new services to be sold to members, thus increasing its usefulnessto 
them, and building financial strength.  
 
•
To commission outside expert studies, surveys, research papers, etc., in support of 
submissions to GoM and its agencies, aimed at improving the regulatory environment 
facing members.  
Page  3
Grants will cover a more generous 75% of eligible costs, but with one important 
proviso.  The total grants extended to an organization within one of its financial years 
cannot exceed the actual income received from members [not from other sources such as 
donors] during the previous financial year, as verified by audited accounts.  
 
Promoting Tourism Sector in Inhambane (US$ 6.5 million)  
 
This sub-component proposes a regional approach to promoting broad-based growth in 
a
selected region using tourism as an entry point.  The goal is to leverage existing 
initiatives and deliver an integrated package of services to stimulate growth in tourism-
related employment and income generation with the possibility that this approach be 
replicated in other regions of the country. The project proposes to pilot this regional 
approach in Inhambane Province. There is compelling evidence that Inhambane Province 
represents the best opportunity to test such an approach for results in this sector. It is the 
province with the most attractive tourism resources and with the highest growth rates in 
terms of investments and tourist numbers. In addition, two other World Bank Group 
projects are working on related aspects of tourism development in the province . The 
rationale for this subcomponent is that it would contribute to ensuring that the other two 
Bank Group projects achieve broader development impacts beyond their objectives; in 
this case increased employment and income generation in the local economy.  
 
The project proposes interventions in two main areas:  
 
•
Improved public sector service provision in the tourism sector through support to 
the development and implementation of a tourism strategy and tourism master and 
marketing plans for the province including, inter alia, aspects of tourism planning and 
zoning, institutional development, light infrastructure development, policy and 
regulation, statistics and data collection, market development, land registration database 
and enhanced environmental protection, and strengthening the provincial one-stop shops. 
Many of these activities have already been identified during project preparation while 
other will be completed following the strategy’s completion, which is expected within 
one year of project launch.  
 
•
Expanding the tourism-related private sector supply chain through building the 
capacity of local training institutes (through curriculum development, training of trainers, 
learning equipment) to provide training in needed areas (languages, tour operations, boat 
operations, diving, fishing, artisanal and crafts development, vocational hospitality skills, 
language, business development, business operations, marketing, catering, construction, 
carpentry, and maintenance, etc);  support to local tourism private sector associations, 
who will be assisted to increase their relevance to their constituency, including for 
instance establishing an ombudsman and review process to address complaints and 
concerns raised by the private sector in relation to the implementation of legislation, 
policy and regulations.  
 
Public-Private Tropical fruits training institute in Nampula (US$ 2.75 million)  
Page  4
This sub-component aims to strengthen linkages between foreign investors and domestic 
producers and farmers in the horticulture sector. Horticulture has been identified as a 
sector of high future export potential for Mozambique as well as of interest for the 
domestic high end market due to growing demand of the middle class in cities as well as 
from the tourism industry. Quality is an essential part of a strategy to target these markets 
alongside other factors such as supply consistency, input availability and access to 
finance. To aid in this, this sub- component will support the establishment of a national 
quality training centre in Nampula specialized in tropical fruit operations.  The training 
centre will be a public-private partnership which will collaborate intensively with the 
international banana marketing company Chiquita which has recently announced a major 
investment in the province and would contribute to the centre through the development of 
training material and the provision of trainers. The Training Centre would be governed by 
a
Board of Governors with one representative from each of the public and private 
stakeholders (Ministry of Agriculture, local government, CEPAGRI (Centre for the 
Promotion of Agriculture), IIAM (the Mozambique National Institute of Agriculture 
Research), and each of the banana investors, including Matanuska, and Chiquita. The 
public-private partnership nature of the project will be reflected in the operation of the 
Board which will serve (a) as governing board for the training institute; and (b) as a 
forum for the discussion of institutional and policy-related constraints to the development 
of a tropical fruit industry.  
 
IDA, through this sub-component will support the investment in buildings, facilities, 
equipment, materials for the training centre itself, as well as the establishment of a 100 ha 
banana farm which will constitute the training grounds of the centre. Furthermore, 
support will be given to management and personnel resources of the training centre 
including scholarships. The project will also support the banana farm operating costs in 
the first year.   The initial training focus will be in Nampula but this is planned to be a 
national institute and there are other banana investments taking place in other parts of the 
country that can benefit from this learning.  It is also envisaged that the training center 
would eventually diversify into other tropical fruits including mango, pineapple and 
papaya, once the model has been tested.  
 
Component Two: Improving the Business Enabling Environment (US$ 7.75 million)  
 
This component will support G
oM’s effort to improve the business enabling 
environment.  Specifically, the component will advance specific reforms based on the 
Business Environment Strategy, build the capacity of key agencies that will pay a 
catalytic role in improving service provision for exports, and strengthen and broaden 
public-private dialogue.  
 
Support to Business Environment Reforms (US$ 5.75 million):  
 
Working with the Bank’s Investment Climate Team for Africa (FIAS), this sub-
component would support the reforms envisioned in the Government of Mozambique’s 
business environment reform strategy through initially working on (i) supporting reforms 
Page  5
to improve Mozambique’s DB indicators; (ii) broader systemic reforms improving the 
business environment such as improving business start-up procedures, streamlining the 
business licensing regime and business tax administration; and facilitating trade.  
 
The two reform areas targeted for support under this sub-component are:  
 
•
Trade Logistics Facilitation:  Facilitating trade logistics through comprehensive 
reform effort which would include: (i) support to the single window initiative through 
training, software development, office and computer equipment, and renovation works at 
Customs; (ii) strengthening the audit, research, risk assessment and strategic management 
capacity at Customs through training; (iii) review and streamlining of legislation and 
customs procedures  
 
•
Licensing Reform: Streamlining the licensing regulations and implementation for 
businesses through development of a licensing database, e-licensing capabilities, and 
strengthening of one-stop shops.  This work would incorporate a comprehensive licensing 
review to be undertaken jointly with FIAS.  
 
Support to Quality/Standards Infrastructure (US$ 600,000)  
 
Mozambique aims to broaden its export portfolio and that will necessitate aiming for 
markets of higher quality products. Quality may be secured in many ways, but strict 
adherence to standards is always part of the answer. The Mozambican government has 
recognized this and is, with the assistance of the EU, UNIDO, SECO and other 
supporting the National Institute of Standardization and Quality (INNOQ).  A key 
challenge is the strong need for good priority making and for creating marked demand-
driven services in the fields of standardization, certification and metrology.  Towards this 
goal, this sub-component will support the provision of standards-related services by 
INNOQ in a way that is private-market led and that promotes exports in key sectors. This 
will be done through a capacity building arrangement with a middle income country 
institution will strengthen INNOQ’scapacity to assess demand for its services and to 
make priorities in service provision.  
 
Strengthening the Accounting Profession (US$1 million)  
 
This activity will support the pillar of financial reporting infrastructure for the private 
sector. Currently, all the corporate entities in Mozambique, including investments with 
foreign participation, are affected by a serious shortage of qualified accountants and 
trained accounting technicians. SMEs are especially affected.  This sub-component will 
build on the recently concluded Accounting and Audit ROSC and support the 
establishment of a capacity building arrangement between the newly established 
professional accountancy body (Order of Professional Accountants) and a strong member 
of the International Federation of Accountants.  
 
Strengthening Public-Private Dialogue (US$ 400,000)  
 
Page  6
This sub-component would strengthen local business and industry associations to 
promote greater private sector participation in the policy reform process, especially from 
outside Maputo.  
 
Component Three: Project Implementation, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$ 1.25 
million)  
 
The main technical counterpart for the project is the Ministry of Industry and Commerce 
(MIC). MIC is the focal point for business policy reforms, has been very active in 
pursuing the PSD agenda, and has requested the new operation.  Within MIC, the main 
interlocutor for the project has been the private sector support unit.  In the first phase of 
the project, a project implementation unit (PIU) would be established and would consist 
of a project coordinator, procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, and a 
monitoring and evaluation specialist.  The long-term goal would be to mainstream the 
PIU within MIC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will include regional sub-components in (i) Nampula Province where 
the new Training Center will be constructed and a 100 ha banana plantation will be 
established for training purposes; and (ii) Inhambane Province where light infrastructure 
activities (rehabilitation of existing government facilities, supporting final hook-
ups/distribution of utilities, repaving and rehabilitation of existing roads that are key to 
access to tourism sites, and solid waste management.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  7
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Safeguard issues will be limited to potential environmental and social impacts related to 
the rehabilitation of existing government facilities, the final hook-up/distribution of 
electricity lines, the repaving and rehabilitation of existing roads that are critical for the 
access to tourism sites, solid waste management, and the operation of a 100 ha banana 
plantation for training purposes. Potential impacts are likely to include soil erosion, water 
and soil pollution, pesticides poisoning, loss of vegetation, traffic accidents, and potential 
loss of livelihoods.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project activities will not incur potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to the 
planned rehabilitation activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Potential adverse impacts due to rehabilitation activities and operation of the banana 
plantation will be addressed in the context of the project's environmental and social 
screening process for sub-projects as outlined in the ESMF and the Pest Management 
Plan (PMP)which will be attached to the ESMF.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the actual sites of the future project sub-projects could not be identified prior to 
appraisal, the borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF)which includes a Pest Management Plan (PMP); and (ii) a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)to ensure that potential adverse environmental and 
social impacts are addressed properly during project implementation. To ensure effective 
implementation of the ESMF and RPF, the project will support the provision of relevant 
environmental training, and Environmental Focal Points will be established at the 
implementing agency and in the governors' offices in the participating provinces. 
Component 1 will provide pest management training. The ESMF and RPF will be 
disclosed prior to appraisal of the proposed project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include participating ministries, provincial governors' offices as well as 
potentially affected persons. Consultations will be carried out in the context of the 
environmental and social screening process outlined in the ESMF and the results will be 
made available to the public.   
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/28/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/28/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/27/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/28/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
Page  9
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mazen Bouri 
10/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
10/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
10/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
10/28/2008 
Comments:  The project has been recategorized as a B due to the planned rehabilitation and 
construction activities. A transfer to the Sector Manager for review and clearance is requested. 
