Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4092 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/27/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P108444 
Project Name: MZ-Energy Development and Access Project (APL-2) 
Task Team Leader: Boris Enrique Utria 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 7, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);Renewable energy (15%);Central government administration (15%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (25%);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (25%);Rural services and infrastructure (24%);Regulation and 
competition policy (13%);Climate change (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.00
18.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
EDAP's overall project development objective (PDO) will be to increase sustainable and 
affordable access to modem energy services to low income peri-urban and rural populations for 
poverty alleviation and improvement of their quality of life.  
 
The development objectives of the project are:  
 
a. To improve grid-based access to modem energy service through the reinforcement of the 
existing primary electricity network and the extension of the grid to un-served areas;  
 
b.
Increase off-grid access to modern energy services in low income rural areas through the 
promotion of renewable energy resources and technologies (RETs);  
 
c. To improve the sustainability and quality of service of the power sector through the reduction 
of energy losses and increasing commercial efficiency;  
 
d.
To improve the overall performance of the main sector institutions and their capacity to 
mobilize new private sector and donor investment financing through the provision of institutional 
strengthening and capacity development support; and,  
Page  2
e. To improve Government-Donor coordination in the energy sector through the gradual 
mainstreaming of a sector wide approach and process (SWAp) aligned with country priorities 
and procedures.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
EDAP (APL-2) constitutes the continuation of the support program launched in 2003 through the 
ERAP-APL-l. As such, EDAP's design was essentially focused on the continuation, scaling-up 
and broadening of the ongoing APL-1 support program components and interventions. As such, 
EDAP will be divided in four (4) main components, namely:  
 
#
Reinforcement of the Primary Networks and Grid Extension Component: (US 
$70.0million): this component will support: (i) the rehabilitation and reinforcement of the 
existing primary networks that have been overloaded as a result of the grid extension and new 
connections activities under implementation under ERAP; (ii) extension and intensification of 
the medium and low voltage grid in peri-urban areas with high potential number of new 
customers; and, (iii) scaling-up the implementation of programs developed under ERAP-APL 1 
for: (a) energy loss reduction and commercial efficiency improvements, and, (b) increasing 
power distribution efficiency (CREST program). This component will be implemented by EdM.  
 
#
Investments on Rural and Renewable Energy Component (US $20.0 million): this 
component win increase and accelerate decentralized access to modem energy services by 
supporting the implementation and/or scaling-up of: (i) decentralized small-and medium-size 
investments on renewable energy production and distribution systems, including small hydro, 
solar PV and thermal, wind, biomass (co-generation, pelletization, biofuels and biogas) in rural 
and some peri-urban areas; (ii) demonstration projects to accelerate the sustainable market 
penetration of clean Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs) in the agriculture, household, SME 
and transportation sectors; and (iii) capacity development and institutional strengthening of 
FUNAE. When applicable, Private-Public Partnerships (PPPs) will be set-up for the 
implementation of individual RET projects. This component will be implemented by FUNAE, in 
coordination with the Ministry of Energy (ME). 
 
#
Promotion of Rural Electrification and New Energy Infrastructure Component (US $20.0 
million): this component will strengthen the capacity of the government of Mozambique and 
provide technical assistance to: (i) elaborate a National Rural Electrification Strategy (NRES); 
and, (ii) be able to undertake the technical reviews, financial and legal analyses, the due 
diligence, and negotiation for the development of new energy infrastructure projects -specially 
power IPPs and other energy "mega-projects" -of national and regional interest. This component 
will be implemented by ME. 
 
#
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building Component (US $10.0 million): this 
component will include institutional strengthening and capacity building of the Ministry of 
Energy with a view to improve its performance, efficiency and governance. ME requires 
substantial strengthening to be able to effectively: (i) discharge it's monitoring and supervisory 
functions over all the energy sub-sectors, including the rapidly growing natural gas and biofuels 
sub-sectors; (ii) promote the development of renewable energy technologies and applications in 
Page  3
the country; and (iii) lead the establishment and roll-out of a SWAp for the energy sector. 
Institutional strengthening and capacity development support will also be provided to CNELEC 
for it to effectively undertake is sector advisory/regulatory function. This component will be 
implemented by ME.  
 
The Proposed EDAP is based on the components and lesson learned within ERAP (APL-l). The 
implementation of EDAP will also be based on the enhancement of the existing institutional 
arrangements of ERAP (APL-I) to facilitate the continuation of the APL-I work program and to 
reduce the implementation costs and maximize the efficiency of EDAP. The only proposed 
change with respect to the APL-l structure will be to set-up FUNAE as an Executing Agency 
within the project, to enable it to increase its operational efficiency.  
 
The only major alternative considered for the above project design was moving from a SIL-
¬based APL format to a considerably larger "Development Policy Lending"(DPL; $300-$500 
million) to provide GoM with a greater degree of flexibility and ownership in the implementation 
of its new sector development strategy and accelerate the operationalization of the SWAp. Such 
a
DPL would enable GoM to advance key energy investments of national and regional interest, 
and would feature a comprehensive set of multi-sector policy triggers, possibly including: (i) 
adoption of a minimum percentage of clean and renewable energy within the country's energy 
matrix (production and end-use); (ii) establishment of the proposed investment "Warehousing" 
mechanism for the promotion of local private sector participation in infrastructure investment 
projects and for the development of a local stock exchange" ; (iii) adoption of the EITI and 
EITI++ frameworks for the energy sector; (iv) adoption of a sustainable multi-purpose 
management regime of water resources and basins, including power generation, irrigation, flood 
control, Climate Change adaptation, and erosion and sedimentation reduction control/mitigation 
objectives; (v) adoption of internationally acceptable social and environmental safeguard for the 
production of biofuels in the country; (vi) adoption of participatory and sustainable forest and 
woodfuel supply management policies and practices; and, (vii) adoption of urban and peri-urban 
"in-door" pollution reduction policies and programs. This system of multi-sectorial policy 
triggers are founded on World Bank ESW (and/or other donor R&D work) whereby the required 
knowledge is available to support the preparation of such a DPL in Mozambique. While 
considered relevant, highly innovative and beneficial to the Borrower, this alternative approach 
was however judged to be premature vis-à-vis the state of policy development and ownership in 
the country and of the state of GoM-donor policy and financing coordination (SWAp). This 
alternative financing approach will be revisited in FY10 in conjunction with the elaboration of 
the PARPA III by GoM and the evolution of the energy sector SWAp.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mozambique (Nationwide)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under APL I (ERAP), the Borrower has tried to strengthen its environmental and social 
management capacity in the energy sector. For example, FUNAE and the Ministry of Energy 
have established and staffed Environment and Social Units and developed the requisite 
environmental and social screening processes, operational manuals for environmental 
management, and carried out environmental and social training. Although EdM has carried out 
Page  4
environmental screening of the majority of its distribution investments funded under APL-l, 
compliance with safeguard policies has not met the expected results. In light of these learning, 
EdM is in the process of establishing and staffing its Environment Unit with support from 
Danish TAS. Lessons learned under APL 1 will be better explored under APL 2 (EDAP).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy was triggered due to the potential adverse social impacts related to land 
acquisition and tree cutting for the implementation of overhead distribution and connection lines. 
An RPF for the project is under preparation by the Borrower and will be disclosed prior to 
Appraisal. Because of the lessons learned from APL-I, and upon clear design of the power 
distribution line routes, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), will be immediately prepared for 
each of the screened subprojects to be implemented in year 1. Also, as a condition to appraisal, 
comprehensive and detailed TOR for RAP have been prepared by the Borrower, final RAP 
should be reviewed and approved by the World Bank and disclosed accordingly in-country and 
at the InfoShop prior to physical implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy was triggered due to the potential adverse social impacts related to land 
acquisition and tree cutting for the implementation of overhead distribution and connection lines. 
An RPF for the project is under preparation by the Borrower and will be disclosed prior to 
Appraisal.  Because of the lessons learned from APL-1, and upon clear design of the power 
distribution line routes, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), will be immediately prepared for 
each of the screened subprojects to be implemented in year 1. Also, as a condition to appraisal, 
comprehensive and detailed TOR for RAP have been prepared by the Borrower, final RAP 
should be reviewed and approved by the World Bank and disclosed accordingly in-country and 
at the InfoShop prior to physical implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/06/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To ensure that EDAP's investments in grid extensions and renewable energy are carried out 
in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner, the borrower will prepare (i) an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) drawing on experience gained 
under APL 1; and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which will outline policies 
and procedures to be implemented in cases where EDAP investments involve land 
acquisition which could lead to Joss of assets and livelihoods. Once the right locations of the 
distribution and connection lines have been identified, a Resettlement Action Plan will be 
prepared for each of the screened subprojects and disclosed in Mozambique and at the Bank's 
Infoshop prior to physical implementation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Boris Enrique Utria 
07/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/27/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
07/27/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
