Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3210 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P106355 
Project Name: MZ-Competitiveness & PS Development 
Task Team Leader: Mazen Bouri 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (70%);Micro- and SME finance (30%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s overall objective will be to improve the business environment andenhance the 
competitiveness of targeted SMEs. This will be achieved by: (i) reducing the cost of doing 
business through support to GoM reforms and capacity building of key public sector agencies (ii) 
developing and strengthening the capacity of local intermediaries to deliver business services in 
targeted sectors; (iii) establishing forward and backward linkages for SMEs to existing and new 
local and foreign buyers and investors; and (iv) enhancing access to finance for business 
expansion and investment.  Indicators will be developed during project preparation and are 
expected to include results at the enterprise level such as increased sales, exports, and 
employment; results at the intermediary level such as number of providers for business services 
to SMEs; and at the policy level such as through the Doing Business Indicators.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The MCPSD project would be financed through a sector investment loan with a forecasted IDA 
allocation in the Country Partnership Strategy of US$ 20 million. The project would seek to 
complement other ongoing operations in addition to working closely with ongoing IFC 
initiatives.  The donor community looks to the Bank to continue to play a leading role in private 
Page  2
sector policy dialogue and TA and a number of donors have indicated an interest in contributing 
to the new project.  
 
The project would support the GoM’s PARPA II goals of broad-based and private-sector led 
growth through the following three main components and a fourth project implementation 
component as follows:  
 
Component One: Promoting Broad-Based Growth in Targeted Sectors and Regions  
 
This component would enhance the competitiveness of SMEs through the following two sub-
components:  
 
Enhancing Business Competitiveness in Targeted Sectors:  This sub-component would enhance 
SMEs growth and competitiveness in the tourism, agribusiness, and export-oriented 
manufacturing sectors.  
 
Promoting Tourism-Led Growth in Pilot Region: This sub-component would promote broad-
based growth in a selected region using tourism as a strategic entry point.  
 
Component Two: Enhancing SME Access to Finance  
 
The obstacles to access to finance include continued high interest rates, limited risk appetite by 
banks, weak credit information systems, a weak collateral registration and enforcement system, 
and limited business and financial management skills in SMEs.  This component will seek to 
complement the reforms that are being undertaken at the national level in business environment 
and will focus on catalyzing financial services for SMEs, improving the ability of firms to 
bureau, and supporting the establishment of a private credit bureau.  
 
Component  Three: Improving the Business Environment through reducing the Cost of Doing 
Business and Capacity Building of Key Public Sector Agencies  
 
This component would aim to improve the business environment for private sector development 
by working with the following three sub-components: (i) supporting the GoM’s policy reforms to 
improve the business environment; (ii) building the capacity of public agencies that provide 
essential services to the private sector; and (iii) strengthening public-private dialogue.  
 
Component  Four: Project Implementation and Monitoring Arrangements  
 
It is expected that the technical counterpart for the project would be the Ministry of Industry 
and Commerce (MIC). MIC is the focal point for business policy reforms, has been very active 
in pursuing the PSD agenda, and requested the new operation.  A Project Steering Committee 
will be established and would include representatives from MIC, Ministry of Planning and 
Development, Ministry of Tourism, Center for the Promotion of Commercial Agriculture, the 
Bank of Mozambique, as well as private sector representatives in equal number.  The Committee 
would provide strategic oversight and direction to the project.  The activities under components 
one and two related to business services and training would be implemented by private sector 
Page  3
partners.   A monitoring and evaluation system will be established to provide ongoing feedback 
on results and lessons and allow for adjustments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in Urban and semi Urban areas in Mozambique   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mazen Bouri 
09/05/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/05/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dileep M. Wagle 
09/05/2007 
Comments:   
