Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3714 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P107311 
Project Name: National Decentralized Planning and Finance Program 
Task Team Leader: Ali Alwahti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the performance of the national 
planning and finance system by strengthening the capacity of local governments to plan and 
manage resources for social and economic development in a participative and transparent 
manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Program operates both at central and local government levels and revolves around the core 
processes for local planning, budgeting, execution and accountability. It also assists central 
government to support to these processes through legal, policy and institutional strengthening, 
program management and knowledge management. The estimated total project cost is US$ 50.0 
million of which the IDA contribution is US$ 25.0 million. Government provides direct district 
budget allocation to implement district plans annually. In 2006 this budget allocation was 
estimated at 3.0% of the national budget, and in 2007 it was estimated at 3.8%. The National 
DPFP provides the capacity building support at all levels to ensure increasingly effective 
development and implementation of these plans.  
 
Page  2
Component 1. National Support Systems (Central Level)  
 
This component will strengthen the national system of decentralized planning and finance and 
the integration of local planning cycles into the national processes. It will also develop the 
national tools and methodologies for implementation and monitoring of the program.  
 
1.1. Support to development of Draft Legal, Policy and   Methodological Instruments  
 
(i) 
Development of Draft Policies, Strategies and Legislation in support of  administrative 
and fiscal decentralization  
 
(ii) 
Development of Methodologies and Tools in support of integration of decentralized 
planning and finance system into national planning process.  
 
(iii) 
Development of a National Decentralized System of Monitoring and Evaluation of 
District Performance  
 
1.2. Institutional Strengthening  
 
(i) 
Development of a National Program for Capacity Development of Human Resources at 
district and provincial level  
 
2. Support to Participatory Planning and Budgeting  
 
Component 2 will support implementation of the system of participatory and strategic planning 
and budgeting at the district level.  
 
(i) 
Facilitate and stimulate participation of communities in strategic planning and local 
development  
 
(ii) 
Introduce and consolidate the process of integrated strategic planning at local level 
(process of elaboration of District Development Plans - PEDD)  
 
(iii) 
Consolidate and harmonize the process of annual operational planning at local level 
(process of elaboration of Social and Economic Plan and Budget - PESOD)  
 
3. Management and Execution  
 
Component 3 provides support to the districts for implementation of the district strategic plans.  
 
(i) 
Improve the capacity of local organs of state to implement, manage and maintain 
infrastructure for local delivery including procurement, contract management and environmental 
and social safeguards  
 
(ii) 
Facilitate the coordination of Local Economic Development activities with other 
activities in the planning process  
 
(iii) 
Improve financial management for district development including own revenue 
generation and collection  
 
(iv) 
Improve the mechanisms for information management and monitoring at district level  
 
(v) 
Finance construction and rehabilitation of public administration offices (small civil 
works) in 128 districts across the ten provinces  
 
4. Internal and External Control (Oversight and Accountability)  
 
Component 4 deals with the control part of the planning cycle, and supports internal and 
external checks and balances as well as community oversight.  
 
(i) 
Extend the coverage of inspections and audits in provinces and districts  
 
(ii) 
Strengthen the internal control system in provinces and districts  
Page  3
(iii) 
Disseminate widely the results of various audits and M&E instruments in an accessible 
manner  
 
(iv) 
Contribute to improved participation of citizens in oversight of public management  
 
(v) 
Promote coordination between the Tribunal Administrativo (External Audit Tribunal), 
IGF (Internal Audit Function) and the UFSA (Procurement Unit in Ministry of Finance) and 
IGAE (Administrative Audit Unit)  
 
5. Knowledge Management  
 
This component will strengthen the generation and use of knowledge at the district level as well 
as the feedback mechanisms between central and local levels of government.  
 
(i) 
Contribute to improving local management through learning feedback loops  
 
(ii) 
Influence national policies and strategies based on district experiences and accumulated 
knowledge at local level  
 
6. Program Management   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Implementation of the project is through the Ministry of Planning and Development at central 
level. Activities will be implemented at three levels of government: central, provincial and 
district level.  The program has national coverage including all ten provinces and districts within 
these provinces. Procurement will be done at provincial and central level.   
 
E.  Borrower
’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower's institutional capacity to implement and supervise Bank safeguard policies is weak at 
all levels (i.e., central, provincial and district level).  The project will specifically address this 
gap with detailed safeguard tools as well as intensive capacity building activities designed under 
Component 3 to ensure that the relevant institutions have the knowledge and capacity to 
implement and supervise application of Bank safeguard tools developed for this project. Indeed, 
the first series of four provincial level safeguard policy training workshops are scheduled for 
January and February 2009.  These workshops are specifically designed to utilize the lessons 
learned from implementation and supervision (and gaps therein) of Bank safeguard policies from 
DPFP I to train provincial staff in all ten provinces who will hold primary responsibility for 
implementing the safeguard policy tools developed for this project as well as the follow on 
investments for DPFP I.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Adverse environmental and social impacts will be mitigated according to the project's ESMF 
and RPF being prepared.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Adverse environmental and social impacts will be mitigated according to the project's ESMF 
and RPF being prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/14/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project will finance construction of district administrative office buildings. The project 
will require a detailed ESMF and RPF based on the safeguard tools developed for DPFP I 
since the civil works are of a similar nature to those financed under DPFP I. Adverse 
environmental and social impacts will be mitigated according to the project’s ESMF and 
RPF. It is important to note that many districts will not require small civil works investments 
as these will benefit from parallel investments by UNDP and GTZ who will continue 
financing investments related to DPFP I (note: these parallel investments will also abide by 
Bank safeguard policies). The updated ESMF and RPF will be finalized by November 20, 
2008 and published in Mozambique as well as at the InfoShop by December 1, 2008. The 
SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ali Alwahti 
12/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
12/02/2008 
Comments:   
