Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/14/2009 
Report No.:  AC4371
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P116190 
Project Name:  NP Power Add Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Haney 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (62%);Renewable energy (30%);Micro- and SME finance (3%);Other 
social services (3%);Central government administration (2%) 
Theme:  Climate change (25%);Rural services and infrastructure (25%);Other financial 
and private sector development (24%);Small and medium enterprise support 
(13%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
89.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development of the proposed additional financing operation is to increase 
access to electricity in rural areas and improve the quantum and efficiency of electricity 
supply.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing would support new investments under the Nepal Electricity 
Authority (NEA) component of the on-going Power Development Project, and a scaling-
up of the Microhydro Village Electrification Component.  The additional investments 
under the NEA component would include rehabilitation of generation assets, transmission 
and distribution strengthening, and technical assistance funds for continued institutional 
strengthening and training, and execution of technical studies and other documentation 
associated with power sector development.  The Microhydro Village Electrification 
Component would receive funds for financing of additional village-level schemes.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The investments proposed under the project are located in various locations in Nepal. The 
proposed transmission line would run between Bharatpur and Bardghat in the central 
Terai. The proposed hydropower generation rehabilitation investments would be at the 
Kali Gandaki HEP in central Nepal. The proposed thermal generation rehabilitation 
investments would be at Hetauda and Biratnagar. The proposed distribution strengthening 
investments would be in Kathmandu Valley. The locations of the microhydro village 
electrification investments would be determined at a later date.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDI) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Nepal Electricity Authority has prepared a full Environmental Impact Assessment 
for the proposed Bharatpur-Bardghat transmission line, and has revised the framework 
for environmental and social impact assessments for the smaller subprojects under the 
proposed Additional Financing.  The combined environmental and social impact 
assessment framework conforms to applicable domestic regulations and World Bank 
policies.  The framework will apply to subprojects currently under implementation as 
well as to new subprojects to be supported under the proposed Additional Financing.  The 
subprojects are expected to have adverse social impacts of varied nature and extent, 
including primarily the loss of land; loss of residential and commercial structures; loss of 
crops;  trees in community forests and other resources particularly in the case of the 
transmission line which would adversely affect the income, livelihood and living standard 
of people living along the route of the transmission line. The social impact assessment 
framework has been designed to identify the likely impacts of the interventions during 
subprojects construction and to indicate appropriate mitigation measures to address the 
identified adverse impacts. The framework will ensure realistic rehabilitation and 
Page  3
compensation for acquired assets of project-affected persons and additional benefits for 
vulnerable persons. The framework provides mitigation measures for losses incurred by 
titleholders (legal land owners and people with usufruct and traditional rights) and non-
titleholders (including tenants; lease holders; encroachers and squatters).  In the event 
that any social impact assessment carried out at the subproject level identifies indigenous 
households as project-affected, a Vulnerable People's Development Plan will be prepared 
in keeping with World Bank policy and as per the guidelines provided in the SIA 
framework.  
 
The main environmental concerns of the proposed Additional Financing related to the 
Bharatpur-Bardaghat 220 kV transmission line. In most parts (around 60 to 70 % of the 
length) the route of the proposed transmission line passes through forest areas. NEA is 
attempting to follow an existing transmission line corridor as far as possible in order to 
minimize impacts on forests and to avoid the National Park. The EIA carried out by NEA 
in 2007 has analyzed alternative routes to help identify the route with the least impact, 
and includes mitigation measures for construction and operation phases.  
 
The investiments in the rehabilitation of the Duhabi Multifuel Power Plant and the 
Hetauda Diesel Plant will not introduce new environmental risks. The existing concerns 
are related to workers' health and safety, particularly exposure to noise, gases and 
temperature.  
 
The Pathlaiya 132 kV Switching Station will be located under the existing transmission 
line, largely within the right of way in the land owned by the Department of Forest.  NEA 
completed an EIA for this subproject in 2003.  
 
The proposed rehabilitation of the Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant includes repair of 
turbines, replacement of some parts, modification of inlet valves. The activities are 
confined to the already existing facility and involve only repairing and maintenance of 
valves, turbines etc., hence there are no significant environmental concern.  
 
The Microhydro Village Electrification Program supports small-scale, demand-driven 
microhydro schemes which, depending on the location, could have minor environmental 
issues arising from canal, powerhouse and distribution poles. The environmental 
assessment and management of impacts for these small projects will be handled in 
accordance with the "Environment Assessment Guidelines for Community-owned and 
Managed Micro Hydro Schemes" that apply to the on-going Power Development Project.  
 
The Kathmandu Valley Distribution Strengthening has very limited adverse 
environmental impacts as the activities will utilize the existing distribution routes, other 
facilities and space.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is expected that the proposed subprojects will not have significant adverse long-term 
impacts in the project areas.  Several of the proposed subprojects are rehabilitation works 
Page  4
at existing sites and will have minimal or no adverse impact.  The proposed new 
transmission line and sub-station are expected to have more significant impacts, but these 
have been well analyzed by NEA and the negative impacts are fully manageable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Subprojects were chosen from a pool of investments at NEA on the basis of (i) their high 
priority, (ii) ease of implementation, and (iii) minimal adverse impact.  In the case of the 
microhydro component, the Additional Financing is providing funds for scaling up, 
hence, the question of alternatives does not arise.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The bulk of the funds to be provided under the proposed Additional Financing are for the 
NEA component (investments in the national power grid). Safeguard policy issues are 
handled by the Environmental and Social Studies Department (ESSD) at NEA, in 
conjunction with the functional teams (transmission, generation or distribution) that are 
responsible for specific subprojects.  
 
NEA has prepared the Operational Manual of Social/Environmental Impact Assessment 
for Subprojects Financed under the Power Development Project. This operational manual 
confirms to the applicable domestic legislations and World Bank policies. In addition, 
NEA has already carried out the EIA for the Hetauda-Bharatpur-Bardghat Transmission 
line (the Bharatpur-Bardghat transmission line proposed under the Additional Financing 
is the second section of the Hetauda-Bharatpur-Bardghat TL) and the EIA for the 
Pathlaiya 132 kV Switching Station.  
 
Environmental improvement works were implemented at the Duhabi Multifuel Plant 
around 1998.  These works included an incinerator, sludge treatment plant, waste-oil trap 
and oil water separator, an increase of the stack height to 26 meters, and provision of 
insulation to reduce the outside noise level.  NEA is committed to monitoring effective 
operation of these facilities. NEA also undertook an EIA for the Kali Gandaki Project 
with support from the Asian Development Bank during the project preparation phase, and 
this has been followed during the construction and operation phases. NEA has also 
commissioned environmental auditing. An Environmental Operation Manual was 
prepared and post-construction quarterly monitoring was carried out for two years after 
construction.  
 
NEA's ESSD has reasonable experience and capacity for preparing EIAs, IEEs and 
EMPs for the types of activities proposed under the Additional Financing. However, their 
compliance monitoring and auditing have been limited to a few donor-funded projects. 
The proposed Additional Financing will aim to strengthen ESSD's compliance 
monitoring and auditing activities and capacity by encouraging these activities in the 
subprojects supported by the Additional Financing.  
 
Page  5
The Microhydro Village Electrification Program is be implemented through the 
Alternative Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC). AEPC has been following environmental 
guidelines for micro-hydropower schemes.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the NEA component of the proposed Additional Financing 
include (i) project-affected persons (PAPs), (ii) local governments, (iii) the implementing 
agency, and (iv) NGOs and other social organizations active in the areas of the 
subprojects. Public consultation is an integral part of the process throughout the planning 
and execution of the subprojects. The Environment and Social Studies Department 
(ESSD) of NEA will interact closely with PAPs/communities, project personnel, 
government departments, NGOs from the early stages of the project preparation on a 
regular basis for preparing and implementing the RAP. Although significant adverse 
social impacts are not expected to result from the subprojects in this component, the 
project will ensure that community is made aware of the possible adverse social impacts. 
For this purpose public contact drives will be organized by the ESSD and public 
awareness will also be created through NGOs and other social organizations active in the 
affected areas.  Suggestions made by communities and affected groups will be 
incorporated in Resettlement Action Plan during the selection of the route of the 
transmission line and substation and tower locations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/04/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/05/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/04/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/05/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  7
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Haney 
05/05/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
05/06/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh 
05/06/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire 
05/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/06/2009 
Comments:  Cleared on assumption that investment specific EMPs and RAPs for generation and 
transmission lines will be cleared by RSA before commencement of civil works. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
