Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/26/2009 
Report No.:  AC4506
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P113441 
Project Name:  School Sector Reform Program 
Task Team Leader:  Venkatesh Sundararaman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 22, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (70%);Secondary education (30%) 
Theme:  Education for all (67%);Other social development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,885.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
9.00 
 Asian 
Development 
Bank 
113.50 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.30 
 
DENMARK: Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA) 
100.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  17.50 
 
EC: European Commission 
74.10 
 
FINLAND: Ministry for Foreign Affairs 
20.00 
 
NORWAY: Norwegian Agency for Dev. Coop. (NORAD) 
26.00 
 UN 
Children's 
Fund 
1.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
254.10
2,505.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program Development Objective is to increase access to and improve quality of 
school education, particularly basic education (Grades 1-8), especially for children from 
marginalized groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The SSR program finances both the recurrent and the development expenditures covering 
all of school education.  The program focuses on the three pillars of Access, Inclusion, 
and Quality in: (i) Basic Education (Grades 1-8) including Childhood Education and 
Page  2
Development (ECED) and Literacy and lifelong learning; (ii) Secondary Education 
(Grades 9-12); and (iii) Institutional Capacity Strengthening for delivery and monitoring 
of the educational services and products.  These are described below.  
 
Basic Education:  Access and Inclusion in Basic Education focuses on expanding access 
to all children in Nepal through four main mechanisms: (i) physical expansion of 
schooling system, (ii) identifying and reaching the hardest to reach students from 
disadvantaged, marginalized and poor backgrounds, (iii) providing access safety 
nets/educational guarantee schemes, and (iv) through traditional schools.  The SSRP aims 
to enhance quality in Basic Schooling by (i) developing and adopting minimum enabling 
conditions (MECs), (ii) development of national standards for education service delivery 
and the establishment of the Education Review Office (ERO), (iii) teacher professional 
development, and (iv) moving towards a competency based curriculum.   In addition to 
these primary tasks, the SSRP will also help expand the number of centers offering 
courses on Literacy and Lifelong Learning and the number of Early Childhood Education 
and Development (ECED) centers which are both school based and community based.  
 
Secondary Education: The success of EFA has increased the demand for secondary 
education, and SSRP has to address this level of schooling as well. Though the primary 
aim of the SSRP is on strengthening Basic Education, the program will also finance to a 
more limited extent, the expansion of access to, and the improving of quality in, 
Secondary Education.  At this level, the SSRP will also provide access to "soft TVET" 
programs that improve the students ability to transition from school to a work 
environment if they choose to drop out of school after Grade 10.  This will at least equip 
them with a basic understanding of the world of work and the opportunities available to 
them.  
 
Institutional Capacity Strengthening:  The final focus in the SSRP is to strengthen and 
improve the capacities of the schooling infrastructure to deliver on the above.   This 
improves capacity development across all levels of the system, with an emphasis on 
improving capacities at the school level with a focus on the School Management 
Committees and other community level organizations, and at the district level for 
improved planning and execution.  A major emphasis of the SSRP will be to improve 
monitoring and evaluation of both the program, and in particular the ability to carry out 
international standard learning assessments.  The GON has committed to improving its 
capacity to carry out high quality learning assessment by partnering with an international 
agency of repute.  Finally, the GON and the DPs have agreed on a Governance and 
Accountability Action Plan as a way of ensuring a committed focus on improving 
governance in the education sector which will be financed through the SSRP.  
 
These components will be implemented against the backdrop of the major reforms that 
have already taken place in Nepal including; (i) decentralization of authority to schools 
and school management committees, (ii) grants based financing, (iii) decentralized 
recruitment of teachers by the SMC and financed by teacher grants through the provision 
of grants to schools on the basis of Per Capita Financing (PCF), (iv) provision of 
scholarship for children from disadvantaged or marginalized backgrounds who have been 
Page  3
historically been excluded from the schooling system.   In addition, to be able to 
implement the SSRP, the GON needs to further strengthen its policy base and the GON 
and DPs have agreed on a Policy Matrix that aims to strengthen the GON's capacity to 
deliver the SSRP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The SSRP aims to provide access to and equity in quality basic education programs.  The 
program will be implemented nationwide.  No irreversible or large scale environmental 
impacts are foreseen.  Works components are typically small structures which will not 
leave environmental footprint.  Perhaps the three most important issues include: (i) access 
for children with special needs; (ii) environment, water and sanitation issues arising from 
the need for drinking water and toilet facilities; and (iii) earthquake resistant building 
codes given that Nepal is seismically active country. An Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) has been prepared by the GON and has been cleared by the Bank.  
The EMF will be translated into a local language and disseminated both on the Bank site 
and through other means.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
Ms Sangeeta Kumari (SASDI) 
Mr Laxmi Prasad Subedi (SASDA) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The SSRP will not be associated with any large scale, irreversible environmental damage.  
The environmental concerns that emerge from the implementation of the SSRP are 
related to the following: (i) small civil works of a localized nature, (ii) drinking water and 
sanitation, (iii) arsenic free water, and (iv) site selection.  These small civil works 
activities relate to construction of classrooms, libraries or laboratories, schools for 
children with special needs or other administrative buildings. Minor and localized 
Page  4
impacts may arise from such construction and/or upgrading of existing infrastructure. 
Ensuring supply of safe drinking water (e.g. arsenic-free groundwater in Tarai), proper 
sanitation (school latrine and waste management), and appropriate classroom conditions 
(e.g. light, ventilation, temperature, and noise) are key issues that have been addressed. 
Site selection guidelines need to be shared with communities and schools to ensure that 
they have a full awareness of issues that need to be taken into consideration.  
 
The SSRP triggers the OP 4.10 on Indigenous People (IP). Nepal has fifty-nine 
officially recognized indigenous groups, which make up 38% of the population. The 
Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NAFIN) has classified Adivasi/Janajati 
groups into five different categories by characterizing their economic and social features.  
Of these five sub-groups, the two most-disadvantaged are referred to as endangered and 
highly marginalized groups.  While the other three groups are well integrated in the 
national education system, participation rates for these two groups are not proportional to 
their share in the national population.  The specific concerns to be addressed with respect 
to IPs include poor access to schools, discrimination, and access to education in their 
mother tongue or linguistic groups.  Indigenous people are direct beneficiaries of the 
program. The key strategies under the SSRP to address these issues include completion 
and consolidation of the decentralization agenda in school education, particularly, the 
way in which they are established and operate, access to teacher salary grants, student 
scholarships targeted to these most disadvantaged two groups among others, and 
increasing access through alternative and traditional programs.  However, in Nepal, these 
two sub-groups of Janajatis or Adivasis do not represent the universe of marginalized or 
disadvantaged communities. Lessons from EFA reveal that Dalits, differently-abled 
children, girls, domestic child labor, street children, conflict affected children, and 
children with HIV/AIDs, also have low levels of participation and are highly 
marginalized in the schooling system. Since the vulnerable population is larger than just 
the IPs, the GON has traditionally developed frameworks for vulnerable community 
development as a whole, and not merely for IPs.  The vulnerable community 
development framework (VCDF) has been prepared by the MOE/DOE to identify the 
most disadvantaged and marginalized groups in the country and ensure that they can 
equitably access the benefits of the program. Though the VCDF is broader than an IP 
specific plan, it complies with OP/BP 4.10 and ensures that free, prior, and informed 
consultation leading to broad-base community support is available for IPs, and other 
disadvantaged or marginalized groups.  
 
Schools are established by communities in which land is acquired through voluntary 
contributions or through a willing buyer/seller approach.  There will be no involuntary 
land acquisition under the program, and hence, SSRP does not trigger OP 4.12 on 
involuntary resettlement.  Land acquired directly by the GON for the establishment of 
administrative buildings will either be on land that already belongs to the GON, or will be 
acquired through a willing buyer/seller approach. The issue of land acquisition for 
schools in Nepal is more nuanced than normal.Since schools are established by 
communities, the question of how the land is acquired only arises ex-post and at the time 
the school is identified for receiving GON subventions for constructing additional 
classrooms or other buildings.  Traditionally, this land has always been acquired through 
Page  5
voluntary contributions, or by adopting a willing buyer/seller principle.  To meet IDA#s 
safeguards issues on land acquisition the GON has developed a resettlement framework 
which helps to ensure that all such transactions are done in a transparent manner, and 
without fundamentally altering the manner in which schools are established in Nepal. For 
the current school year, these guidelines will be disseminated using government circulars, 
and will be made part of the annual school implementation guidelines from the following 
year. The framework will apply to all schools established during the program period and 
which become eligible and identified for financing of new classrooms under the SSRP, 
and for those schools that were established prior to the start of the SSRP, but acquired 
additional land during the SSRP period with the aim of expanding the number of classes 
they offered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No expected indirect or direct long term impacts after following guidelines above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative proposals were feasible for the small scale infrastructure being considered 
under this program.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The SSRP is a follow-on to the Education For All (EFA) program (2004-2009) 
implemented by the GoN.  For EFA, the GON had carried out an environmental 
assessment and developed the National Environmental Guidelines for School 
Improvement and Facility Management in Nepal (NEG).  For the SSRP, the GON carried 
out a rapid environmental assessment and then used this information together with 
information from EFA, to prepare an Environmental Management Framework (EMF). 
The EMF incorporates experiences from earlier projects and programs, such as, BPEP II, 
SESP, and EFA.  Furthermore, lessons were also drawn from the implementation of the 
National Environmental Guidelines for School Improvement and Facility Management in 
Nepal.  The rapid Environmental Assessment (EA) for SSRP was done through series of 
reviews of experiences related to previous or ongoing similar activities as well as field 
visits and consultation with stakeholders. The SSRP's EMF defines simplified steps, 
procedures and emphasizes use of guidelines or criteria and/or standards while planning 
and developing schools physical infrastructure. These, for example, are related to 
screening, preparation of simple EMP as part of SIP, use of criteria for orientations and 
siting of school buildings, standards for light, ventilation, temperature, and sound as well 
as sanitation and water-quality aspects. The EMF also requires monitoring by DEO and 
DOE, while simultaneously calling for independent annual compliance check.  
 
During EFA implementation, DOE and DEOs have developed familiarity to implement 
the NEG for School Improvement and Facility Management in Nepal. However, they and 
other implementing partners need to be oriented/ trained on the new EMF.  Capacity 
strengthening at different levels (DOE, DEO, and SMC) is necessary in order to improve 
Page  6
environmental management. GoN intends to strengthen capacity by providing 
environmental competency/human-resources; training, orientation and awareness 
activities on environmental planning and management of school and school-facilities; and 
establishing mechanism for coordination and for accessing specific environmental 
services. GON will have a full-time dedicated Environmental Officer at DOE to provide 
EMF implementation oversight. Additional human resources or agency will be hired, if 
necessary, in order to effectively implement the EMF.  
 
The SSRP follows from five years of successful implementation of the EFA, and of 
nearly two decades of a sustained effort to improve educational outcomes under the 
Education for All # New Program of Action (EFA-NPA).  The SSRP has been designed 
using the data from the implementation of EFA, and on evaluations of past programs at 
various points in time, including the recent EFA final evaluation. A Vulnerable 
Community Development Plan (VCDP) was prepared for planning and implementing 
specific interventions for vulnerable and marginalized groups during EFA.  This was 
based on an in-depth social assessment using data from the most recent census and the 
Nepal Living Standards Survey (NLSS 2).  
 
For SSRP preparation, a new and independent social assessment was not undertaken 
based on the GON#s efforts to mainstream inclusion and equity issues in all aspects of 
school education, and because the only new nationally available data was indeed 
administrative records data from the educational management information system 
(EMIS) of the DOE.  The VCDF was prepared to ensure that SSRP is implemented with 
sufficient attention to issues of access and equity for children from the most marginalized 
and disadvantaged groups.  A full scale social assessment was deemed not necessary.  
The main objective of this framework is to facilitate and reinforce the use and application 
of the SSRP strategies and interventions aiming to increase inclusion of the vulnerable 
groups in education. In addition, this VCDF provides policy and procedures to screen 
SSRP impacts on vulnerable communities at community level and preparation and 
implementation of SIP, DEP and ASIP.  The MOE/DOE has sufficient capacity to 
implement the VCDF, as they have very successfully implemented the VCDP under 
EFA.  The evidence of this capacity to implement can be seen in the manner by which the 
MOE/DOE have consistently and successfully mainstreamed similar interventions during 
EFA.  This has gradually eliminated the need for stand-alone plans or frameworks to be 
implemented through the SSRP. The progress made by Nepal in narrowing disparities 
across ethnic groups, gender gaps, and in improving access and equity in primary 
schooling has been impressive.  This has been made possible due to an aggressive pursuit 
of equity across the lines mentioned above.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMF will be shared by the Ministry of Education with other concerned institutions, 
Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology (Division of Environment), and civil 
society. MOE and DOE will put the EMF on their web-sites.  As no affected sub-
population has been identified as this stage, such field level consultation will be waived 
here.  DOE will also translate and publish the EMF in Nepali language which will be 
Page  7
widely circulated to DEOs and SMCs. It will also be made available at the World Bank's 
InfoShop. EMF will be included in the Program Implementation Manual (PIM) also. 
DOE will also disseminate EMF to stakeholders including engineers/sub-engineers, 
district education officers, design consultant as well as to partner INGOs/NGOs through 
orientation program. Relevant subprogram specific safeguard documents/mitigation plans 
(EMPs) prepared subsequently will also be disclosed to the public.  
 
The SSRP has been prepared by the MOE based on the SSR Core Document and from 
feedback received from stakeholder consultations. These consultations were conducted at 
different levels across the country between July and December 2007.  These 
consultations were held with the help of coordination committees constituted at centre, 
regional and district, village, and school levels. Workshops were conducted at central and 
regional levels inviting all stakeholders including educationists, NGOs, lawmakers, 
organizations representing child welfare, IPs, Dalit groups, women's organizations and 
groups representing differently-abled children. Intensive consultations were carried out at 
the DEO level and school level involving political parties, SMCs, VDCs, NGOs, 
Teacher's union, PTA etc.  
 
The MOE has organized a consultations workshop to disclose the draft social safeguard 
instruments, such as, the VCDF, prepared for the implementation of the SSRP at center 
level. The invited participants were from the National Dalit Commission, the National 
Women Commission, the National Federation for Indigenous Nationalities and the 
National Commission for People with Disabilities. The draft documents are also placed at 
the website of the Ministry of Education, GoN.  During Implementation a separate 
discussion will be held with representative of such organization to share the progress 
achieved and outstanding issues every six months during SSRP implementation and at the 
time of the two major annual review meetings.  
 
At village level, public consultations and information dissemination/campaign will be 
carried out in each school catchment area to disseminate information about the project 
and specifically safeguard instruments to local communities. Documentation of all the 
consultations shall be maintained by SMCs and DEOs.  
 
Before sanctioning funds for the schools meeting eligibility criteria for project support 
to create additional infrastructure, public hearing shall be conducted by DEO based on 
land assessment data sheet submitted by SMCs as part of SIPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/11/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/11/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  8
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/11/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/11/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/14/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  9
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Venkatesh Sundararaman 
08/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire 
08/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sangeeta Kumari 
08/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Laxmi Prasad Subedi 
08/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
08/26/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. Please see clearance memo for detaials. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
08/26/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
