Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2009 
Report No.:  AC4222
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P087140 
Project Name:  Project for Agriculture Commercialization and Trade (PACT) 
Task Team Leader:  Gayatri Acharya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project development objective: The project development objective is to assist the 
Government of Nepal in improving the competitiveness of smallholder farmers and the 
agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains in 25 districts supported by the 
project.  This will be achieved by: (i) helping farmer groups and cooperatives engage in 
profitable market-oriented production and improved access to markets through the 
provision of technology and information services and critical public infrastructure and 
linkages to agribusiness; (ii) creating and strengthening industry-wide partnerships along 
the value chain, thus forging linkages between producers, traders, processors, and other 
stakeholders and, (iii) reducing existing obstacles to agriculture and food trade thereby 
increasing the ability of farmers and agribusiness to respond to sanitary and phytosanitary 
(SPS) and food-quality standards to meet domestic and international market 
requirements.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project components:  
 
1.
Component 1 (Agriculture and Rural Business Development) will finance 
demand-based sub-projects proposed by farmer groups, cooperatives, agribusinesses and 
Page  2
other value chain participants to build strategic linkages with a view to increase 
competitiveness, productivity, quality and market access.  
 
2. 
Component 2 (Support for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Facilities and Food Quality 
Standards) will finance activities to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of sanitary 
and phyto-sanitary services in order to reduce existing obstacles to agricultural and food 
trade.  It will also support the private sector’s efforts to gain market advantage through 
improved food quality management.   
 
3. 
Component 3 (Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation) will finance 
overall project management, monitoring and evaluation and reporting.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area comprises of 25 districts (out of 75), which are found in the four 
Development Regions of Nepal, namely, Central, Western, Mid-western and Far-western 
Regions. The Project will be implemented in four development regions of Nepal, in 25 
districts. The twenty five districts straddle mainly the Terai (below 300m) and Hills 
(Siwalik 300m-1,500m and mid mountain 1,500m-3,000m).  Noneof the districts are in 
the Alpine or Arctic zones that range between 3000m – 5000m.  Poly-cultural farming 
systems integrating forests, domestic animals and crop production are practiced in hills 
and mountains, where as in Terai plains livestock and crop production have been 
integrated.  The highly diversified agro-ecological conditions make it possible to grow 
many botanical families and different kind of fruits and vegetables in these districts.  The 
project targets districts with higher level of agriculture commercialization, better 
economic infrastructure and with relatively better organized farmer groups that are 
already engaged in the production of high value commodities and are accessing markets.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDI) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The PACT is an AE Category “B” project, given that significant adverse environmental 
and social impacts are not expected as a result of project activities. The social and 
environmental assessment carried out in sample districts reveal that the project activities 
proposed related to production, processing, testing, trading and marketing of different 
agro-based commercial commodities are relatively small in size with limited adverse 
social and environmental impacts.  
 
Resettlement:  The project envisages small market infrastructure development which 
does not require any major land acquisition/appropriation. Subprojects with major 
physical displacement will not be covered under the project. A framework for R&R 
entitlements and Resettlement Plan (RAP) has been developed to be applied where ever 
required.  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  IESA established that project interventions will not have any 
adverse impacts on IPs (referred as janajatis) and other disadvantaged groups.  However, 
to ensure that their access to project benefits is at par with others, the ESMF includes a 
framework for an IP development plan.  
 
Pest Management. Diversification into new agricultural crops, changes cultivation 
practices and use of high yielding variety, and cultivation of high nutrient demanding 
crops could pose threats on soil fertility status and could spread diseases and pests. In 
anticipation of higher yields, farmers could expand the use of chemical fertilizers, 
pesticides and herbicides more than what is recommended. An environmentally sound 
crop and livestock production practices, as well as sound soil management and fertility 
enhancement measures could be by passed in order to reduce costs of production, leading 
to soil fertility loss and soil degradation.  Therefore, an Integrated Nutrient and Pest 
Management plan has been developed focusing on screening subprojects for nutrient and 
pest management, as well as on creation of awareness about soil and nutrient 
management.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There is no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impact identified during 
the environmental and social assessment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since no major adverse impacts are anticipated from project activities, alternative project 
designs were not considered. However, at the subproject level all efforts will be made to 
ensure that such activities are planned which do not involve any major adverse impacts 
on the local population.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on an assessment of legal and regulatory framework and institutional arrangements 
for social and environment management, and the observed environmental and social 
issues in agriculture sector at large, the borrower has prepared an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) with the objective of minimizing project risks and 
impacts through design suggestions and/or mitigation and management measures.  The 
ESMF is developed through a consultative process with potential beneficiaries in selected 
district and subproject site. The assessment included primary beneficiary survey of 450 
households, focus group discussions with various stakeholders including vulnerable 
members of the community, group meetings, institutional surveys, and consultations with 
local government bodies, private and civil society organizations, and secondary 
stakeholders at district and village levels. SWOT analysis was carried out to fully realize 
the strengths and weaknesses, and constraints and opportunities of the existing 
institutions both at national and local level.  
 
Stakeholders’ consultation:  As part of IESA, stakeholder consultations were held with 
different social groups, NGOs, local government bodies and staff of relevant line 
agencies.  Feedback from these consultations provided input to the development of the 
ESMF. The process of stakeholder consultations will continue during implementation.  
 
The ESMF prepared for the project takes into account the field level situation and the 
existing GON policies and requirements of the Bank’s operational policies. The 
guidelines included in the ESMF relate to (i) environmental and social screening of 
subprojects; (ii) environmental codes of practices; (iii) integrated pest and nutrition 
management plan; (iv) social policies and strategies on resettlement and rehabilitation, 
indigenous or vulnerable people development plan, strategy for gender development, and 
community consultation and communication, (vi) institutional arrangement, and (vii) 
monitoring and evaluation. All subprojects proposed to be covered under the project will 
undergo environmental and social screening to determine their inclusion under the 
project. For subprojects that may result in negative environmental and social impacts 
activities, appropriate Environmental and Social Management plans (ESMP) would be 
prepared and implemented.  
 
Planning and implementation capacity is weak with the Borrower both within the 
project executing Ministry and its major departments. By and large there is lack of 
trained manpower with basic knowledge on emerging environmental and social issues, 
weak linkage between agricultural and other institutions directly or indirectly involved in 
ESMP and weak monitoring and evaluation. Therefore, the project includes an 
institutional strengthening component to develop and strengthen technical and managerial 
capacity both within the Ministry and its associated institutions and agencies. Suitable 
local NGOs and social groups will be involved to facilitate planning and implementing 
ESMF at the subproject level.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are potential value chain participants including farmer 
organizations and farmer groups (commodity associations, cooperatives, women groups, 
etc.), traders, processors, input suppliers, agribusinesses and other service providers. 
Public sector entities such as the MOAC and its departments, local government 
authorities, private sector entities and NGOs, are also important stakeholders. As part of 
project preparation and undertaking IESA, specific consultations were held with various 
stakeho
lders including potential affected communities, farmers’ organizations, traders, 
processors, exporters, transporters and project implementers and facilitators.  
 
Besides making this available to farmer organizations who might participate in project 
activities, ESMF will be available at the District Development Councils, District 
Agriculture, Livestock Services Offices, District Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 
etc. The public and private sector entities will have access to copies of the ESMF for 
distribution among their staff who will be involved in project implementation.  
 
During project implementation, the Borrower will continue to hold consultations with 
various stakeholders at different levels on planning and implementing project activities. 
A
major awareness campaign about the project is envisaged at the district level involving 
potential value chain participants and this will also be used as a forum for disclosure and 
consultation.  In addition, the TA component (supporting subproject planning, 
formulation and implementation) that is aimed at strengthening the capacity of farmer 
groups and participants in the value chain will be a vehicle for continuing consultation on 
social and environmental issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2009 
 
Page  6
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Please note that the resettlement framework, IPP and Integrated nutrient and pest 
management plan are part of the main document and are not submitted as separate 
documents.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  7
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gayatri Acharya 
02/11/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire 
02/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
02/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
04/06/2009 
Comments:  Cleared with comments in memo dated 04/06/2009 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
02/18/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
