Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3837 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P113002 
Project Name: Nepal Food Crisis Response Program 
Task Team Leader: Gayatri Acharya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (50%);Other social services (30%);Irrigation and drainage (20%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
31.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Trust 
Funds 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Bank’s strategy for emergency support is aligned with the Government’s strategic approach 
and takes place in the context of the agreed joint UN response.  The Bank emergency program 
focuses on measures to address the short and medium to long term implications of the global 
food crisis for the country, including on going efforts to strengthen agricultural production and 
safety net mechanisms on a broad scale.  It is fully consistent with the Bank’s Global Food Crisis 
Response Program (GFRP).  The food crisis interventions will be financed out of the newly 
created Food Price Crisis Response Trust Fund and through the restructuring of the existing 
portfolio.  
 
Project Development Objectives  
 
Program Goal: To address the short and medium term implications of the global food crisis for 
the country by strengthening agricultural production and safety net mechanisms on a broad scale.  
 
Page  2
The project development objective of the Social Safety Nets Project is to ensure access to food 
and basic needs for vulnerable households in the short term in food insecure districts and to pilot 
measures to enhance the medium term effectiveness of safety net delivery. The expected 
outcomes of the project are improved access to food in food insecure districts for vulnerable 
groups in the short term, and workable models for improved safety net service delivery in the 
medium term.  
 
The project development objective of the Irrigation and Water Resource Management Project 
remains unchanged and is to improve irrigated agriculture productivity and management of 
selected irrigation schemes and enhance institutional capacity for integrated water resources 
management.  The additional financing supports the intermediate outcome of Component D: 
farmers in selected districts adopt better agricultural production and water management 
techniques. Additional monitoring indicators are however identified.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Nepal Food Crisis Response Program would help finance activities to mitigate both the 
short-term and the medium- to long-term impact of rising food prices in Nepal as a result of the 
global food price trends.  The proposed interventions will support the Government of Nepal’s 
(GoN’s) national strategy to maintain and enhance food security.  It includes support to: (i) the 
implementation of social safety net measures to maintain access to food and basic needs among 
vulnerable households in food insecure districts in the short term and (ii) expedite a supply 
response of agricultural production through the implementation of measures to raise the yields 
and consequently the production of staples.  The program has an indicative outlay of USD 36 
million.  
 
Specific activities under the proposed new project include: (a) a short term program for 
vulnerable districts through the WFP food/cash for work program; (b)fertilizer support and better 
targeting of fertilizer uptake by small holders. This project will focus its activities in the food 
insecure districts.  
 
Under the additional financing proposed in (ii) activities will support (a) small scale and non-
conventional irrigation; (b) increased local production of improved seeds and soil management.  
This additional financing will prioritize food insecure and remote districts.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
As with most food/cash for work programs around the world, the targeting mechanism adopted 
here is a combination of geographic targeting (according to the degree of food insecurity 
spatially) and self selection at the household level (through a lower-than-market wage rate in the 
program). Tentatively, 43 districts will be selected by MOLD using poverty maps and 
information from WFP’s food security surveillance system and the recent WFP Market and Price 
Impact Assessment Report. Within these, 21 districts will implement RCIW (public works) 
activities, and livelihood activities (described in paragraph 30) will be launched in some of the 
remaining districts.   As for project selection for public works, WFP will seek to work with 
VDCs and project activities will be chosen by the communities, prioritizing the most food 
insecure areas. The fertilizer support program is expected to reach 15,600 farmers across 26 food 
deficit and remote districts (an average of 600 farmers per district). Expansion of the program to 
service centers will provide access to remote farmers within these districts.  
Page  3
Under Food for Work, the activities includes construction of demand-driven small scale 
community infrastructures such as dry-season community roads, and  foot/ mule trails; micro-
irrigation and drinking water schemes, small rural market sheds, community buildings, etc.  
Support for critical aricultural inputs (fertilizer) is targeted to the 26 remote districts’ interiors. 
Additional financing toIWRMP will support small-scale and non-conventional irrigation 
technologies (for example, pipes, shallow tubewells, rainwater harvesting, micro-lift irrigation 
and minor surface irrigation), prioritizing food insecure and remote districts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are 2 projects which are being assessed here: (i) Social Safety Net ; (ii) Additional 
financing for Irrigation and Water Resource Management Project. The two projects are managed 
by different institutions.  DoLIDAR's capacity to manage the social safeguard issues under 
RAIDP is weak. Capacity of the involved agencies, particularly the dry-road under RCIW food-
for-work, to implement environmental and social requirements is weak. In the past, RCIW was 
availing external support/TA which now is limited to few roads only. The project, therefore, will 
need to have provision for separate TA for supporting implementation of social and 
environmental safeguards. Also, a mechanism needs to be in place to assure quality and check 
compliance with the environmental and social requirements by a non-implementing party in 
order to ensure effective environmental and social management.  
 
The ESMF for IWRMP remains valid for the additional financing activities. However 
agricultural seed technologies for increased production and productivity may require additional 
expenses for inputs. While it is anticipated that efforts will be focused on multiplication of 
existing varieties, crop budgets for new and improved varieties should be assessed to see if they 
are economically sustainable in the context of small marginal producers.  The capacity of the 
DOA/DOI to manage environmental and social impacts of irrigation and seed related activities 
will need to be imcreased and there is exisitng support under the parent project as well as the 
capacity to engage consulting services under the additional financing to carry out detailed 
assessments as required.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Ms Samantha L. Forusz (SASDI) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Assessment done for RAIDP and IWRMP are valid and resulting ESMFs are applicable. 
Government of Nepal (GON) will prepare a detailed operational procedure and implementation 
manual for environmental and social management drawig from the said ESMFs for application in 
project activities.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
This is triggered to stay consistent with rural roads projects but the size of projects under this 
emergency project will be of a much smaller scale.  Each sub-project requires preparation of 
EMP which will include mitigation measures if required.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Most of the beneficiaries of the project would be in remote areas and would represent largely 
indigenous communities. the IP issue here is largely how to maximize the project benefits and 
the targeting of food insecure and remote populations, as well as small holder farmers would 
address this concern. The IWRMP ESMF will be updated to reflect this targeting and 
requirement to monitor positive and negative impacts. The approved ESMF contains the 
framework for IPDP where necessary.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The approved ESMFs contain the framework for Resettlement where necessary. There could 
be a possibility of land acquisition (RCIW builds rural roads).  Given the small size and demand-
driven nature of these schemes, land could be voluntarily acquired, (either through land pooling 
or voluntary land donation) in which case the managing principles of each will need to be 
developed and the mechanisms, procedures and documentation etc. would need to be spelled out 
upfront.  The planned Operational Procedures and Implementation Manual would be the right 
instrument to describe these and mainstream them into the project operations.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/29/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Overall the Social Safety Nets project is rated as environmental category B. However, a 
separate Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is not required because 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
assessments made in the existing RAID project are valid to this project as well.  The project 
implementation manual should refer to the guidelines under RAIDP ESMF.  Management 
provisions of existing ESMFs need to be adapted to this project because the scales of the 
schemes to be supported under this project are smaller than those under RAIDP, and 
institutional modality for Component I is different than those for RAIDP. Therefore, it is 
necessary to prepare a detailed operational procedures and implementation manual for 
environmental and social management in this project drawing from the ESMF of RAIDP as 
well as environmental and social guidelines of the RCIW and green road approach. Target 
date for this is September 30, 2008. The IWRMP ESMF will apply to the additional 
financing activities and will be updated to indicate the nature of the additional financing 
activities.  This is expected by end September.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gayatri Acharya 
08/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/08/2008 
Comments:  Comments: 1) identify and address capacity gaps; 2)land acquisition arrangements should 
be detailed in operations manual. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
09/24/2008 
Comments:  approved 
