Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2008 
Report No.:  AC3559
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P110731 
Project Name:  Nepal - Health Sector Program Project  Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Jagmohan S. Kang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 6, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Health (86%);Central government administration (12%);Compulsory health 
finance (1%);Sub-national government administration (1%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health (S);Other 
communicable diseases (S);Child health (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective remains to expand access to, and use of, essential 
health care services, especially by underserved populations. Higher targets have been set 
for the extended and expanded health sector program.  Contraceptive Prevalence Rare 
and immunization coverage will increase beyond the initially planned levels.  Further, to 
reflect the renewed focus on the inclusion agenda, specific targets are set for the poor 
which aim at bringing their health status closer to that of the population average.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will support further investment in the health sector along the 
eight areas of work initially planned. These outputs remain consolidated under two 
components: (a) Strengthened Service Delivery, including the expansion of essential 
services (output 1), increased involvement of local authorities in service delivery (output 
2), public private partnerships (output 3) and (b)  Institutional capacity and management 
development through improved sector management in the context of the SWAp (output 
4) increased funding for the sector (output 5), improved availability of drugs, supplies 
and equipment (output 6), human resources development (output 7), and monitoring and 
Page  2
evaluation (output 8). More specifically, the program will be expanded in two key 
directions: first, enhanced availability of and access to essential health care services, and 
second, accelerated progress on key stewardship functions such as monitoring and 
evaluation, accountability and transparency.  
 
In essential health care services (output 1), MOHP will scale up interventions presently 
implemented in selected districts, e.g., community-based integrated management of 
childhood illnesses, obstetric care, and the prevention and treatment of uterine prolapse 
(prevalent among the poorest women).  A neo-natal health plan will be introduced 
initially in 10 districts, 7 of which with low human development index.  To address 
malnutrition among children under 2 years of age, MOHP will carry out pilot 
interventions in three districts and evaluate these for scaling up under NHSP-II.  In 
communicable disease control, the control of Japanese Encephalitis and Leishmaniasis 
will be expanded and the health system’s response to HIV/AIDS strengthened.  
 
To improve the use of essential services by the disadvantaged, two recent initiatives are 
expected to benefit the poor: the removal of some user fees and the introduction of the 
Safe Delivery Incentive Program, a conditional cash incentive to increase institutional 
deliveries and health professional attendance.  MOHP will strengthen the implementation 
and monitoring of these policies and ensure that (i) conditions are in place for the system 
to be able to meet increased demand and (ii) these policies translate into increased access 
for and service use by the poor and socially-excluded groups.  For example, human 
resources for maternal health will be deployed as a priority to increase skilled birth 
attendance (output 7), and the availability of essential drugs in public health facilities will 
be ensured through adequate procurement and effective logistics management (output 6).  
 
Public Private Partnerships (output 3) contribute substantially to improving the 
availability, quality and access to health services in Nepal, but a systematic PPP strategy 
is needed and the dialogue with the private sector needs to be better institutionalized.  A 
Private Health Sector Assessment is currently under way and will be used to engage the 
private sector to achieve the essential services delivery targets, with a focus on 
underserved areas.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation will be improved through the use of additional surveys 
(output 8), as well as governance and accountability at the sector level. Lastly, building 
on the agenda described above, and other elements of the sector program, MOHP will 
elaborate the NHSP-II strategy in consultation with all stakeholders (output 4).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would cover the entire country (75 districts). The geographical context ranges 
from mountainous areas to the foothills and plains of Nepal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Samjhana Thapa (ARD) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDN) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Indigenous People: The social assessment prepared under OD 4.20 for the original 
project found that there would be no adverse impact on indigenous people (Janajatis and 
Dalits).  
 
Environmental Assessment: The program supported by the Bank does not envisage any 
significant construction activities. The Environmental Impact Assessment of the initial 
project completed in June 2004 identified Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) as 
the most significant environmental challenge of the health sector and suggested that 
appropriate regulation on HCW management and systems should be put in place.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indigenous People: No adverse impact expected on Indigenous people.  
 
Environmental Assessment: In the long term, and if widespread, the lack of health care 
waste management can have adverse environmental as well as health consequences as it 
exposes healthcare workers, waste handlers and the communities to infections, toxic 
effects and injuries.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant in the context of a sector-wide program.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Indigenous People:   Although it was not required, a specific Vulnerable Community 
Development Plan (VCDP) was developed by the government to ensure a more inclusive 
implementation. Much of the progress registered so far under the health sector program 
Page  4
relates to health conditions which predominantly affect the poor, and additional inclusive 
policies are being implemented, such as the removal of user fees. Yet specific progress on 
the VCDP has been slow and needs to be accelerated. An MOHP staff has been assigned 
as a focal point for the implementation of VCDP and progress is now being monitored 
every two months.   A pro-poor policies monitoring system under development as well as 
an expansion of the health management information system currently pilot-tested will 
allow for a better monitoring of data disaggregated along socio-economic dimensions 
including ethnicity and caste.  
 
Environmental Assessment:A HCWM Action Plan was prepared for implementation 
during 2005-2009: actions identified by this plan included development of institutional 
framework for HCWM; preparation of National HCWM Guidelines, its dissemination 
and orientation/ training on its use; conducting feasibility study on appropriate technical 
options for HCWM in different types of HCFs and in different environmental settings of 
Nepal (e.g. hills, plains); training on appropriate HCWM practices; preparation and 
introduction of  HCWM Regulation;  and gradually bring HCFs under proper HCWM. in 
the first 3 years of NHSP, MOHP has taken steps to improve HCWM. The Management 
Division has been identified as focal division and an officer has been assigned to work 
full time on waste management issues.  A HCWM orientation book has been developed 
and piloted; HCWM Guidelines for public and private facilities are under preparation.  
Despite these efforts, at mid-term, implementation of the HCWM Action plan remains 
partial and actual impact on the ground limited. Implementation will be pursued in the 
next phase.  
 
Progress on safeguards during the first three year should be seen against the country 
context of continuing political instability.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
At the onset of the project, the government disclosed the Environmental Assessment, the 
VCDP and other supporting documents on their website, as well as in public places for 
wider dissemination. Community and other stakeholder are an integral part of the overall 
program. Many local communities are involved in the management of health facilities, 
and efforts are continuously made to encourage a more bottom-up planning approach, 
adapted to communities needs. Civil society is also involved in the annual reviews of the 
program. In the coming phase of the project, in the context of the governance and 
accountability action plan, new tools will be put in  place to increase accountability 
towards communities. For instance, the MOHP will introduce annual social audits with a 
focus on underserved areas and socially excluded population, and Health facilities will 
post prominently on their premises the services available, prices, staff accountable and 
budgets received and used. These mechanisms should also help ensure that any concerns 
of safeguards issues can be brought to the attention of MOHP and dealt with.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/22/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/18/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/10/2004 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The initial Environmental Assessment and VCDP were disclosed and submitted to 
Infoshop in 2004, at the dates given above, and no new ones were required for this 
additional financing.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
Yes 
Page  6
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jagmohan S. Kang 
04/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire 
04/29/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Samjhana Thapa 
04/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cornelis P. Kostermans 
04/29/2008 
Comments:  This ISDS is approved by SASHD-HNP. 
