Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3475 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P110731 
Project Name: Nepal - Health Sector Program Project  Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Jagmohan S. Kang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Health (86%);Central government administration (12%);Compulsory health 
finance (1%);Sub-national government administration (1%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health (S);Other 
communicable diseases (S);Child health (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
62.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective remains to expand access to, and use of, essential health care 
services (EHCS), especially by underserved populations. More ambitious targets have been set 
for the extended and expanded NHSP.  CPR and immunization coverage will increase beyond 
the initially planned levels.  Further, to reflect the renewed focus on the inclusion agenda, 
specific targets are set for the poor which aim at bringing their health status closer to that of the 
population average.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional financing will support further investment in the health sector along the eight areas 
of work initially planned. These outputs remain consolidated under two components: (a) 
Strengthened Service Delivery, including the expansion of ECHS (output 1), increased 
involvement of local authorities in service delivery (output 2), public private partnerships (output 
3) and (b) Institutional capacity and management development through improved sector 
management in the context of the SWAp (output 4) increased funding for the sector (output 5), 
human resources development (output 6), improved availability of drugs, supplies and equipment 
Page  2
(output 7), and  monitoring and evaluation (output 8). More specifically, the program will be 
expanded in two key directions: first, enhanced availability of and access to essential health care 
services, and second, hastened progress on key stewardship functions such as monitoring and 
evaluation, accountability and transparency.  
 
In the area of EHCS (output 1), and particularly maternal and child health, the government will 
scale up interventions presently implemented in selected districts, in particular community-based 
integrated management of children illnesses (CB-IMCI) and obstetric care. In the area of 
reproductive health, interventions to address uterine prolapse, particularly prevalent among the 
poorest women, will also be scaled up. Further, the recently approved neo-natal health plan will 
be implemented in at least 10 districts. In the area of communicable diseases, the control of 
tuberculosis, Japanese Encephalitis and Kala-
azar will be expanded and the health system’s 
response to the HIV epidemic strengthened.  
 
The inclusion agenda is critical to the success to new Nepal and the government has taken steps 
to improve the use of EHCS by the disadvantaged, in particular by removing some user fees and 
introducing a Maternal Incentive Scheme (MIS) which supports providers and women to 
increase skilled birth attendance. The government will strengthen the implementation and 
monitoring of these policies and seek to ensure that (i) conditions are in place for the system to 
be able to meet an increase in demand and (ii) the policy translates into increased access for the 
poor and marginalized groups. More specifically, human resources for maternal health will be 
developed (output 7), and the availability of essential drugs in all public health facilities will be 
improved through procurement and logistics management (output 6).  
 
Public private partnerships (output 3) to improve the availability, quality and access to services 
have been on-going since the beginning of NHSP, but the government has yet to develop a more 
systematic strategy in this area and institutionalize the dialogue with the private sector. In order 
to develop a full strategy for NHSP-II, the government will engage the private sector to achieve 
the delivery targets of EHCS as described above, with a focus on underserved areas.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation around the initiatives described above will be improved (output 8), 
as well as governance and accountability. Lastly, building on the agenda described above and 
other elements of the sector program, the government will elaborate the NHSP-II strategy in 
consultation with all stakeholders (output 4).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would cover the entire country (75 districts). The geographical context ranges from 
mountainous areas to the foothills and plains of Nepal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Impact Assessment of the initial project completed in June 2004 identified 
Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) as the most significant environmental challenge of 
the health sector. A HCWM Action Plan was prepared for implementation during 2005-2009: 
actions identified by this plan included development of institutional framework for HCWM; 
preparation of National HCWM Guidelines, its dissemination and orientation/ training on its use; 
conducting feasibility study on appropriate technical options for HCWM in different types of 
HCFs and in different environmental settings of Nepal (e.g. hills, plains); training on appropriate 
HCWM practices; preparation and introduction of  HCWM Regulation;  and gradually bring 
HCFs under proper HCWM. However, progress on these actions has been slow and actual 
impact on the ground limited.  Yet, in the first 3 years of NHSP, MOHP has taken steps to 
Page  3
improve HCWM. The Management Division has been identified as focal division and an officer 
has been assigned to work full time on waste management issues.  A HCWM orientation book 
has been developed and piloted; HCWM Guidelines for public and private facilities are under 
preparation.  Despite these efforts, at mid-term, implementation of the HCWM Action plan 
remains partial and will be pursued in the next phase.  
 
The NHSP aims at increasing access to essential health services with a focus on vulnerable 
populations, and the social assessment undertaken in the context of the original project showed 
that NHSP would not negatively impact indigenous people or socially disadvantaged 
communities such as the Dalits. A specific Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) 
was nevertheless developed by the government to ensure a more inclusive implementation. Much 
of the progress registered so far under NHSP relates to health conditions which predominantly 
affect the poor, and additional inclusive policies are being implemented, such as the removal of 
user fees. Yet specific progress on the VCDP has been slow. The project’s mid-term review 
reiterated the importance of implementing it more vigorously and progress is now being 
monitored every two months. An MOHP staff has been assigned as a focal point for the 
implementation of VCDP.  
 
Progress on safeguards during the first three year should be seen against the country context of 
continuing political instability.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Samjhana Thapa (ARD) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The conclusions of the Environmental Impact Assessment done for original NHSP remain 
valid and a new one is therefore not required. Effective implementation of the HCWM Actions 
developed for NHSP needs to be emphasized and ensured. A more systematic implementation of 
the HCWM action plan prepared for the initial project will be pursued.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The conclusion of the initial social assessment are still valid and the VCDP implementation 
will be a key priority of the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/17/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not Applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jagmohan S. Kang 
02/26/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
03/13/2008 
Comments:  Cleared for disclosure in the InfoShop. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cornelis P. Kostermans 
03/14/2008 
Comments:  Cleared by Acting SM SASHD-HNP 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
