Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4273 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P116190 
Project Name: NP Power Add Financing 
Task Team Leader: Michael Haney 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (62%);Renewable energy (30%);Micro- and SME finance (3%);Other 
social services (3%);Central government administration (2%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other financial and 
private sector development (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Nepal is experiencing an energy crisis of unprecedented severity.  As of January, 2009, 
generation shortages and transmission bottlenecks have resulted in grid-connected consumers 
experiencing 16 hours of load-shedding per day.  This has had a highly negative impact on all 
aspects of the economy and has imposed a heavy burden on Nepal's people.  Back-up systems 
which industry, commerce and households have used for years to cope with the poor power 
supply are being pushed to their limits or, in some cases, rendered useless (e.g. there is not 
sufficient power to recharge inverters and electric vehicles that are part of the Kathmandu mass 
transit fleet). The Government of Nepal has requested World Bank support of its emergency 
response to this crisis.  In addition, the Government would also like to ensure the continued 
expansion of its successful, renewable energy based, off-grid rural electrification program.  
 
The objective of the proposed additional finance operation is to scale up support under two 
components of the on-going Power Development Project, the Nepal Electricity Authority 
component and the Microhydro Village Electrication Project, to help the Government of Nepal in 
Page  2
its response to the prevailing crisis and to ensure continued support to the rural electrification 
program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional financing for two components of the on-going Power Development Project 
includes investments in rehabilitation of existing generation assets; transmission and distribution 
system strengthening; and microhydro village electrification schemes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The investments supported under the project will be located in Nepal, at various locations 
throughout the country.  The proposed transmission line investment would run between 
Bharatpur and Bardghat in the central Terai.  The proposed hydropower generation rehabilitation 
investments are located at the Kaligandaki HEP in central Nepal.  The proposed thermal 
generation rehabilitation investments are located in Hetauda and Biratnagar.  The proposed 
distribution strengthening investments would be located in Kathmandu Valley.  The locations of 
the microhydro village electrification investments would be determined at a later date.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has satisfactory capacity for management of safeguards-related issues.  As part of 
the preparation of the parent project, an Environmental and Social Assessment and Management 
Policy Framework (ESAMPF) was prepared by the Government; the ESAMPF will be applied to 
the proposed new investments under the NEA component.  The ESAMPF contains specific 
templates for individual environmental assessments for micro, small and medium hydro; 
transmission lines; distribution lines; and substations.  The Environment & Social Studies 
Department at NEA has good capacity.  For the microhydro component, the Alternative Energy 
Promotion Center, the implementing agency, has prepared and follows a comprehensive 
"Environment Assessment Guidelines for Community-owned and Managed Micro Hydro 
Schemes".  
 
It is expected that the proposed new investments will not trigger any additional safeguard 
policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDI) 
Ms Jane T. Nishida (SASDI) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The existing Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Policy Framework for 
the on-going Power Development Project will be applied to this Additional Finance operation, 
with any modifications as required.  
 
Several of the proposed subprojects require EIAs, which have been completed in most cases 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and are under review.  The proposed Bharatpur-Bardghat 220 kV transmission line (75 km) is the 
single most significant (from a safeguards perspective as well as from the perspective of benefit) 
subproject proposed for financing under the operation. A full EIA was completed for this 
subproject and approved by the Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology. A significant 
part of the proposed transmission line would pass through forests (state, community and private 
forests). The EIA Report identifies construction and operational phase impacts and suggests 
mitigation measures including alternative alignment of the transmission line. The main impacts 
identified include: loss of forests areas/trees including some threatened species e.g. Simal and 
Sal trees; impacts on wildlife particularly due to impacts on Barandabar forest; acquisition of 
land and houses; construction related accidents; bird collision; decline in land value; hindrance to 
farming affecting agriculture production cost; and loss of agricultural production.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The proposed Bharatpur-Bardghat 220 kV transmission line passes through forest areas.  The 
EIA completed for this subproject addresses forest issues.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The EIA for the proposed Bharatpur-Bardghat 220 kV transmission line indicated a small 
level of acquisition of land and houses (4-5 households affected) among the anticipated project 
impacts. Three studies need to be carried out immediately as required by EIA/SIA framework) 
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) along the affected VDCs/ Municipalities  
 
ii) A brief Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) as some households need to be acquried based 
on EIA study, and  
 
iii) A Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) for the people in the affected 
areas.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/04/2009 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard-related studies will be implemented over April-June 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Haney 
03/12/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/12/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. Please copy us guidelines on micro-hydros, prepared by the client. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
03/12/2009 
Comments:  The issues appear adequately hightlighted. I defer to Eric and team on environment and 
social. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
