Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3936 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nicaragua 
Project ID: P114375 
Project Name: National Seed System Strengthening (Food Crisis Response Program) 
Task Team Leader: Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (70%);Agricultural extension and research (30%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the operation is to improve the availability of and the access to high quality 
seed, in order to sustainably increase agricultural productivity. This objective is fully compatible 
with the overall objective of the Second Agricultural Technology Project (PTA), which is “to 
provide rural households and communities with broader access to sustainable agricultural, 
forestry and resource management services and innovations, thereby stimulating higher 
agricultural productivity”. Agricultural Technology Project (PTA), which is “to provide 
ruralhouseholds and communities with broader access to sustainable agricultural, forestry and 
resource management services and innovations, thereby stimulating higher agricultural 
productivity”.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The operation will work across the country and will strengthen the seed supply system, from 
genetic seed to certified seed. The operation has an intended duration of three years. It will focus 
on the basic grains (beans, maize, sorghum and rice) because these are the most important 
elements in the diets of the rural and urban poor most affected by the food crisis, and because 
Nicaragua has excellent conditions to increase production of these crops.  US$ 0.5m is currently 
Page  2
planned for running the project and for establishing an effective M&E system. The operation will 
support four fields of activities.  
 
First, the capacity of the farmer organizations that will produce seed will be strengthened. Seed 
production and marketing skills will be improved; the infrastructure required for the production, 
processing, storage and marketing of certified seed will be put in place. The expectation is that 
13 local seed businesses will be working at the end of the operation, most of them based on 
existing farmer cooperatives. The cost of this component is estimated at around US$ 3.1m.  
 
Second, technical assistance to seed producers and certification systems of seed production will 
be strengthened. A two tier extension system will be put in place, in which existing extensions 
agents are first trained, who then train farmer experts. The farmer experts will then accompany 
the seed production on farm. The cost of this component is estimated at US$ 0.8m.  
 
Third, a revolving fund will be established. Member farmers of the participating cooperatives 
will be able to receive credit for seed production through the “Fondo de Credito Rural”. 
Cooperatives may also receive credit for buying seed from its members, and for storing it. 
Interest rates and other conditions will be in line with other credit providers, taking account of 
the special nature of seed production. The cost of this component is estimated at US$ 2.1m. The 
component will be designed in compliance with OP 8.30 on financial intermediary lending.  
 
Finally, facilities for germplasm characterization and basic seed production will be 
strengthened. Through this facility Nicaragua will increase the use of productive land races, 
which will help to further lift agricultural productivity, while ensuring adequate adaptation to 
local conditions. While the more productive land races may also be used in genetic improvement 
programs, such activities will not be funded through the project. The cost of this component is 
estimated at US$3.5m.  
 
Project implementation arrangements: Currently component 1.3 (Seed production and 
certification)of the PTA II project is undertaken by the Nicaraguan Institute for Agricultural 
Technology (Instituto Nicaraguense de TecnologiÂ­a Agropecuaria;INTA), under the 
supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAGFOR), who is the implementing 
agency of the parent project. Since the additional financing concerns scaling up of the ongoing 
activities, some of the implementation arrangements will have to be modified however. 
MAGFOR will remain the implementing agency. INTA will remain responsible for the 
production and supply of the superior seed categories (genetic and basic seed) and will lead the 
selection of the cooperatives that will be engaged in the project. INTA will also lead the 
development of the facilities for germplasm characterization and basic seed production. The 
Rural Credit Fund (Fondo de Credito Rural; FCR) will manage the revolving fund and develop 
the credit lines for seed production. Support in the feasibility studies, the design and installation 
of equipment in the local seed businesses will be obtained from the Rural Development Institute 
(Instituto de Desarrollo Rural; IDR) and from the Nicaraguan Enterprise for Storing Basic Grains 
(Empresa Nicaraguense Acopiadora de Granos Basicos; ENABAS). Where possible, the 
implementation arrangements will be built on the arrangements that are currently put in place for 
the GFRP TF donation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project will be carried out at the national level in Nicaragua (specific departments to be indicated 
during appraisal).   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has the capacity to implement safeguards compliance. The agencies involved are the 
same (MAGFOR and INTA) as the PTA-II project with the addition of two: The Rural Credit 
Fund (Fondo de Credito Rural; FCR) and Nicaraguan Enterprise for Storing Basic Grains 
(Empresa Nicaraguense Acopiadora de Granos Basicos; ENABAS. The institutional capacity of 
these institutes will be evaluated and any remedial measures recommended during the October 
preparation mission (October 20 to 24th).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake (LCSAR) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project through its proposed activities in component 1 (improved seed businesses of 4 
basic grains 
–corn, rice, beans and sorghum) and 4 (strengthening germplasm and basic seed 
production facilities) mainly and to a lesser extent through component 3 (establishment of the 
revolving fund with in kind payment option) may have moderate to low environmental impacts 
in some of the project sites requiring taking appropriate mitigation actions. It also triggers 
OP4.09 and thereby trigger OP 4.01.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The original project did not trigger this policy. However given the potential for increase use 
of pesticides in some of the grain production areas that may have a deleterious impact on critical 
habitats (e.g. rice and drainage basins to lake Nicaragua) this policy may be triggered. 
Information provided from the Nicaragua Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) 
recommendations of reducing degradation of the lake Nicaragua case study will be used to assess 
and take necessary mitigation measures.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Forest policy was triggered under the original project, and measures are included in the 
current EMF.  The additional operation will not work in forest areas, therefore no additional 
safeguards requirements are necessary.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will not directly finance large-scale purchase of agrochemicals, but the seed 
technology innovations and adoption may produce an increased use of production and 
postharvest inputs including prohibited use of pesticides and improper use of permitted ones, and 
as such triggers OP4.09.    Two responses are foreseen.  First of all, the second component of the 
additional operation (certification) intends to ensure that seed is produced in a healthy and 
environmentally sustainable way, and in the further design of this component, it will be ensured 
that the certification requirements and procedures allow for effective mitigation of pest 
management risk.  Secondly, the Safeguards Arrangements prepared for PTA II (including an 
Integrated Crops Management Plan) will be maintained for the additional operation.  They 
provide guidance on how to ensure lowest environmental impact include a list of prohibited 
agrochemicals, and contain an Indigenous People Action Plan.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will be executed in the entire national territory and include main production areas 
of the four grain crops where selected groups of indigenous population lives as well as the 
Atlantic region where most of the indigenous communities resides and as such triggers this 
policy.    The development of seed businesses in farmer cooperatives may trigger the Indigenous 
People policy, because indigenous people may be part of the targeted cooperatives. If so the 
Indigenous People Development Plan, developed for PTA II will be activated.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/03/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Currently the PTA II project is rated in the ISR as satisfactory for the Indigenous People 
policy and marginally satisfactory for Pest Management, because the factual compliance with 
safeguards is adequate but not sufficiently documented. The updated Environmental Report 
of the PTA-II project that is being prepared by the borrower will be ready by the proposed 
Mid-Term review (MTR) dates (November 24th). Safeguards performance assessment is 
integral to the Mid term review. In addition the lessons learnt during implementation (upto 
the MTR stage) will be described in the PAD-ISDS. The project safeguards documents will 
be also updated to include measures that address the impact of this scaled-up operation, 
particularly in the seed sector. Based on the MTR review by the safeguard specialist(s) 
necessary adjustments to the safeguards rating will be done and reflected in the PAD-ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen 
11/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
11/12/2008 
Comments:   
