Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/18/2008 
Report No.:  AC3722
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P109691 
Project Name:  Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development 
Task Team Leader:  Michael J. Goldberg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (44%);Central government administration 
(30%);Micro- and SME finance (26%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to improve the competitiveness of micro, small, and 
medium enterprises (MSMEs) and the business climate that affects those firms.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would be implemented over five years and improve the quality and 
affordability of services to MSMEs through four components: (i) the business and 
investment climate for MSMEs; (ii) matching grants for MSMEs to support innovations, 
environmental improvements, and forward and backward linkages; (iii) financial services 
through a partial credit risk guarantee system for MSMEs in coordination with regulated 
financial institutions, and (iv) improved strategic, technical and coordination abilities of 
MIFIC in the field of competitiveness.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would have the following coverage.  The registries improvement work under 
Component 1 
–
business climate improvement – would take place in Managua and at 
least eight secondary cities.  Other systems related to increasing access to quality 
Page  2
assurance and certification would be centralized in Managua.  The matching grants 
(Component 2) would be open to firms throughout the country. In keeping with the 
Government’s National Development Plan and objectives, special attention will be paid 
to women as well as indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan communities and MSMEs on the 
Caribbean coast.   The financial sector work of Component 3 would have national 
implications, since MSMEs that benefit from the partial credit guarantees could be 
located anywhere in Nicaragua.  However, this will depend on the branch systems and 
geographic coverage of qualified financial institutions.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Anjali Acharya (ENV) 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp (LCSDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment (OP/BP 4.01):  There are no large scale, significant, and/or irreversible 
impacts expected from this project.  However, potentially slightly adverse environmental 
effects could occur with components 2 and 3 if proper safeguards are not put into place.   
 
Component 2: Without prevention measures, the matching grants offered in this 
component could lead to some adverse environmental effects.  Grants would finance pre-
investment and investment activities and be awarded competitively through a series of 
rounds with different technical focus (such as quality enhancements and certification, 
innovation, or resolving value chain bottlenecks for a specific sector). If no safeguards 
are implemented, the grants could potentially fund investment activities with negative 
spillover effects on the environment.  
 
Component 3: Similar to component 2, component 3 could indirectly permit adverse 
environmental effects if adequate safeguards are not implemented.  This component 
would improve MSME access to affordable, reliable, and appropriately designed 
Page  3
financial products, providing a Partial Credit Risk Guarantee (PCRG) for loans by 
regulated financial institutions to MSMEs.  Since private financial institutions will 
ultimately determine which enterprises benefit from the PCRG, they might not screen for 
whether money loaned to MSMEs would have potential negative environmental impacts.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Women:  Adverse effects are not expected for 
indigenous peoples with this project, but indigenous peoples are present in and may have 
a
collective attachment to project areas.  Since many indigenous peoples own micro and 
small enterprises and the geographic reach of the project includes indigenous regions, the 
proje
ct’s activities should benefit indigenous peoples.  Women make up a large share of 
managers of enterprises and should therefore also benefit from these programs promoting 
their development. The project is committed to ensuring that the positive benefits of the 
project, particularly of components 1 and 2, reach indigenous peoples and women.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment (OP/BP 4.01):   Although there may be indirect risks, the matching grants 
component is likely to have positive long-term environmental spillover effects.  
Competitive rounds for the matching grants will each be centered on a theme and these 
themes will be geared toward areas with the potential to generate public goods and 
positive spillovers/externalities.  One possible theme is enterprises hoping to adopt “clean 
technologies.”  The PCRG component could indirectly promote enterprises with 
environmentally unsound practices if such enterprises benefit from the program.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Women:  The project expects to have long-term 
neutral or positive impacts on indigenous peoples and women.  By adjusting some of its 
services to cater to the particular needs of indigenous peoples, such as offering materials 
related to business climate improvement in indigenous languages, the project will 
encourage their MSME development.  Since many indigenous peoples and women own 
micro and small enterprises, their formalization and growth should have an important and 
positive impact on their livelihoods.  The activities of this project will reinforce ongoing 
Bank supported initiatives, such as the Nicaragua Broad-Based Access to Financial 
Services Project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project team considered excluding any matching grant applications with potential 
environmental impacts, but decided instead to use evaluation and screening mechanisms 
to promote clean technologies and mitigate adverse environmental effects.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment (OP/BP 4.01):   The Environmental Management Unit (UGA) of MIFIC, 
the coordinating agency of the project, will be primarily responsible for ensuring all 
executing agencies are dealing responsibly with any environmental issues.They will also 
work in consultation with The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
Page  4
(MARENA) who will provide periodic reviews of ongoing work. As part of component 
4, Institutional Strengthening of MIFIC, the agency will build its capacity to evaluate the 
environmental impact of the components. This strengthening can be through training or 
by hiring an external expert consultant.  
 
A
framework has been created that specifies the environmental evaluation processes for 
both the matching grants and the partial credit risk guarantee mechanism.  Firms must 
submit the environmental documentation (permits or other authorization) that national, 
regional, or municipal laws require according to their environmental impact. The 
evaluation process -  which includes participation from MIFIC-UGA, the FNI Special 
Credit Committee, Private Financial Institutions, and MARENA - will determine if firms 
have appropriate documentation and are complying with said documentation.  The 
framework will not exclude subprojects without proper documentation, but will 
encourage firms to meet requirements so that it can then reconsider their applications. A 
standard negative list, also based on national law, excludes subprojects with potential 
major environmental impacts (e.g. large infrastructure projects) and will be used by the 
evaluating agencies.  
 
Also, as every round for the matching grants is theme specific, the percentage of each 
grant application that the project will finance will vary by round. Rounds with the highest 
positive spillovers and externalities (e.g. clean technologies) will receive a higher 
percentage of financing from the project (i.e. the private firm has to contribute a smaller 
percentage of the initiative’s total cost).  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Women:   With its Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework, the borrower is committed to ensuring that project activities reach 
historically excluded populations.  To that end, through the business and investment 
climate improvement component, the project aims to reach indigenous populations and 
women with its decentralized service centers that should facilitate the legal formalization 
of their enterprises.  Also, by working with organizations already targeting indigenous 
peoples and women, the component will raise awareness of its programs and offer 
materials in indigenous languages.  Through component 2, the project will also aim to 
reach indigenous peoples and women.  Particularly if insufficient percentages of 
indigenous peoples are applying for and receiving matching grants in the initial rounds, 
the project could have a competitive round aimed at sectors that are important in 
primarily indigenous regions. Similarly, they could offer rounds to target key clusters for 
women and certain rounds will have quotas for the number of grants awarded to women-
owned enterprises.  Furthermore, since large populations of indigenous peoples live on 
the Caribbean coast, project activities will be coordinated with a representative from the 
Office for Caribbean Coast Development.  
 
A
member of the team at MIFIC or a local consultant will monitor the results of the 
IPPF and report findings to government officials responsible for support to indigenous 
peoples and women, as well as the Bank project team.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment (OP/BP 4.01):  
 
Ministry of Economy (MIFIC) and the Environmental Management Unit (UGA):  
MIFIC is the coordinating agency for the project and the executing agency for all 
components, except component 3.  UGA will be primarily responsible for coordinating 
with executing agencies and ensuring they are implementing the environmental 
framework.  UGA will also be part of the technical committee for the matching grants 
and will determine if firms are meeting environmental requirements.  
 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA):   MARENA will work 
with MIFIC to ensure all executing agencies are dealing responsibly with any 
environmental issues.    This ministry will provide periodic spot-checks to ensure that no 
inappropriate investments are supported.  
 
Financiera Nicaraguense de Inversion (FNI) Special Credit Committee:  The FNI 
Special Credit Committee will be the executing agency for component 3, the partial credit 
guarantee.  It will be responsible for sharing the negative list of activities with 
participating financial institutions and, through coordination with MIFIC and MARENA, 
for monitoring to ensure these activities are not being included.  
 
Financial Institutions: Private financial institutions that qualify for the PCRG would 
share the negative list and eligibility criteria they receive from FNI with MSMEs 
applying for loans under this program.  They will be responsible for ensuring they do not 
lend money to enterprises engaged in activities on the negative list.  
 
MSMEs: MSMEs and associations and chambers that are applying for either the 
matching grants or the PCRG will receive the negative list of activities and eligibility 
criteria.  They will be expected to meet country, regional, and municipal level 
environmental requirements and to provide documentation indicating they meet these 
requirements.  For the matching grants component, they will be made aware of the 
possibility of using the matching grants for adapting “clean” technologies and that 
selection criteria will incorporate the use or planned use of such technologies.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Women:  
 
Ministry of Economy (MIFIC):  MIFIC is the coordinating agency for the project and 
will be primarily responsible for ensuring all executing agencies and units are 
implementing programs to reach excluded populations.  MIFIC will be the executing 
agency for all components, except 3.  After consultation with the Bank team, MIFIC will 
be primarily responsible for implementing the Indigenous People’s Planning Framework 
(IPPF).  
 
Indigenous leaders: A social assessment was carried out in December 2007 to provide 
input into the IPPF and included contributions from indigenous leaders.  The project will 
Page  6
continue to consult with these leaders and interested community members during project 
implementation.  
 
Women: The social assessment included input from women who own enterprises and 
women who are community leaders.  The project will continue to consult with these 
leaders and others identified during project implementation.  The project will also consult 
with organizations that target their work at women.  
 
Nicaragua Institute for Women (IMIN):  This Government agency will collaborate with 
MIFIC to ensure that project activities reach women.  They will also provide important 
inputs into adjusting project activities if there is low participation from women.  
 
Organizations working in regions with high concentrations of indigenous peoples:  The 
social assessment also included input from non-governmental organizations, such as the 
Association of Indigenous Women on the Atlantic Coast (AMICA) in RAAN, and 
microfinance institutions.    The project intends to work closely with these organizations, 
particularly for promoting awareness of programs.  
 
Regional Governments:   The government of RAAN (GRAAN) and the government of 
RAAS (GRAAS) were consulted for the social assessment. These are both regions with 
large concentrations of indigenous populations. The project will continue to consult with 
these government representatives to ensure the project is meeting the needs of their 
indigenous populations.  A representative from the Office of the Caribbean Coast 
Development will also be consulted to provide periodic reviews of the project’s work.  
 
FNI and Private Financial Institutions: For component 3 (the partial credit risk 
guarantee) both FNI and participating private financial institutions will be sensitized on 
social screening through the technical assistance training provided on the function and 
use of the PCRG.  FNI already works with leading MFIs in RAAN, such as Pana Pana.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/17/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael J. Goldberg 
07/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/15/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp 
07/15/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Anjali Acharya 
07/15/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Yira J. Mascaro 
07/18/2008 
Comments:  The project has already been approved by the Board, but the team realized the ISDS 
Appraisal Stage was not officially submitted through the system. 
