Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3452
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P108974 
Project Name:  Nicaragua Hurricane Felix Emergency Recovery Project 
Task Team Leader:  Enrique Pantoja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 6, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Housing construction 
(35%);Sub-national government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support the sustainable recovery of the 
communities affected by Hurricane Felix in the North Atlantic Autonomous Region 
(RAAN) of Nicaragua.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will be financed through an IDA Emergency Recovery Credit of 
US$ 17 million equivalent, of which US$5 million are being advanced through a Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF). The Project will be implemented by the Government of 
RAAN (GRAAN) with support from the relevant ministries and sector agencies. The 
PPF, however, will be administered by the Executive Secretariat of the National System 
for Disaster Prevention, Mitigation and Response (SINAPRED), in close coordination 
with GRAAN.
 Specifically, the Project, in line with the Government’s recovery strategy, 
will support the recovery of the small scale fisheries sector (pesca artesanal) to restore 
incomes of fishermen and foster economic development, the reconstruction of housing 
and social infrastructure, and the strengthening of the regional government to implement 
Page  2
externally-funded projects and lead development efforts in general.  The Project has four 
components:  
 
(1) Early Recovery (US$5.0 million).  This Component, financed through the PPF, will 
provide (a) retroactive financing (US$2.0 million) for materials (excluding food 
expenditures) and operating costs directly related to Hurricane Felix’s relief and early 
disaster rehabilitation efforts; and (b)(i) institutional strengthening of GRAAN to ensure 
readiness for project implementation and support key project preparation activities such 
as the social and environmental assessments required for the Project as per the applicable 
Bank safeguards and related management plans and manuals, (ii) Support to the 
Executive Secretariat of SINAPRED to administer the PPF, (iii) early rehabilitation of 
housing, primarily involving replacement of zinc roofs and their structures, and (iv) early 
rehabilitation of fisheries and (v) agriculture sector, mainly through community-based 
seeds distribution and provision of urgently needed equipment and supplies to fishermen.  
 
(2) Recovery of Fisheries Sector (US$6.3 million). This sub-component will help (a) 
restore the incomes of men and women engaged in the small scale fisheries sector by 
providing (i) credit to help them buy better boats and have working capital, and (ii) 
technical assistance and training; (b) rehabilitate the Lamlaya Fish Processing Plant, 
along with a small shipyard and a community store for fishing supplies. Women, who lost 
their income sources with the disaster, will be given the opportunity to operate the plant 
and its related facilities. To facilitate this strategy, women will be given credit for 
working capital to re-start plant activities, as well as expert advice, technical assistance 
and training. This sub-component will also include financing for the necessary feasibility, 
engineering and environmental studies; and (c) will help rehabilitate or reconstruct 
several community landing docks and small piers affected by the disaster.  
 
(3) Reconstruction of Housing and Social Infrastructure (US$5.4 million). Under this 
Component, the Project will help (a) reconstruct 500 houses in two communities, using 
traditional materials and designs, but applying standards that consider disaster risk and 
following a community-driven process; and (b) reconstruct community churches, 
community centers, and small health clinics. All structures will be built to safer standards 
and with adequate technical supervision, given especially that the community churches 
and centers are used by the locals as emergency shelters.  
 
(4) Institutional Strengthening for Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring 
and Evaluation (M&E) (US$0.3 million). This Component will finance equipment, 
software and training, as well as additional technical and fiduciary experts for GRAAN to 
ensure that the implementation demands of the Project are fully met. This component also 
includes financing for the annual external audits and necessary surveys and support to 
implement the Project’s M&E system.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project focuses on RAAN, the region most affected by Hurricane Felix, and one of 
the poorest regions in one of the poorest countries of Latin America and the Caribbean A 
Page  3
large rainforest crossed by several large rivers covers the region, characterized by a hot 
and humid climate and a sparse yet multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-lingual 
population, including many of Afro-Caribbean descent.  Given its culture and history, 
RAAN (along with the South Atlantic Autonomous Region or RAAS) has enjoyed partial 
autonomy since the mid 1980s.  
 
Rehabilitation and reconstruction works will take place in already settled and mainly 
rural communities in the six most affected municipalities (out of a total of eight 
municipalities in the region). The bulk of Project activities, however, will benefit selected 
communities of Puerto Cabezas, the most affected municipality. Support to the small 
scale fisheries sector will focus on the 19 most affected coastal communities, where the 
storm disrupted extensive marine areas and uprooted mangroves. These communities 
concentrate in three of the six most affected municipalities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO) 
Mr Marvin R. Ortega Rodriguez (LCSAR) 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (LCSSO) 
Mr Manuel Basterrechea (LCSUW) 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp (LCSSA) 
Mr Joel Zamora Cortes (LCCNI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment  
 
The Project is considered Category “B” overall and OP 4.01 is triggered.  In general, no 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected from Project 
implementation. Most of the works included in the project are of a small scale and would 
likely correspond more closely to a Category “C” impact rating.  Housing rehabilitation 
mainly involves replacement of zinc roofs, while housing reconstruction, which will be 
done using traditional materials and design and applying safer building standards, will 
Page  4
focus on two communities where all the houses were destroyed.  Other structures to be 
reconstructed under the Project are community centers and churches, community landing 
docks and piers, and small health clinics.  The potential environmental effects generated 
by the reconstruction of these structures are likely to result principally from the disposal 
of rubble and other byproducts of construction. The four health clinics, however, will 
offer small surgery and natal care services, posing some environmental risk.To address 
this, the Ministry of Health (MINSA) has prepared acceptable plans for the management 
of solid wastes, including medical wastes, and standards for the construction of each 
clinic, which would include a sanitary cell and small incinerator.  
 
Two structures are likely to cause some localized environmental effects during its 
rehabilitation and future operation. These are the Fish Processing Plant and ancillary 
shipyard in Lamlaya, together covering an area close to 5,000 square meters.  Although 
no construction in new areas or expansion is planned, the rehabilitation process will 
produce rubble, dust and noise.  Temporary impact on the population will be minimal as 
only three families live close by to the plant.  With respect to future impacts, such as 
solid and liquid was
te and odor emissions, GRAAN, as the Project’s Implementing 
Agency, is required to obtain an environmental permit from the Regional Secretariat for 
Natural Resources (SERENA) before works commence on these structures.  SERENA 
also requires an environmental impact assessment and an environmental management 
plan that will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  
 
The proposed activity to restore the income of the men and women engaged in the small 
scale fisheries sector requires close attention due to its potential effects on the region’s 
marine resources. Although under the project fishing would remain at sustainable levels, 
and the project would help diminish pressure on shrimp and lobster resources, the long-
term risk of over-fishing remains, particularly considering the impact that the hurricane 
had on the region’s coastal ecosystem, estuaries and lagoons. A plan to rehabilitate these 
ecosystems has been prepared by the Government and will be implemented in parallel to 
the Project. Moreover, monitoring and assessment of marine ecosystems’ recovery will 
continue during the life of the Project to make sure that the recovery of the small scale 
fisheries sector is indeed sustainable. Accordingly, OP 4.04 has been triggered as a 
precaution.  
 
The above concerns notwithstanding, direct impact on marine resources due to the 
project’s support to the small scale fisheries sector would be minimal, given that the 
Project would finance boats that are culturally and technologically appropriate for small 
scale fishing.  Based on intense consultations with potential beneficiaries, of a total of 
150 boats to be provided under the Project, 110 would be relatively small and considered 
replacement of existing technology.  
 
Social  
 
RAAN is a predominantly multi-cultural and multi-ethnic region with a majority of 
population of indigenous/ethnic origin. At least six indigenous groups share RAAN’s 
territory with the Afro-Nicaraguans, creoles, and increasingly mestizo communities, 
which have grown as migration to the Atlantic coast has accelerated. The region is also 
Page  5
one of the poorest ones in Nicaragua, and Hurricane Felix affected deeply poor and 
vulnerable indigenous and ethnic communities.  The Project is focused on supporting the 
sustainable recovery of these communities.  
 
Given the characteristics described above, the entire project will be consistent and in full 
compliance with OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples).  Over 98 per cent of the project 
beneficiaries will be indigenous community members (based on self-identification), 
regional and local government institutions are led and managed by indigenous/ethnic 
people, and local NGOs and civil society organizations (CSOs) are also the representative 
bodies of local indigenous/ethnic peoples. To understand and mitigate potential social 
risks, ethnic conflicts, gender inequities, and institutional weaknesses relevant to RAAN, 
a
social assessment is being completed.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement  
 
The Project will not finance any activity requiring resettlement.  Most works will consist 
of rehabilitation or reconstruction of small structures in their current locations.  No 
additional land is needed for the rehabilitation of the processing plant and shipyard. If for 
reasons related to disaster risk, territorial planning or a community decision, a new 
location for a small structure were necessary, the selection process for the new site will 
be done with community participation and agreement, in coordination with the concerned 
local government. This represents not just the most practical option, but also the most 
culturally compatible one because in most Project areas the land is communally owned 
(even though not all land has been demarcated or titled), and accepted traditional 
practices for the allocation of land for social infrastructure already exist.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources  
 
The Project does not require deep or large excavations. As such, it is not expected to 
have a negative impact on physical cultural resources, such as movable or immovable 
objects, sites, structures, groups of structures, natural features or landscapes with 
archeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other 
cultural significance.  Nevertheless, OP 4.11 is triggered because the nature of the works, 
as well as the areas they will be implemented in, still makes it possible for such resources 
to be turned up accidentally.  Accordingly, the Project Operations Manual will 
incorporate procedures for handling “chance finds” in which, among other things, a 
project activity will be stopped if any material is found which may be considered to have 
some historical or cultural significance.  An appropriate Project official will be notified, 
and the area in which the material was found will be marked and the evidence preserved 
for analysis. Safeguards Preparation and Supervision Plan.  
 
As per OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies), emergency recovery 
operations are subject to accelerated, consolidated, and simplified procedures and 
streamlined ex-ante requirements. As such, preparation of required assessments is phased 
into the early stages of project implementation, while safeguard supervision is intensified.  
Accordingly, an environmental assessment (EA) and environmental management plan 
(EMP), as well as a social assessment (SA), are being prepared for the Project, following 
the processes described below.  
Page  6
A
brief environmental analysis of project components and activities was undertaken 
during appraisal, in coordination with the regional government.  Simultaneously, Terms 
of Reference for the EA and EMP have been prepared, and funds provided under the PPF 
for their preparation.  These documents will be part of the Operations Manual, which will 
also include procedures for the fulfillment and enforcement of environmental 
management requirements related to the different types of works to be executed under the 
Project.  As noted above, rehabilitation activities for the processing plant and shipyard 
will not start until the specific environmental impact assessment and management plan 
have been completed and received the Bank’s no objection.  
 
The Project’s social assessment is being undertaken in two phases. The first phase was 
conducted during Project appraisal through intensive community consultations. Under the 
leadership of the regional and central government, indigenous leaders, women’s 
organizations, church representatives and local government authorities were invited to 
help identify the most urgent needs of the communities, and to provide initial guidance 
on criteria for the selection of project beneficiaries and activities. The second phase will 
consist of a full-fledged social assessment to be undertaken during the next months to 
inform the implementation of Components 2 and 3.  Terms of Reference for this 
assessment have been prepared and funds also made available under the PPF. 
Environmental supervision will be conducted by both the Bank’s project team and the 
RAAN, supported by theRegional Environmental Secretariat (SERENA) and monitored 
by MARENA when applicable.  The Bank team will work closely with the Director of 
Planning of RAAN during the design phases of the works. During these phases, 
environmental classifications will be confirmed and procedures applied as established in 
the Operations Manual.  
 
During the execution of works, the environmental officer of the RAAN and the Director 
of Planning will conduct environmental inspections and oversight to ensure compliance.  
The Bank team will make site inspections as needed to ensure that environmental 
management requirements are being enforced. Acceptance of completed works will be 
managed by the Director of Planning, who will report on environmental compliance in 
the semi-annual project progress reports sent to the Bank for review.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The activities aiming to restore the income of the men and women engaged in the small 
scale fisheries sector will require close attention due to their potential effects on the 
region’s marine resources. One of the Project’s objectives is to make the sector’s 
production more efficient and sustainable by increasing the capture of several abundant 
fish species, while diminishing pressure on shrimp and lobster resources. Under the 
Project, fishing would still remain substantially below any level that would threaten the 
sustainability of the region’s fish resources.  However, the long-term risk of over-fishing 
remains, particularly considering the impact that the hurricane had on the region’s coastal 
ecosystem, estuaries and lagoons.  Post-hurricane assessments indicate a severe depletion 
in the stock of marine life, which the Nicaraguan Institute for the Fisheries Sector 
Page  7
(INPESCA) and other rele
vant agencies are closely monitoring. The Government’s 
emergency recovery strategy includes the preparation and implementation of a plan to 
rehabilitate the marine, coastal, estuary and lagoon ecosystems of the region. The Food 
and Agricultural Organization (FAO) has also prepared several post-hurricane 
assessments and studies. The evaluation of the way the ecosystem is recuperating from 
the hurricane’s impact will be monitored throughout the life of the Project.  Based on the 
initial assessments conducted by INPESCA and FAO, a baseline will be established.  
Specifically, the EA will consult on, and then incorporate, measures to reduce the long-
term risk of over-fishing.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Nicaragua has legislation and instruments to evaluate potential environmental impacts 
generated by the Project, and to develop and implement mitigation measures.  MARENA 
and SERENA, the agencies which oversee these requirements, will support the regional 
government in the implementation of safeguard requirements.  As part of the Project’s 
support, GRAAN’s capacity to supervise and implement the necessary safeguard 
requirements will be strengthened to ensure compliance.  Moreover, experienced 
technical agencies such as the Social Investment Fund (FISE), the Rural and Urban 
National Housing Institute (INVUR), and INPESCA will help GRAAN in project 
implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The emergency recovery program and specific project activities have been identified with 
broad-based community consultation, and participation of regional and local 
governments. Community participation will continue to be central during project 
implementation, and the Project’s M&E system includes indicators of beneficiaries’ 
satisfaction with key activities.  Social audit mechanisms are also being considered in 
consultation with communities and CSOs. Environmental issues regarding project 
activities have been consulted with the affected communities and particularly vulnerable 
groups.  A Communications Strategy is being prepared to ensure that target communities 
know about the project, its activities and selection criteria for beneficiaries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/31/2008 
 
Page  8
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/31/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The EA and EMP were not dosclosed prior to appraisal because this is an emergency 
operation being prepared under OP8.00.  The EA and EMP will be completed after 
Project Approval and disclosed in Country accordingly. An specific IPDP is not required, 
as the whole project will benefit indigenous peoples and has been designed to be 
consistent with OP 4.10. A social assessment is being carried out and will also be 
completed after Project approval.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Page  9
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Enrique Pantoja 
01/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp 
01/15/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Josefina Stubbs 
01/15/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/22/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
01/22/2008 
Comments:   
