Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3927
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P110092 
Project Name:  NI Greater Managua Water and Sanitation (PRASMA) 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The projectís higher level objective is to contribute to the improvement of thequality of 
life of the population living in the greater Managua region, by providing access to 
reliable water supply and sewerage services.  
 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to reliable  water and 
sanitation services to the population of the greater Managua region .  
 
The success of the project will be measured using the following set of indicators:  
 
ï
Number of additional beneficiaries with access to reliable water supply in 
participating settlements in the targeted neighborhoods in the greater Managua region;  
 
ï
Number of additional beneficiaries with access to improved sanitation services in 
participating settlements in the targeted neighborhoods in the greater Managua region;  
 
ï
Decrease in ENACALís working ratio .   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation would assist the Government of Nicaragua (GoN) in improving 
the situation with regards to water and sanitation services in the capitalísmetropolitan 
area. As outlined in Annex 1, over the past few years, ENACAL has embarked on an 
ambitious plan to address the severe deficiencies of service both in water supply and 
Page  2
sanitation, supported by various donors. This effort is largely based on three key planning 
instruments.  
 
In 2005, JICA financed the preparation of a water supply master plan, which outlines 
four main areas of action:  
 
1.
Rehabilitation of existing and development of new urban water sources  
 
2.
Increase in efficiency  
 
3.
Reduction in losses, and  
 
4.
Coverage improvements and extensions in low-income neighborhoods.  
 
The JICA plan is currently being implemented with projects financed by JICA, the IDB, 
and FAD.  
 
In addition, a sanitation master plan was also prepared in 1996 and revised in 2002, with 
a
vision of increasing wastewater collection and treatment and alleviating the current 
pollution of Lake Managua and the risk of pollution of the aquifers serving the city. The 
master plan is currently under implementation with a project financed by KfW, the 
Nordic Fund, IDB, the Central Government, and ENACAL and includes the construction 
of main collectors and the wastewater treatment plant.  
 
Finally an Institutional Development Plan has been under preparation and is currently 
being finalized. This plan, which targets the period 2008-2012, includes an ambitious set 
of goals and supporting activities, together with a monitoring framework, with year to 
year tracking of improvements in performance indicators.  
 
This project would support the implementation of the vision developed in these three 
instruments and complement other donorsí work. For this purpose, the proposed project 
would finance coverage extensions in low-income neighborhoods (Component 1) as well 
as improved supply and efficiency in specific areas (Component 2). Component 3 would 
support institutional strengthening activities as well as the projectís management and 
monitoring activities.  
 
The following section provides further details on the projectís components and 
subcomponents. Amounts show total component costs with credit proceeds in brackets. 
All components will be implemented directly by ENACAL.  
 
Component 1: Coverage Extension and Improvement for WSS in Low-Income 
Neighborhoods ñ Cost US$20 million (IDA US$20 million)  
 
As discussed earlier, one of the main challenges ENACAL faces in the greater Managua 
region is the poor quality of service. This results mostly ñ aside from fairly high losses in 
the network ñ from the fact that most of the network extension in low-income 
neighborhoods was constructed in an ad-hoc manner by the communities themselves, 
without proper design and supervision. As a consequence, many of those small-scale 
networks are poorly and/or under-designed, consisting, in many cases, of simple plastic 
hoses installed at shallow depths, and their condition is also often poor. ENACAL 
estimates that as much as 60 percent of the cityís neighborhoods are covered by artisanal 
networks.  
 
On the sanitation side, most of these areas do not have any type of network 
infrastructure for wastewater evacuation. Rather, houses often have latrines and discharge 
the grey water to the street, creating a health and safety hazard with poor quality of life 
impacts. A very large project, financed by the KfW, the IDB and others, has sought to 
Page  3
construct major collectors, pumping stations and a wastewater treatment plant  for the 
City of Managua, but the collection networks do not cover the entire urban area. 
ENACAL has been monitoring the situation with concern, particularly because many of 
these newly populated areas overlay the main aquifers providing water supply to 
Managua.  
 
Therefore and in alignment with the fourth axis of the JICA master plan, this component 
will finance primary, secondary and tertiary network rehabilitation and extension in 
neighborhoods that either have their water sources and supply infrastructure financed 
under Component 2, or for which such infrastructure already exists. After the 
intervention, all inhabitants in the targeted neighborhoods should have access to a 
continuous or nearly continuous supply of drinking water, as well as adequate sewers. All 
connections will include metering.  
 
ENACAL has stated that it intends to involve users heavily in the design and 
implementation of the sub-projects. It is expected that existing neighborhood 
organizations, among others, will be the main points of contact at the community level 
during project development. Annexes 4 and 10 contain more details on the social 
interventions planned in those neighborhoods and the project cycle.  
 
Designs are currently being financed for about 60 neighborhoods through a PHRD 
grant. The rest of the neighborhoodsí designs will be financed during project 
implementation, using the creditís proceeds. The use of alternative technologies to 
conventional sewers will be explored together with the users during project definition, 
and the Bank will provide technical assistance on small bore, condominial and other 
simplified sewers, for which a few pilots exist in Nicaragua.  
 
Collaboration will also be sought with the Municipality of Managua in order to 
coordinate the WSS investments with other similar urban improvement measures that 
depend from the Municipality, such as rainwater collection, public lighting and paving of 
secondary streets. However, no formal agreement is expected given the limited budget 
that the Municipality of Managua can devote to these activities.  
 
Finally this component will also finance similar activities in Managuaís satellite cities, 
among others Tipitapa and Ciudad Sandino, which suffer from similar challenges. Some 
investments in rehabilitation or repair of existing wastewater treatment systems may be 
included based on the studies to be prepared during implementation.  
 
Component 2: Improvement of Water Supply and Efficiency in Selected Areasñ 
CostUS$15 million (IDA US$15 million)  
 
An important assumption of the JICA master planís water balance is that the technical 
efficiency of the network can be quite dramatically improved until 2015, thereby 
liberating water for the additional connections needed to increase effective coverage. In 
fact, according to the master plan, physical and commercial losses in the system need to 
be reduced from todayís estimated 55 percent to 25 percent, a goal that ENACAL itself 
does not consider realistic (its institutional development plan foresees a decrease to about 
48 percent by 2012).  
 
However, the JICA plan also calls for the segmentation of the network system into 18 
different macrosectores (equivalent to district metering areas and pressure zones). Each 
macrosector would have its own sources, storage capacity and distribution network with 
only minimal interconnections with other macrosectors. Rather than tackling the issue of 
Page  4
efficiency in the entire system, ENACAL has decided to prioritize a number of those 
macrosectores and ensure that a proper balance of supply (including losses) and demand 
is reestablished in each of these, hence improving service quality.  
 
ENACAL is already working in some of the macrosectores in the lower elevation zone 
of the city, the Zona Baja, with financing from the Spanish FAD, where water supply is 
already continuous or nearly continuous, but physical losses are high and metering is 
limited. ENACAL has asked the Bank to finance a component to replicate and extend 
these types of activities to another six macrosectores in the southwestern part of the city, 
along with two satellite cities, Tipitapa and Ciudad Sandino, while a parallel IDB project 
would tackle six more macrosectores in the southeast. At the moment, the new 
macrosectores suffer from low service quality (discontinuous service) and the 
intervention would therefore have to tackle water supply as much as water demand and 
efficiency.  
 
Within each of these macrosectores, the project will finance an initial diagnostic to 
evaluate current supply and demand, losses and unmet demand, and establish which 
combination of additional sources and efficiency improvement is technically and 
financially most efficient. The diagnostic will also verify possible additional sources that 
have been pre-identified by ENACAL. The diagnostic will also recommend a set of 
measures aiming at improving not only the technical but also the commercial efficiency 
of ENACAL within the targeted areas.  
 
As a result, this component may finance activities such as:  
 
Supply side  
 
ï
Rehabilitation and capacity extension for water sources (mostly boreholes)  
 
ï
Increase in adduction and storage capacity (pumping stations, water storage tanks)  
 
ï
Increase in wastewater collector capacity  
 
ï
Rehabilitation and extension of low-technology wastewater treatment systems  
 
Efficiency  
 
ï
Creation of District Metering Areas through the installation of macro-meters and 
the installation of valves creating separate and independent supply zones  
 
ï
Optimization of energy consumption in pumping systems through better system 
management  
 
ï
Leak reduction campaigns  
 
ï
Registration of illegal connections  
 
Demand side  
 
ï
Metering at a household level  
 
ï
Updating the user registry (cadastro de usuarios)  
 
ï
Improvement of billing and collection practices targeted to low-income 
households  
 
The initial diagnostic and design for major works has already been contracted for the 
first three macrosectores under the PHRD grant; the contract does not include, however, 
any activity on the efficiency and demand-side. The Bank has suggested that, in 
complement and for the next three macrosectores, ENACAL may consider extending 
Page  5
invitations to regional water utilities to participate, which would intervene not as 
operators but as technical and management consultants.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Monitoring and Evaluation 
ñ
Cost 
US$5 million (IDA US$5 million)  
 
SubComponent 3A: Institutional Strengthening ñ Cost US$3 million (IDA US$3 
million)  
 
ENACAL has prepared an Institutional Development Plan 2008-2012 that includes a 
hard set of performance indicators with year-to-year goals and corresponding actions (see 
Annex 1). This plan identifies five main challenges that the institution is currently facing:  
 
ï
Operational income does not cover operational costs  
 
ï
Rising energy costs mean progress in other areas is canceled  
 
ï
High non-revenue water needlessly increases operational costs  
 
ï
Current commercial and management systems do not support strategic decision-
making  
 
ï
The institution suffers from organizational weaknesses that impair its ability to 
fulfill its mission  
 
While the first three issues are being tackled through components 1 and 2, this 
component would support, jointly with an on-going IDB-financed project, a range of 
activities aimed at tackling the last two issues. ENACAL has already initiated work on 
both , but will continue to require support over the next five years. The plan includes a 
number of institutional strengthening activities, which will be largely financed by an on-
going IDB project (commercial system, improved monitoring). However, ENACAL and 
the Bank have agreed on including some supporting activities in the present project to 
complement the IDB project.  
 
The Bank will also use this component as an important window to continue and 
strengthen discussions at policy and utility level. Although ENACAL has remained 
cautious in terms of including specific, explicit utility strengthening measures in the 
project, a dialogue has been initiated on topics such as internal and international 
benchmarking, innovative approaches in low-income neighborhoods or accountability 
mechanisms in particular with the citizen/users.  
 
As a result this component will finance, among others, activities such as:  
 
ï
Technical assistance, as well as goods and services aimed at implementing thekey 
activities identified in the Institutional Development Plan.  
 
ï
Development of tariff studies and appropriate payment mechanisms for low-
income neighborhoods where ENACAL is seeking to increase tariff collection.  
 
ï
Participation in trainings and study tours in countries with similar conditions, 
seeking to establish contacts and learn lessons from other public utilities that have 
managed a successful turn-around.  
 
ï
Other activities as deemed necessary to continue successfully strengthening the 
utility during the course of the project.  
 
SubComponent 3B: Project Management and Monitoring ñ Cost US$2 million (IDA 
US$2 million)  
Page  6
This Component will finance the incremental costs of non-staff salary, travel, and the 
general operating costs of the personnel working on the projectís implementation within 
ENACAL. In addition, this component would also finance M&E activities, including the 
collection of information and development of reports for continued evaluation throughout 
the project cycle by both project management and the Bankís supervision team. It will 
also cover audits and other project management activities required for the proper 
implementation of the project.  
 
Estimates of Project Costs, by Component (US$ m)  
 
Component 1: Coverage Extension and Improvement in Low-Income Neighborhoods
 
IDA US$20.0M Recipient 0.0 Total US$20.0M  
 
Component 2: Improved Supply and Efficiency in Selected Areas IDA US$15.0M 
Recipient 0.0 Total US$15.0M  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Monitoring and EvaluationIDA 
US$5.0M Recipient 0.0 
Total US$5.0M  
 
Total IDA US$40.0M 
Recipient 0.0   TOTAL 
US$40.0 M   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will serve the population of the greater Managua region, which is defined as 
the Metropolitan area of Managua and adjacent municipalities, specifically including the 
satellite cities of Tipitapa and Ciudad Sandino.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) Environmental impacts of the proposed project 
are expected to be positive or neutral.  It is expected that improved collection and 
Page  7
delivery of wastewater to the new sewerage treatment plant under construction will 
generate positive environmental benefits to the quality of Lake Xolotlan (Managua) and 
surrounding habitat, protection of groundwater recharge areas, as well as provide a 
healthier environment and improved sanitation services to the urban population. 
Rehabilitation of the small existing treatment plants located in Tipitapa and Ciudad 
Sandino may be incorporated based on the results of technical and planning studies.  
 
An Environmental Assessment has been prepared based on the Category B classification 
of the project.  Baseline studies and impact assessments cover Managua and its satellite 
cities of Tipitapa and Ciudad Santino.  Tipitapa is a smaller satellite city of Managua with 
poor sewerage coverage and is located in a relatively low-lying area near Lake Managua. 
Currently sewerage treatment is limited to stabilization ponds at two locations in the city. 
Ciudad Sandino has a small treatment plant of relatively recent construction that requires 
improvements to provide optimal performance.  
 
The draft Managua EA includes: i) potential project impacts including direct, indirect, 
and cumulative impacts as well as the aspects related to overall water use and supplies 
(surface and groundwater), and linkages to the wastewater collection system, treatment 
plant (completion expected late 2008), and potential impacts to Lake Managua. It also 
reviewed baseline environmental and social aspects of the project area.  ii) The legal and 
institutional framework has been analyzed as pertains to the requirements under the 
MARENA EIA requirements and licensing as well as municipal authorization. iii) 
Institutional capacities have been evaluated regarding aspects needed for project EMP 
implementation and for overall strengthening of the institutional environmental 
procedures with potential for mainstreaming within the ENACAL Environmental 
Management Unit; and iv) An Environmental Management Plan has been prepared for 
those works and activities that are under design. A framework is being finalized for those 
works and activities that are not designed prior to appraisal or will be designed during 
project implementation. The EMP includes aspects covered in OP 4.01 Annex C 
including criteria for identifying sensitive areas, framework for review of sub-projects, 
staffing and institutional responsibilities regarding environmental management as well as 
capacity-building needs and strengthening for ENACAL, and best-management practices 
for construction to minimize impacts associated with project infrastructure investments. 
Monitoring and evaluation measures have been proposed and included with associated 
costs to adequately follow the implementation and support supervision.  An exclusionary 
list of activities is being incorporated into the EMP in order to ensure that projects with 
potential broader negative impacts are not financed under the project.  In addition, the 
EMP indicates the procedures necessary to comply with the national environmental 
assessment laws and with municipal regulations. Consultation activities have been 
carried-out in Managua in July 2008.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) The implications of the proposed project activities have 
been analyzed in light of the natural habitats within the project area of influence in the 
urban Managua component with particular focus on Lake Managua. The draft EA 
indicates no negative impacts to critical or important natural habitats, while the overall 
investments should assist in improving the water quality of the lake, lakefront, and 
tributary river and stream habitats.  
 
The Tipitapa and Ciudad Sandino components and investments have not been 
completely defined and require further technical studies and design prior to 
Page  8
implementation.  The baseline conditions have been reviewed separately for each town, 
especially in light of the potential investments in wastewater collection and treatment 
having identified degraded areas and no critical habitats in the immediate areas 
considered for the project. The EA reports that existing environmental conditions are 
poor in and around Tipitapa and impacts to fisheries from sewerage discharge and 
infiltration into Lake Managua and Tipitapa River are evident.  The Tipitapa River flows 
into the Tisma Lagoon (an Important Bird Area) some 15 km southeast of the city, 
therefore no expansion of the smaller treatment plant should occur under the project 
while sub-components should be designed to ensure no impact or increases in discharges 
occur in this direction. Recommendations are included in the EMP for specific measures 
to avoid, mitigate, or compensate for any impacts to natural habitats from investments, 
and an exclusionary list will preclude investments that could negatively affect natural 
habitats based on Bank safeguards guidelines. No new treatment plants are considered, 
however rehabilitation or optimization of existing plants may be considered which should 
improve conditions for natural habitats around Lake Managua and tributary rivers and 
streams.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) The EA for the Managua investments has 
reviewed potential impacts to physical cultural resources and no physical cultural 
resources are expected to be impacted in the proposed sites.  The proposed EMP includes 
measures in case of ìchance findingsî or other types of measures necessary to protect any 
resources identified.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) Although no resettlement is foreseen at this 
point in the neighborhoods proposed for intervention, the construction of water and 
sanitation systems may require land acquisition or resettlement of social units or 
commercial activities operating on land needed for civil works under the project. 
Therefore, an Involuntary Resettlement Framework was elaborated by a local consultant 
and the Legal Department of ENACAL, with technical assistance of the Bank. The 
institution has adopted the IRF for application in all investments that may trigger 
resettlement.   The IRF describes the potential resettlement impacts and proposes 
measures to mitigate losses caused by resettlement. It establishes a valuation method, 
processes and procedures to be followed for compensations, under Nicaraguan 
legislation, and consistent with O.P. 4.12.  The IRF has been submitted to the Bank for 
approval.  
 
Each Resettlement Plan should include the following: (a) A description of the subproject 
and the area where it will be developed. (b) Location of the properties required by the 
subproject. (c) Results of the diagnosis (topographic information of the assets, land titles 
and socioeconomic studies). (d) Identification and analysis of impacts for the displaced 
population.(e) Alternatives of solutions based on the type of impacts and the 
characteristics of the population. (f) Eligibility criteria. (g) Description of the Disclosure 
and Information Program. (h) Land Acquisition Program. (i) Program for housing 
replacement. (j) Program for the reestablishment of social and economic conditions. (k) 
Institutional framework. (l) Required human resources. (m) Budget. (n) Schedule. (o)  
Monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.  
 
Social Assessment. An integrated social and technical assessment was carried out by a 
team of consultants in six neighborhoods intervened by ENACAL. The lessons learned, 
conclusions and recommendations have informed the project design. Moreover, a plan for 
Page  9
technical and social accompaniment of ENACAL in the project area has been developed 
as a participatory tool applicable at the pre-investment stage, during implementation, 
until six months after the formal reception of the civil works by the community. The plan 
includes informed consultations with the municipality, leaders and community at large, 
and provides them with opportunities to make decisions. It also includes capacity 
building to the Water Committee and community throughout the project cycle to generate 
ownership and social responsibility with regards to the project. Additionally, the Water 
Committee and community will be trained on the importance of paying their tariffs as 
well as demanding quality services from ENACAL.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The activities, although not completely finalized in their design, are expected to generate 
only localized environmental impacts. Indirect environmental impacts and long-term 
impacts are expected to be positive given that the sewerage investments seek a reduction 
in the contamination of aquifers that provide a large part of the water supply base for 
Managua as well as benefits to human health and sanitation while potable water 
investments in efficiency will increase sustainability in the use of underground water 
resources.  In addition, potential investments in the rehabilitation and improvements of 
the treatment plants should also contribute to the long-term improvement of 
environmental conditions in Lake Managua and surrounding habitats and streams.  
 
Although the need for land acquisition or resettlement is not evident at this point, should 
the need arise during the initial phase of subproject preparation, the borrower is 
responsible for the elaboration of a Resettlement Plan for each subproject, and for 
submitting it to the Bank for approval. As agreed with ENACAL, the civil works may not 
start until resettlement has taken place.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
ENACAL has analyzed alternatives and limited the size and scale of sub-project 
investments as well as incorporated a focus on efficiency and public outreach as part of 
an overall strategy with regard to water provision, use, and treatment. New treatment 
plants have not been included, rather focusing on rehabilitation in existing infrastructure.  
The project also incorporated funding for citizen participation and environmental 
education/communication components in order to improve outreach and increase positive 
environmental and health impacts.  A reforestation project also was incorporated to 
increase positive impacts on aquifer protection in specific project areas.  
 
In ENACALís experience working in Managua neighborhoods, settlements tend to 
include less than 5 families. Under the present IRF, subprojects that have resettlements 
that include more than 60 people are not eligible for financing under the project.   
 
Page  10
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ENACAL has a specific department dedicated to environmental management.  The office 
has technically qualified staff to provide for environmental review of project activities as 
well as monitoring and evaluation.  In addition, there are laboratories for water quality 
control and for industrial discharge issues within this department. The department 
however requires support to improve its capacity, including staffing and procedures.  The 
environmental measures that have been incorporated into the project EMP seek to ensure 
project compliance with safeguards but also has included a program to support capacities 
within the ENACAL environmental unit.  Implementation arrangements for the project 
will reflect this process and includes a budget for investments in the internal capacity of 
the unit.  
 
The borrower has elaborated an Involuntary Resettlement Framework. The legal 
department of ENACAL handles resettlement issues and land acquisition. For the present 
project, the legal department will continue to have this responsibility as part of the 
Technical Resettlement Committee at ENACAL.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are: The project beneficiaries in the neighborhoods, the Water and 
Sanitation Committee (Comit√© de Seguimiento del Proyecto, or CSP), the Technical 
Resettlement Committee coordinated by the Prasma Unit Coordinator and including 
representatives of the ENACAL Units (Community Management, Communications, 
Legal, Project Management, Environment and a civil society representative of the 
District.  From an environmental standpoint several government agencies intervene in the 
water sector including MARENA and the INAA while the municipal governments or 
Alcaldias also play a role in water infrastructure projects.  
 
Two different consultations were carried out: (a) the social assessment in 6 
neighborhoods of Managua; and (b) consultations of the team preparing the Resettlement 
Framework in 3 neighborhoods of Managua. A specific environmental consultation also 
took place in Managua in July 2008 with the participation of several sector institutions, 
the Managua municipal government, and civil society representatives. The project scope, 
a
draft EA, and Environmental Framework were presented at the consultation and 
feedback documented.  
 
The Involuntary Resettlement Framework, the Environmental Assessment, EMP, and 
Environmental Framework will be disseminated in Spanish on the web page of 
ENACAL, and on the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  11
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/09/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
Yes 
Page  12
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
10/01/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
10/01/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
09/30/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
10/03/2008 
Comments:   
