Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3283 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nicaragua 
Project ID: P109691 
Project Name: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development 
Task Team Leader: Michael J. Goldberg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSPF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (60%);Micro- and SME finance (40%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Africa AIDS Prevention Initiative 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Project is to improve the competitiveness and efficiency of micro, small, 
and medium enterprises (MSMEs) by strengthening public and private service providers and 
improving the business climate.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would be implemented over five years and improve the quality and affordability of 
services to MSMEs through four components: (i) the business and investment climate for 
MSMEs; (ii) matching grants for MSMEs to support innovations, environmental improvements, 
and forward and backward linkages; (iii) financial services such as a partial credit risk guarantee 
system for MSMEs in coordination with regulated financial institutions, and (iv) improved 
strategic, technical and coordination abilities of MIFIC in the field of competitiveness.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would have the following coverage.  The registries improvement work under 
Component 1 
–
business climate improvement – would take place in Managua and at least eight 
secondary cities.  Other systems related to increasing access to quality assurance and certification 
Page  2
would be centralized in Managua.  The matching grants (Component 2) would be open to firms 
throughout the country. In keeping with the Government’s National Development Plan and 
objectives, special attention will be paid to women as well as indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan 
communities and MSMEs on the Caribbean coast.   The financial sector work of Component 3 
would have national implications, since MSMEs that benefit from the partial credit guarantees 
could be located anywhere in Nicaragua.  However, this will depend on the branch systems and 
geographic coverage of qualified financial institutions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Minimal institutional capacity for safeguards would be required from the Borrower. MIFIC, the 
coordinating agency of the project, will be primarily responsible for ensuring all executing 
agencies are dealing responsibly with any environmental issues.  They will also work in 
consultation with The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) who will 
provide periodic reviews of ongoing work.  As part of component 4, Institutional Strengthening 
of MIFIC, the agency will build its capacity to evaluate the environmental impact of the 
components. This strengthening can be through training or by hiring an external expert 
consultant.  
 
MIFIC, with support from the Quality Assurance Team and MARN, will develop a standard 
negative list of activities for the matching grants facility and the partial credit guarantee 
mechanism, to ensure neutral or positive environmental impacts.  Participating private financial 
institutions and MSMEs will be informed in writing of the relevant negative lists.  Selection 
criteria for the matching grants will include a condition based on the negative list that a firm’s 
activities do not have adverse environmental effects.  Also, as every round is theme specific, the 
percentage of each grant application that the project will finance will vary by round. Rounds with 
the highest positive spillovers and externalities (e.g. clean technologies) will receive a higher 
percentage of financing from the project (i.e. the private firm has to contribute a smaller 
percentage of the initiative’s total cost).  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Women:   With its Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, 
the borrower is committed to ensuring that project activities reach excluded populations.  To that 
end, through the business and investment climate improvement component, the project aims to 
reach indigenous populations and women with its decentralized service centers that should 
facilitate the legal formalization of their enterprises.  Also, by working with organizations 
already targeting indigenous peoples and women, the component will raise awareness of its 
programs and offer materials in indigenous languages.  Through component 2, the project will 
also aim to reach indigenous peoples and women.  Particularly if insufficient percentages of 
indigenous peoples are applying for and receiving matching grants in the initial rounds, the 
project could have a competitive round aimed at sectors that are important in primarily 
indigenous regions or a round open only to indigenous applicants. Similarly, they could offer 
rounds to target key clusters for women and certain rounds will have quotas for the number of 
grants awarded to women-owned enterprises. Furthermore, since large populations of indigenous 
peoples live on the Caribbean coast, project activities will be coordinated with a representative 
from the Office for Caribbean Coast Development.  
 
Page  3
A
member of the team at MIFIC or a local consultant will monitor the results of the IPPF and 
report findings to government officials responsible for support to indigenous peoples and 
women, as well as the Bank project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (LCSSO) 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp (LCSDE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project has been changed to a category "B."  An environmental management framework 
will be prepared. The operational manual will prohibit the use of project funds to support sub-
projects with substantial negative environmental impacts. Matching grant proposals would 
require environmental screening. The environmental screening would be identical to the format 
proposed for matching grants for the Enhanced Competitiveness project, including a role for the 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) on a review committee, a negative list, 
and emphasis on clean technologies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous Peoples Framework will be prepared. The framework will ensure that 
culturally appropriate opportunities for participation and consultation will be available for 
indigenous peoples throughout the project's life. This framework is similar to the ones used in 
other projects in the country, and dovetails with the Government's emphasis on development 
project investment on the Caribbean Coast (RAAS, RAAN and San Juan del Norte), where the 
majority of indigenous people live.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/01/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The framework for indigenous peoples is being prepared by the Government, with guidance 
from Josefina Stubbs. The target date for this framework is 3/25/2008.The target date for the 
environmental assesment is 4/4/2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael J. Goldberg 
04/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lily L. Chu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
