Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3448
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P106283 
Project Name:  Nicaragua Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.10
3.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Nicaragua Rural Water and Sanitation Project supports the following strategic 
objectives of the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Nicaragua (FY08–12): 
(a) infrastructure and sustainable development, and (b) human capital development 
improving social equity and opportunity. This project also responds directly to the 
government’s development objectives, as improvements in water and sanitation have 
been explicitly outlined in the National Development Plan (PND). The Sectoral Strategy 
Area III of the PND Infrastructure and Sustainable Development aims to increase 
coverage and quality of infrastructure to support economic growth and attain the MDGs. 
The plan outlines the government’s intention to promote the sustainability of water and 
sanitation infrastructure and service expansion in rural areas through community 
participation and education, and the coordination of agencies such as FISE and the 
municipalities.  
 
Beyond the Bank’s CPS and the government’s PND and alignment with the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper, the proposed project also supports progress toward the 
drinking water and sanitation targets contained in MDG No. 7, “Ensure Environmental 
Sustainability.” Because of its geographic scope targeting rural and indigenous areas, the 
project is expected to have a strong de facto poverty focus. Improving access to water 
services also has a much stronger impact on women and children because they 
Page  2
traditionally are tasked with, washing clothes and taking care of children often fetching 
water from distant water sources.  
 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access by project beneficiaries to 
sustainable (The concept of sustainable access goes beyond the mere provision of 
physical infrastructure and includes a series of dimensions capturing the sustainability of 
such service provision, as defined by the CAPS scorecard presented in Annex 3.) water 
and sanitation services in rural areas. (Rural areas in the context of the water and 
sanitation sector in Nicaragua are defined as dispersed communities and small towns with 
less than 5,000 inhabitants that are not served by ENACAL.)   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation would assist the Government of Nicaragua in strengthening its 
ongoing effort to increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of the 
country. Since a formal decision in 2004, (Prior to that date, the national water and sewer 
utility, ENACAL, was in charge of rural investments in WSS) FISE has been the 
governmental body in charge of investments in rural water and sanitation solutions. FISE 
is currently implementing several donor-funded rural WSS projects, one of which is a 
large, multisector rural investment project funded by IDB and KfW for which WSS 
represents a key sector, and several smaller projects financed by CIDA and COSUDE.  
 
For this purpose, the operation would finance investment to increase access to water and 
sanitation services in the country’s rural areas (Component 1) including the country’s two 
autonomous regions on the Atlantic Coast (the RAAS and the RAAN) and 60 
communities along the Alto Coco River which have the lowest levels of coverage and a 
large indigenous population (Component 2). The project would also develop a series of 
pilots to test concepts new to the country (Component 3). Component 4 will finance 
project management activities and strengthen the rural WSS institutions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of 
Nicaragua and in municipalities with populations of less than 5,000 people. An important 
component of the project will increase W&S access in two autonomous regions on the 
Atlantic Coast, the Region Autonoma del Atlantico Sur (RAAS) and the Regio 
Autonoma del Atlantico Norte (RAAN), thus triggering the Natural Habitats safeguard.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As the project will include civil works, there will be minor environmental impacts such 
as digging trenches to install pipes or clearing small, vegetated areas to install a latrine. 
Since these are small scale systems for rural, often dispersed populations, no large scale, 
significant or irreversible impacts are likely or expected. Nevertheless, the Environmental 
Assessment Safeguard is triggered. FISE has prepared a draft environmental management 
framework for the project based on their existing Manual for Environmental 
Management. This framework contains an environmental assessment of the project and 
an environmental management plan.  
 
Although some works will be implemented on the Caribbean coast (the RAAN and the 
RAAS), the project does not trigger the Natural Habitats Safeguard since works are small 
and will not represent a significant conversion or loss of natural habitats directly or 
indirectly. The Environmental Management Framework contains guidance on the 
selection of the minor works in this project as well as information on the location of 
protected areas, both of which should minimize any impacts on the coastal ecosystems.  
 
Finally on the environmental side, with respect to the triggering of the Physical Cultural 
Resources Safeguard, the Environmental Management Framework contains measures and 
instructions in the case of any “chance finds” of archeological materials.  
 
O.P. 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples.  The borrower prepared an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP) (Plan para los Pueblos Indigenas y Comunidades Etnicas) in consultation with 
indigenous peoples, authorities and Regional Governments of RAAN and RAAS. The 
objective of the IPP is to ensure indigenous and afro-descendant communities access the 
project benefits, and that the services offered by the project are delivered to them in a 
culturally-appropriate manner. Component 2 is exclusively targeted to improving access 
to water and sanitation systems in the autonomous regions of RAAN and RAAS and 60 
communities of Alto Coco River (Waspan and Jinotega), where the bulk of ethnic groups 
Page  4
live. Also included in the IPP are the adjustment of the operational manuals and 
procedures to serve indigenous peoples.  
 
Approximately 14% of the people of Nicaragua identify themselves as indigenous. 
There are 10 autochthonous groups: 6 on the Atlantic Coast and 4 in the Pacific, Central 
and Northern regions of the country. Although coverage of W&S systems has increased 
country-wide, it is not clear that Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendant communities 
have been able to access water and sanitation sub-projects, to the same degree as the 
general population.  
 
O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered. The small civil works of the 
project (water connections, wells, stand-pipes, latrines or basic sanitation units) are 
mostly installations at the household level or stand-pipes designed to serve a small 
number of households, therefore, no land acquisition or relocation of the population is 
foreseen.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None for the project as a whole; however, FISE requires each sub-project to consider at 
least 2 alternatives in a report that take into account basic environmental requirements 
and a site evaluation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has a system of environmental management to manage minor and expected 
project impacts that has been in place for 12 years; therefore, FISE has the experience to 
manage the environmental impacts of this project. FISE employs an ecologist with a 
degree in Ecology and Natural Resources with Specialization in Watersheds and Forests 
as well as a Masters Degree in Hydrogeological Technology and another Masters in 
Management of Water Resources and Hydrogeology in Managua, and they have 
experience coordinating with at least 20 technical specialists (architects and engineers) in 
their 17 regional offices throughout Nicaragua. FISE’s well-developed environmental 
procedures have served as the model for the Nicaraguan national environmental agency.  
 
Indigenous Peoples. The project will implement a promotional campaign to ensure that 
communities are aware of opportunities to access the project and the rules related to 
implementation., Communities will be involved in developing the project’s processes and 
procedures so that they are culturally appropriated and respond to community needs. The 
project will ensure positive discrimination is applied in the prioritization, eligibility and 
selection criteria of subprojects submitted by poor and ethnic groups to municipalities. 
An important part of the project includes comprehensive social intervention in 
communities and CAPS, to ensure that communities become knowledgeable about the 
Page  5
technical and financial aspects of the project and develop a sense of ownership of the 
systems. Under component 2, the project will concentrate resources on RAAN, RAAS 
and 60 communities of the Alto Coco River (Waspan and Jinotega), home to the majority 
of indigenous populations in Nicaragua (Miskito, Mayangna, Garifuna, English-speaking 
Creole, and Rama). In coordination with other donors, FISE will offer the above regions 
a
participatory water and sanitation program, where stakeholders and communities will 
be included before, during and after the civil works are finished. The project will  ensure 
that women are trained and included in decision-making processes regarding  technical 
options for W&S and also that FISE’s gender policy (women’s participation of 40% or 
more) will also be enforced for CAPS’ leadership positions (President, Treasurer).  
 
FISE has the capacity to implement all necessary safeguard measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the water users, municipalities and environmental NGOs. 
Consultations on the environmental framework were held April 1, 2008 in Bluefields and 
April 2, 2008 in Jinotega. Consultations on the Environmental Framework in Managua 
were held April 11, 2008. The Environmental Framework was made available in 
InfoShop and in-country in March 2008. In-country, the Framework was placed on the 
FISE website and hard copies will be made available in the 17 territorial offices and 
Managua. FISE placed their Manual for Environmental Management, the source 
document for most of the Environmental Framework for the project, on their website in 
February of 2008. Additionally, during the process of developing each sub-project, the 
community will be informed of the impending works. Before any studies are done or 
final designs made, the communities will be consulted in public meetings to determine if 
there is demand for a sub-project.  
 
Indigenous Peoples. Some key stakeholders are: the Regional FISE teams in the RAAN 
and RAAS, Regional Governments of RAAN and RAAS, Mayors, Municipal Technical 
Units (UTMs), Water and Sanitation Committees (CAPS), Indigenous Authorities of the 
Pacific, Central and Northern regions, RAAN and RAAS regions, and the communities, 
particularly women and children.  Consultations are being carried out by a national 
independent professional team (which includes a social specialist, a sanitary engineer, 
and a systems specialist) in 15 communities throughout the country (which includes sub-
projects that are finished and have been operating for at least one year, or subprojects in 
implementation). The sample was selected from municipalities with large numbers of 
indigenous and afro-descendant peoples. The objective of the consultations is to assess 
the level of community satisfaction with the systems built by FISE, and with the 
participatory processes that intend to include all potential beneficiaries. The results were 
included in the project design.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  7
Manager review the plan? 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
04/14/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah 
04/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
04/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
04/14/2008 
Comments:   
