Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3348 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nicaragua 
Project ID: P110092 
Project Name: Nicaragua Urban Water and Sanitation 
Task Team Leader: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would contribute to increased access to water and sanitation services in 
poor neighborhoods of Managua and would improve the quality and sustainability of water and 
sanitation services provided by ENACAL in Managua.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
ENACAL, which has been under new management since early 2007,  is working on four critical 
areas for services in Managua that were identified in the master plan study, financed by JICA in 
2005:  
 
1. 
Increasing the access to and quality of services in low-income neighborhoods that are 
currently served by informal providers or have a very low service level;  
 
2.
Improving operational efficiency through investments in reducing non-revenue water and 
rehabilitation/replacement of selected infrastructure;  
 
3.
Improving wastewater collection and treatment; and  
 
4.
Communicating better with customers through informational campaigns.  
 
Page  2
In response, several donors are working with ENACAL in Managua on its management 
capacity (IDB), non-revenue water reduction (Spanish International Cooperation Agency), and 
wastewater collection and treatment (KfW, Nordic Fund, IDB).  In addition, JICA has expressed 
interest in funding other parts of the master plan.  
 
ENACAL has requested Bank support to complement these ongoing efforts, in particular 
increase in coverage, efficiency improvements, and information campaigns.As a result, the 
following project components are proposed:  
 
Component 1: Coverage increase in low-income neighborhoods (US$34 million):  This 
component would finance water and sanitation coverage extensions in the unserved or 
underserved poor neighborhoods of Managua.  Low-cost technologies, such as condominial or 
small-bore systems, will be considered.  Construction of works would be preceded by social 
interventions focusing on community participation in the selection of service levels, design 
schemes, and operation and maintenance of the systems (as needed), and hygiene education (to 
complement systemwide campaigns, as described in Component 4).  In addition, strategic 
partnerships will be established with other actors, mostly the Municipality of Managua, to 
coordinate the water and sanitation interventions with other urban upgrading measures, such as 
paving or public lighting.  Finally, this component will also include the main trunks 
infrastructure needed to connect these neighborhoods with the existing system.  
 
Component 2: Efficiency improvements (US$6 million): This component aims at implementing 
specific recommendations of the JICA study to improve the system’s technical efficiency.  
Among other investments, it includes replacement of main pipes that have high loss rates, 
capacity increases in the system where hydraulic bottlenecks exist, installation of meters, and 
rehabilitation of selected water wells.  This component will complement the project funded by 
the Spanish International Cooperation Agency for network optimization, which is under 
implementation but will not cover all of Managua’s needs, and to other projects financed by IDB 
and KfW that have efficiency improvements as their main goal.  
 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening and communication (US$3 million):  The project will 
provide institutional strengthening on improving and expanding services for the poor. This will 
complement the support provided by IDB on overall ENACAL strengthening. The Bank will 
finance institutional strengthening activities through a combination of training, partnerships, 
study tours, and equipment purchases, aiming at strengthening the institution on topics such as 
commercial practices specifically designed for low-income customers, improving billing and 
collection techniques, developing and implementing systemwide campaigns on hygiene practices 
and water use and conservation (cultura del agua).  In addition, this component will provide 
support in the following areas not covered by other international donors: reducing technical and 
commercial losses and the optimization of scarce investment and maintenance resources.  
Finally, this component may also finance technical assistance linked with more delicate topics 
such as a pro-poor tariff policy and/or transparent subsidy schemes, once the relationship with 
ENACAL has grown stronger.  
 
Component 4: Project management and monitoring (US$2 million):  Component 4 would 
finance the setup of a Project Management Unit within ENACAL to execute the technical and 
Page  3
social aspects of the Project.  Pending further evaluation, the fiduciary aspects of the project 
would be managed by the respective existing units of ENACAL.  This structure is similar to 
what has been done for other multilaterally funded projects in ENACAL.  In addition, this 
component would also finance the project’s monitoring and evaluation activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The city of Managuua, Nicaragua.  Specific neighborhoods and locations to be identified.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
preliminary review of the borrower capacity indicates some past experience with 
environmental assessment and safeguard measures based on projects with other donors and 
lending institutions.  ENACAL has a person charged with environmental aspects and who has 
indicated that there has been some experience with the national licensing procedures as well as 
the EIA process.  Currently ENACAL does not have internal procedures and standardized 
processes for environmental management but has demostrated interest in institutionalizing these 
procedures with the support of the Bank.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental impacts of the proposed project are expected to be positive or neutral.  It is 
expected that improved collection and delivery of wastewater to the new sewerage treatment 
plant under construction will generate positive environmental benefits to the quality of Lake 
Xolotlan (Managua) and surrounding habitat, protection of groundwater recharge areas, as well 
as provide a healthier environment and improved sanitation services to the urban population.  
 
An Environmental Assessment will be carried-out based on the Category B classification of 
the project.  Terms of reference for the studies, management plan, and framework have been 
prepared by ENACAL and currently in process of contracting as part of preparation activities.  
The EA will include: i) potential project impacts including direct, indirect, and cumulative 
impacts as well as the aspects related to overall water use and supplies (surface and 
groundwater), and linkages to the wastewater collection system, treatment plant (completion 
expected late 2008), and any potential impacts to Lake Managua. It will also look at baseline 
environmental and social aspects of the project area.  ii) The legal and institutional framework 
will be reviewed especially as pertains to the requirements under the MARENA EIA 
requirements and licensing. iii) Institutional capacities will be evaluated regarding aspects 
needed for project EMP implementation and for overall strengthening of the institutional 
environmental procedures with potential for mainstreaming and iv) An Environmental 
Management Plan will be prepared for those works and activities that are under design. A 
framework is being prepared for those works and activities are not finalized prior to appraisal or 
will be designed during project implementation.  The EMP will include the aspects covered in 
OP 4.01 Annex C including criteria for identifying sensitive areas, framework for review of sub
-
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
projects, staffing and institutional responsibilities regarding environmental management as well 
as capacity-building needs and strengthening for ENACAL, and best-management practices for 
construction to minimize impacts associated with project infrastructure investments. Monitoring 
and evaluation measures will also be proposed and included to adequately follow the 
implementation and support supervision.  Finally, consultation activities have also been included 
within the TORs for preparation of the EA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The implications of the proposed project activities will be analyzed in light of the natural 
habitats that may be identified within the project area of influence and in particular as pertains to 
Lake Xolotlan. Recommendations will be included in the EMP should specific measures be 
required to avoid, mitigate, or compensate for impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The TORs for the EA includes a review of any potential impacts to physical cultural 
resources, should there be any, in the project area.  The EMP would include measures in case of 
“chance findings” or other types of measures necessary to protect any resources identified.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The TORs for the EA includes a review of any potential impacts to physical cultural 
resources, should there be any, in the project area.  The EMP would include measures in case of 
“chance findings” or other types of measures necessary to protect any resources identified.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/16/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
July 01, 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
05/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
05/07/2008 
Comments:   
