Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3320 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nicaragua 
Project ID: P106283 
Project Name: Nicaragua Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Analysis of economic growth (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective of this project is to increase access to sustainable water and 
sanitation services in rural areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Over the past few years, FISE has been refocusing its role from a pure project executor, to an 
investment channel for municipalities.  In parallel, FISE has also stepped up its technical 
assistance to those municipalities to enable them to make better use of the resources to which 
they are granted access.  FISE has promoted jointly with other institutions the preparation of 
participative municipal investment plans that serve as a basis for the national investments 
channeled to the municipalities. Accordingly, the municipalities would be an important partner in 
project prioritization.  In addition, because of the importance of community participation in the 
design, construction, and operation and maintenance of the systems, the project will use the 
communities as the basis unit for project implementation.  Furthermore, taking into account the 
specific needs of certain type of communities (dispersed communities, dense small towns); the 
project will include a series of pilot activities that will inform the design of the rural water and 
sanitation project planned for FY10.  As a result, the proposed project would include the 
following components:  
Page  2
Component 1: Coverage increase in rural areas (US$15 million):  The bulk of the investments 
will be in water and sanitation infrastructure, including all necessary social and technical 
interventions to ensure its sustainability.  These investments will be divided in two 
subcomponents:  
 
•
A.  In the Autonomous Regions of RAAN y RAAS  (US$5 million):  FISE has recently 
started working in a more systematic manner with the autonomous regions; however, due to the 
particular cultural and geographic configuration of these regions, the traditional implementation 
models used by FISE are not proving as effective as elsewhere.  Therefore, this component will 
seek to partner with other donors, most notably UNICEF and COSUDE, to develop an 
alternative intervention model to ensure sustainability and adequacy of the investments 
responding to the specificity of local indigenous communities.  
 
•
B.  In the rest of the country’s rural areas (US$10 million):  For the restofthe country, the 
Project will finance water and sanitation investments using the existing intervention models used 
by FISE.  These investments will complement water supply and sanitation (WSS) activities 
financed by IDB-KfW and COSUDE through FISE, and will set the basis for a unified 
investment policy in the rural WSS sector.  In addition, the current model for intervention will be 
evaluated during project preparation and will be fine tuned during the first year of 
implementation to increase investment sustainability.  
 
Component 2: Pilot Projects Development (US$3.5 million):  Despite the long engagement of 
several donors in the water sector, there are certain “market niches”that have not been properly 
catered to, and for which no best practice model of intervention exists in Nicaragua.  This 
component therefore seeks to develop a series of pilot projects and the accompanying 
intervention strategies making best use of the Bank’s international experience and successful 
models developed in other countries of the region.  Pilots will be developed in the following 
areas: (a) service provision to dispersed communities; (b) simplified sewers in dense, small 
towns; and (c) appropriate management models in small towns.  All pilots will be subject to 
evaluation and the results will be disseminated and benefit the design of the following rural WSS 
project, planned for FY10.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening in the rural WSS sector (US$1 million):  In 2004, the 
Government of Nicaragua decided to give sole responsibility of rural water and sanitation 
investments to FISE. ENACAL, which had previously been very active in the rural sector, 
stopped providing post-construction technical assistance to the CAPS; but FISE, by nature a 
project implementer, has not been able to fill the gap and is now expecting the municipalities to 
provide this support to the CAPS.  This component will support and strengthen the various 
institutions working in the rural WSS sector in order to ensure that the existing and new WSS 
systems and their CAPS are made more sustainable through the provision of technical assistance 
and specific support in the long term.  In addition, this component will finance exchanges of 
experience with other countries, training, and consultancies in order to move toward a more 
unified sector policy (financing policy, social intervention, and community participation).  
 
Page  3
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring (US$1.0 million):  Component 4 will 
finance Project Management costs within FISE, in particular logistics and operational costs, and 
the project’s monitoring and evaluation activities.  Staff costs will be supported through 
counterpart financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide with a particular focus in the Caribbean coastal autonomous regions in the north and 
the south (the RAAN and RAAS). It is for this reason that the Natural Habitats Safeguard is 
triggered.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
For environmental capacity, FISE has an ecologist with a degree in Ecology and Natural 
Resources with Specialization in Watersheds and Forests as well as a Masters Degree in 
Hydrogeological Technology and another Masters in Management of Water Resources and 
Hydrogeology in Managua coordinating with at least 20 technical specialists (architects and 
engineers) in their 17 regional offices throughout Nicaragua. FISE has well developed 
environmental procedures that have served as the model for the Nicaraguan national 
environmental agency.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSDE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Framework (includes both the Environmental Assessment and Environmental 
Management Plan) 
 
will be prepared by mid to late March 2008.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Environmental Management Framework (includes both the Environmental Assessment 
and Environmental Management Plan) contains guidance on the siting of the minor works in this 
project as well as information on the location of protected areas both of which should minimize 
any impacts on the coastal ecosystems   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The Environmental Management Framework contains measures and instructions in the case 
of any “chance finds” of archeological materials.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Consistent with the Operational Policy 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, the borrower is carrying 
out consultations nation-wide, and preparing an Indigenous and Afro-Caribbean Peoples Plan 
(IPP) geared to support the strategy of the GON to ensure (a) access and participation of ethnic 
groups in the project design, implementation and ex-post sustainability phase, and (b) to ensure 
culturally-adequate planning and delivery of W&S services under the project. The IPP is being 
agreed on by FISE with the Regional Go
vernments and Councils and the indigenous 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
organizations of RAAN, RAAS, and Central Pacific regions   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered. The small civil works of the project (water 
connections, wells, stand-pipes, latrines or basic sanitation units) are mostly installations at the 
household level or stand-pipes designed to serve a small number of households, therefore, no 
land acquisition or relocation of population is foreseen.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/11/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/16/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Environmental Framework will be prepared by mid to late March 2008.  
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan:  
 
Consistent with the Operational Policy 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, the borrower is carrying 
out consultations nation-wide, and preparing an Indigenous and Afro-Caribbean Peoples Plan 
(IPP) geared to support the strategy of the GON to ensure (a) access and participation of 
ethnic groups in the project design, implementation and ex-post sustainability phase, and (b) 
to ensure culturally-adequate planning and delivery of W&S services under the project. The 
IPP is being agreed on by FISE with the Regional Governments and Councils and the 
indigenous organizations of RAAN, RAAS, and Central Pacific regions.  
 
The results of the consultations will be included in the project design. Component 2 is 
dedicated to coverage expansion of W&S systems in the RAAN and RAAS, which are home 
to the largest number of indigenous and afro-descendant population of Nicaragua.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The IPP will be prepared by end of April 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
03/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
03/10/2008 
Comments:  Mr. Daniel Hoorweg, Acting Sector Manager, signed on behalf of Mr. Guang Zhe Chen. 
