Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3961 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P108253 
Project Name: Niger Reform Management and TA 
Task Team Leader: Robert A. Yungu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (34%);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (33%);Other public sector governance (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1.   The project development objective is to improve: (i) the credibility and reliability of budgets 
allocated to budget managers in each Ministry; and (ii) the internal controls of the use of said 
budgets. These objectives are related to the first two platforms of the sequenced reform approach 
adopted by this project.  
 
2. 
A successful project will be reflected in a Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) that 
is staffed with more competent and better motivated personnel who will use efficient business 
processes and tools to ensure that:(i) sound macro-fiscal framework and revenue forecasts are 
established, (ii) adequate budgets are allocated to managers according to agreed-upon programs; 
(iii) budgets are executed according to plan and without undue delays; and (iv) effective internal 
controls are put in place to hold mangers accountable.  
 
3.     Subsequent platforms, which seek to enable more accountability for performance 
management, are realistically beyond the project’s timehorizon. They necessitate significant 
financial resources and sophisticated capabilities which take time to acquire and maintain. 
Page  2
Ultimately, as capacities and capabilities gradually evolve in later stages, it will be possible to 
monitor budget performance through the lenses of service delivery and development outcomes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
4.    The proposed operation is a five-year technical assistance grant which seeks to reform MEF 
by developing capacities that are needed to implement the Public Financial Management (PFM) 
reform. Therefore the focus of the project is first and foremost on outcomes (i.e. transparency, 
accountability, strategic resources allocation, and progress towards the MDGs), rather on inputs 
such as computers or skilled staff. The challenge, then, is to ensure that the inputs and incentives 
for strengthening capacity are aligned with and facilitate the achievement of the required 
outcomes.  
 
5. 
Strengthening capacity of MEF will necessitate continuous improvement of technical and 
managerial skills of staff, rationalization and integration of systems and processes, and 
establishment of enabling institutional arrangements. To allow a more coherent implementation 
of activities envisioned by this project, it was agreed between the MEF and the Bank’s team to 
have three components by functionality/expertise areas: human and institutional capacity 
development, information systems, and project management. Thus, the project will have three 
components:  (i) capacity development; (ii) leverage and rationalization of financial management 
information systems; and (iii) support to the project coordination. The estimated IDA financing 
for this project is US$ 10 million.  
 
Component 1: Capacity Development (US$3 million).  
 
6. 
Three sub-components were selected to support capacity development: (i) strengthening 
of the key functions of MEF, (ii) support to the training institutes, and (iii) support to the 
diaspora program.  
 
Sub-component 1.1:  Strengthening of Key Functions of MEF (US$ 1.5 million).  
 
7. 
The project will support MEF to improve performance in the critical macro-fiscal and 
budget management functions of the ministry. This will involve strengthening of macro-fiscal 
forecasts, revenues collection, internal controls, budget execution, procurement, and treasury 
operations.  
 
Sub-component 1.2:   Support to Local Training Institutes (US$ 1 million).  
 
8. 
Training institutes will play a critical role in long-term sustainability of the capacity 
development program in Niger. The project aims to strengthen capacity of the National Institute 
of Public Administration and Magistrate (Ecole Nationale d’Administration et de la Magistrature 
-
ENAM) and the Faculty of Economics at the University of Niamey so as to provide effective 
training to MEF staff in macro-fiscal management, financial programming, program budgeting, 
information systems, leadership, change management, and other key activities envisioned in this 
project.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Support to the Diaspora program (US$ 0.5 million).  
Page  3
9. 
Leveraging the expertise of Nigeriens from the diaspora is a very effective way of 
sustaining capacity development as has been proven in a few good cases in Niger, particularly at 
the National Institute of Statistics. There are also success stories of the diaspora program in some 
other African countries.  Through their direct participation in work program and staff mentoring, 
diaspora experts will share good practice knowledge, thus, ensuring long-term sustainability of 
capacity development.  
 
Component 2: Leverage and rationalization of Information Systems (US$5.0 million).  
 
10. 
 Given the risks and complexities of developing integrated financial systems particularly 
in the low income countries with limited capacity, the project will primarily seek to leverage and 
rationalize existing systems. The development of completely new systems will be very limited.  
 
11. 
In this context, the project will draw on the recommendations of the ITC plan (schema 
directeur) proposed by the EU for strengthening core IT systems of the ministry (Tax, Customs, 
Treasury, and Budget) by working on on-going projects which have already been initiated within 
the ministry.  
 
12. 
In the same vein, the project will capitalize on the improvement of the network recently 
achieved by the local telecommunications provider (e.g. SONITEL), who has laid out a fiber- 
optic network around major government agencies in the capital, so as to start interconnecting 
disparate MEF information systems and deploy the intranet/internet. As capacities and 
capabilities improve, it is anticipated that there will be scope to develop a full-fledged IFMIS at 
later stages of the platform sequence.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Intranet/Internet deployment (US$ 2.5 million).  
 
13. 
Network extension.  The project will first focus on the capital Niamey which has a 
relatively secure and reliable network thanks to SONITEL and recent interventions from some 
donors including the EU and the World Bank.  The next step will be to expand to regions as the 
telecommunications providers increase their services across the country and the cost of 
interconnectivity become more affordable. Therefore, the project will negotiate the cost of data 
transfer with providers, who could use any type of cost effective technology (fiber optic, 
satellite, Wimax, etc.) to provide network coverage across the country. Thus, the project will not 
fund the development of network per se, but will seek to use available services and negotiate 
payment of monthly or annual fees. Other related network expenditures that will be supported by 
the project will be the acquisition of the connecting and security equipment as well as 
networking training for maintenance staff.  
 
14. 
Intranet.  Currently, different parts of the ministry do not have a unique platform for 
internal communication. With the establishment of intranet which will firstly be built on the 
existing network infrastructure, business processes will certainly improve as more people have 
direct access to same information about procedures, guidelines, and other important 
Page  4
administrative documents. Transparency on budget allocation, use and monitoring of resources, 
and dissemination of results shall help improve financial accountability and budget credibility.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Systems rationalization and upgrade (US$ 2 million).  
 
15. 
 The current MEF information system platforms which include Budget, Customs, Taxes, 
and Treasury systems have significant deficiencies which need to be corrected in the short-term. 
Successful rationalization and upgrade of these systems will require ownership and commitment 
of adequate resources by the Government and other donors.  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Office Equipment (US$ 0.5 million).  
 
16. 
 Limited office equipment renovation. With the information systems upgrade and 
integration, there will be a great need for adequate office equipment. The project will help fund, 
jointly with the government and other donors, network equipment, computers, printers, and 
communication tools.  
 
Component 3: Support to the Project Coordination Unit (US$ 1.5 million).  
 
17. 
As a way of ensuring project ownership and use of country system, the coordination of 
the project will be carried out by an internal unit inside MEF, not an external implementation 
unit. The PCU will be headed by a Coordinator who will supervise the work of the two fiduciary 
staff (senior accountant and procurement specialist), the component managers, and the 
monitoring and evaluation specialist.  
 
18. 
 Of the $1.5 million allocated to the Project Coordination Unit, a contingency fund of 
$0.5 million will be kept aside for funding of unexpected activities which might be required in 
one of the above mentioned subcomponents   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ministry of Economy and Finance. The project will be carried out in the central and regional 
entities of the ministry as well as in local training institutes.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies is limited   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/27/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert A. Yungu 
04/30/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
04/30/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
