Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/26/2008 
Report No.:  AC3209
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P095949 
Project Name:  Local Urban Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christian Diou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (20%);Other social services (20%);Sanitation 
(20%);General public administration sector (20%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Decentralization (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase and sustain access of urban residents to 
basic infrastructure and services, particularly those living in deprived settlements.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have three components: (a) capacity building, especially targeting 
institutional strengthening; (b) investments, aimed at improving access to basic 
infrastructure and services in the cities of Niamey, Maradi, and Dosso; and (c) support to 
implementation.  
 
Component A: Capacity building and institutional strengthening (extimated cost: 
US$1.5 million)  
 
The focus of this component is to build and consolidate management capacities for 
programming, implementing and managing urban infrastructure and services. The 
Page  2
component includes: (i) support to the local authorities in the targeted cities : CUN, 
CUM, the municipalities of Niamey, Dosso and Maradi; (ii) support to selected 
government institutions active in the areas of urban management, to contribute to overall 
efforts to strengthen the capacities of public stakeholders of urban development beyond 
the cities primarily targeted by the project; and (iii) support to the private sector, mostly 
local contractors and consultant firms involved in project implementation.  
 
Component B: Provision of access to basic infrastructure and services for the cities of 
Niamey, Maradi and Dosso (estimated cost: US$14.50 million)  
 
The main objective of this component is to upgrade infrastructure in order to:  
 
a) 
 Increase access to basic services in the targeted cities, primarily in low-income 
settlements.  This includes construction or rehabilitation of roads likely to facilitate 
access to and from land-locked settlements; drainage works, water stand-posts, public 
latrines, health and social facilities, etc.; and  
 
b)
Construct or rehabilitate local primary income generating infrastructure key to 
local economic development: primary roads, food markets and truck terminals.  
 
Component C: Support to implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated cost: 
US$1.9 million)  
 
This component will provide financing for the efficient implementation of the Project 
through the BNC, including staff operating costs (cost shared with PAPST), monitoring 
and evaluation, IEC and cost of technical and financial audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project is expected to take place in Niamey, Dosso, Maradi and Dosso.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is designed to have beneficial impacts on the population in terms of better 
service delivery and improved living conditions.  Given the programmatic nature of the 
project, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared by the Government.  The final 
ESMF and RPF were disclosed in-country on August 6, 2007 and at the Bank's Infoshop 
on September 5, 2007.  
 
Environmental and social concerns have been integrated into the project design.  As of 
today, no resettlement is expected, except temporary resettlement during the works 
pertaining to the markets in Dosso and Maradi.  Impacts on the environment and on 
people were included as criteria for the selection of the municipal subprojects at an early 
stage of the process. Subproject screening for environmental purposes is being handled 
the BNC in collaboration with municipalities on the basis of a multi criteria analysis 
reviewed by the Bank.  This screening identified the nature and magnitude of the 
expected environmental and social impacts.  It classify the subprojects as Category A, B 
or C similar to the World Bank classification, triggering adjusted level of treatment from 
an environment point of view.  Potential negative impacts will be mitigated during design 
phase and mitigation measures will included in the works contracts.  If needed, 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be 
prepared as part of the preliminary design stage so that recommendations can be included 
into detailed subproject design.  Potential resettlement plan will be prepared according to 
Bank's guidelines (OP/BP 4.12).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse long-term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Management Unit (BNC) and the municipalities will do the preliminary 
screening for all sub-projects included in the program and will determine the actions 
necessary to comply with environmental and social safeguard issues.  Based on the 
preliminary screening, it will be determined whether an environmental assessment (EA) 
or resettlement actions plan (RAP), or both, will be required.  An assessment chart was 
finalized by BNC and approved by the Bank.  Based on the preliminary screening, the 
BNC will request the municipalities or Nigetip to include relevant terms of reference in 
the preliminary studies; the municipalities will implement the RAP with support from 
BNC; and the BNC will be responsible for the monitoring and the implementation of EAs 
and RAPs for all sub-projects in the program. T
he Bank’s approval will be required for 
Page  4
all sub-projects involving resettlement and therefore the preparation of a RAP.  
Involuntary resettlement costs will be borne by the Government of Niger.  
 
BNC will be responsible for the overall implementation of the ESMF and RPF 
recommendations.  Consultants will be engaged to prepare Resettlement Action Plans and 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) or Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) 
as and when necessary.  
 
The engineer at the BNC will act as the focal point person for environmental and social 
management.  The BNC will prepare and submit to IDA the standard annex of the 
bidding documents concerning the Environmental and Social Management Plan, which 
will be part of the contractors’ financial offer.  For any subpproject, the technical works 
contractors and supervisor will be required to designate a focal point person for the 
application of the provisions of the ESMP; these arrangements will be included in the 
contract.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the BNC; the local authorities in the targeted cities: CUN, CUM, 
the municipalities of Niamey, Dosso and Maradi; selected government institutions active 
in the areas of urban management; local contractors and consultant firms involved in 
project implementation; and NGOs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/06/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/05/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/06/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/05/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christian Diou 
01/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
01/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
01/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
01/21/2008 
Comments:   
