Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3798 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P110697 
Project Name: Second Health Systems Development II - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 11, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (88%);Sub-national government administration (12%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health (P);Child 
health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The additional financing proposed (US$80 million) would retain the same objectives and 
implementation procedures of the original project and would be allocated (on a notional basis) as 
a
supplementary credit to the Federal Government and 22 States. Government has agreed, that, 
due to the limited resources available and in order to achieve economies of scale and ensure 
impact, not all of the states will participate in the additional financing.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional credit would help finance the costs associated with the current financing 
gap created after the project was restructured two years ago and implementation was accelerated. 
Given the political sensitivities, selection criteria were based on project performance, fiduciary 
compliance, financing gap, stability of the Project Implementation Units and PFMUs and the 
timely payment of government contributions.  The 22 States selected meet this criteria and based 
on their current workplan projections indicate that roughly 50% of the funds will go to support 
civil works (refurbishing and rehabilitation of health training institutions and primary health 
centers and provision of water), 30% for service delivery, including commodities and equipment, 
and 20% for systems development (e.g. M&E) and capacity building at the State and facility 
Page  2
level.  It is envisaged that the additional funding will support the following sets of activities 
within the broader context of strengthening primary health care services:  
 
•
Rehabilitation and Refurbishment of Schools of Health Technology and Schools of 
Nursing and Midwifery US$16.53m.  The objective of this component is to support 36 health 
training institutions to secure relevant accreditation in order to improve the quality of pre-
training of human resources for health. Renovation/upgrading of equipment and training 
facilities as well as the provision of basic pedagogic materials will especially improve the supply 
of skilled attendants at birth.  
 
•
Support to Health Services US$54.06m.  The objective of this component is to support 
activities that would improve the delivery of primary health care services and increase utilization 
rates.  The additional financing would support the refurbishment/re-equipment of primary health 
facilities and training of health service workers, as well as immunization activities, such as the 
procurement and repair of cold chain equipment and training of vaccinators. 127 primary health 
care centers are to be rehabilitated are designated in each State’s workplan.  
 
•
Strengthening monitoring and evaluation systems and processes at National andState 
levels US$9.41m.  The objective of this component is to strengthen the processes and systems to 
ensure evidence-based decision making and confirmation of the impact of government 
interventions in improving the delivery of basic health services.  The lack of baseline data and 
inconsistent efforts to track results has impeded the project from having the influence to inform 
policy decisions and build the capacity for managing the health system.  The challenges of 
working across 36 states and the weak capacity at all levels for quality data collection should not 
be underestimated.  Therefore, the focus on only 22 states that are already well-performing, 
combined with a revamped monitoring and evaluation framework, is expected to support more 
meaningful use of project data.  A rapid assessment of the current HMIS systems will be 
conducted to ascertain the bottlenecks and remaining data gaps.  The Director of Health 
Planning, Research and Statistics will continue to be responsible for monitoring and evaluation.  
But, the additional financing will allocate supplemental funding to contract M&E firms to 
partner with the Director of Health Planning, Research and Statistics to deliver quality project 
monitoring and evaluation.  These firms will also be tasked with additional supervision 
responsibilities to ensure that field visits are undertaken on a regular basis.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The 22 states expected to participate are: Akwa Ibom, Abia, Anambra, Bauchi, Benue, Borno, 
Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo, Jigawa, Kebbi, Kogi, Kano, Kwara, Nasarawa, Ondo, Osun, Plateau, 
Sokoto Taraba and the FCT.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has limited safeguards policies capacity.  This will be supplemented during 
preparation with the hiring of local consultants to carry out the safeguards work.  The project 
will further assess during project preparation, the Borrower’s current capacity and identify 
measures to strengthen it. It will outline institutional arrangements, including the roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor environmental and social 
mitigation measures, and make appropriate recommendations.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed additional financing project is categorized as a B, since it might generate small 
and site-specific less adverse environmental impacts associated with civil works, through the 
rehabilitation of health institutions and repair of cold chain equipment. There will be no new 
construction and land acquisition in this project nor loss of, and/or access to sources of livelihood 
since all interventions are site specific and will occur on already existing structures.  
Accordingly, Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared by 
the borrower, and would be reviewed and cleared by the Bank. This ESMF will have been 
disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to project signing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/05/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared as there will 
be no new construction and land acquisition in this project.  The ESMF will be disclosed in-
country and at infoshop prior to project signing.  The sector unit agrees to accept transfer of 
safeguard responsibility.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
07/31/2008 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
