Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1823 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/23/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P097026 
Project Name: State Governance and Capacity Building Project-II 
Task Team Leader: George Addo Larbi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 6, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (95%);Central government 
administration (5%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (P);Other public sector governance (S);Tax policy and 
administration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to strengthen the capacity and quality of (a) the public 
financial and procurement management systems (b) personnel and payroll management system 
and (c) monitoring and evaluation system in participating states. By improving these governance 
systems at state level SGCBP II will support achievement of the Seven Point Agenda of the New 
Administration and Governance pillar of the Second Country Partnership Strategy (CPS II, 2010-
2013)of the Bank, DFID and other development partners.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
PRELIMINARY PROJECT DESCRIPTION  
 
SGCBP II seeks to support reforms in participating states and pilot local governments towards 
improved fiscal, public financial management, and personnel and payroll management systems, 
including public procurement, multi-year budgeting and fiscal planning, tax administration, 
capacity development, monitoring and evaluation. The estimated lending envelope is $100 
Page  2
million. The lending instrument is a technical assistance/investment loan (TAL), funded entirely 
from IDA credit. Given the emphasis of the project on institution building and capacity 
development, TAL would be the most appropriate instrument. Based on existing analytical work  
and information collected during the project identification mission, the team note similarities in 
the institutional weaknesses and capacity development needs. The difference is a matter of 
degree. Proposed components of SGCBP II will therefore be common to all states, with 
flexibility to address state-specific needs that fall within the scope of the project. The 
components outlined below will seek to complement, in some cases,  what other development 
partners and the state governments themselves are doing.  
 
Component 1: Public Financial Management and Procurement Reforms ($55 million) aims to 
develop and modernize the PFM systems of participating states, with the objective of improving 
its efficacy and quality in managing public financial resources. To enhance macroeconomic 
management and quality of public expenditure, the component will support fiscal planning and 
standardization of PFM procedures, processes and reporting among participating state 
governments for consistency with the federal government.  Activities will include:(a) fiscal 
responsibility legislation and implementation; (b) strengthening capacity for budget preparation, 
presentation, implementation and monitoring; (c) accounting, and financial reporting; (d) 
strengthening audit and oversight role of the State Houses of Assembly; (e) improving tax 
administration (f) modernization and automation of financial management system; and (g) public 
procurement reforms and capacity building. These activities are in line with the follow-up action 
plans that are part of the PEFA and PERs undertaken by the some potential candidate states. The 
PFM component will be coordinated with other development partners’ support in the selected 
states where applicable (e.g. with EU-SRIP in Anambra state).  
 
Component 2: Human Resource Management and Capacity Development ($22.5 million). 
Diagnostic work undertaken by the Bank and other development partners highlight the depth of 
human resources capacity and systemic weaknesses that undermine the credibility of PFM, 
payroll and personnel management systems. They also highlight the fact the wage bill constitute 
one of the biggest items of government expenditure and subject to weak controls and abuses with 
negative impact on the quality of public expenditure. The objective of this component will be to 
provide targeted capacity building to PFM-related ministries, departments and agencies, as well 
as strengthen personnel and payroll systems to minimize abuse and redirect potential savings to 
improve services. Activities include conduct of a thorough assessment of existing skills and 
training needs of PFM and procurement related MDAs; targeted short to medium term training, 
provision of logistic support, and development, modernization and linking of payroll and 
personnel databases the state public service.  
 
Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation System Development ($7.5 million) In most states 
M&E is either non-existent or even where they exist the emphasis is on project monitoring. One 
of the key challenges is how to monitor and measure the outcome of public expenditures, 
especially in big spending ministries, departments and agencies. This component will help to 
address these challenges by strengthening the capacity of state governments to effectively 
allocate resources, track outcomes of government programs and improve the quality of service 
delivery, using evidence generated from regular evaluation of programs. The focus will be on 
improving the legal and institutional framework for results-based M&E and building the 
Page  3
institutional capacity for effective monitoring and management of development outcomes. It will 
support activities related to (a) diagnosis of existing M&E systems (b) design and 
implementation of a new M&E system (c) formulation of policies and drafting of enabling 
regulations (d) training and skills development for staff of State Planning Commissions and 
MDAs (e) establishment of an M&E secretariat to coordinate M&E activities across the state 
alongside capacity building and (f) pilot evaluations and service delivery satisfaction surveys for 
key government programs.  
 
Component 4: Responsive Support for State Specific Requests ($15 million) This component 
will allocate resources to meet other relevant SGs’ requests to complement and deepen reforms 
under the components outlined above. Funding from this component will also be used to provide 
additional financing for the three states currently implementing SGCBP I when the project closes 
in March 2010.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Four (4) of the following potential candidate states: (1)Anambra in the South East geopolitical 
zone; (2) Ekiti in the south west geopolitical zone; (3) Kwara, (4) Niger and (5)Plateau, all in the 
North Central geopolitical zone; and (6) Yobe in the North East geopolitical zone.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has limited safeguards policies capacity.  This will be supplemented during 
preparation with the hiring of local consultants to carry out the safeguards work.  The project 
will further assess during project appraisal, the Borrower’s current capacity and identify 
measures to strengthen it. It will outline institutional arrangements, including the roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor environmental and social 
mitigation measures, and make appropriate recommendations.  In addition, Government team 
will receive guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists on the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is categorized as a B, since it might generate small and site-specific less 
adverse environmental impacts associated with civil works, through the rehabilitation of State-
Owned training institutions and office buildings, landscaping and fencing of the structures. 
However,  no new land acquisition in this project nor loss of, and/or access to sources of 
livelihood since all interventions are site specific and will occur on already existing structures.  
To successfully identify and manage the potential adverse impacts on the environment from 
project funded activities such as those enumerated above, the borrower will prepare 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) reviewed and cleared by the Bank. 
This ESMF will have been disclosed in-country and at the Info Shop prior to project appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, reviewed, 
approved and disclosed in Nigeria by the Government and sent to the Bank for disclosure at 
the Info Shop prior to appraisal.  The sector unit accepts transfer of safeguard responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George Addo Larbi 
03/10/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/19/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
03/19/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
