Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/09/2008 
Report No.:  AC3123
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P101434 
Project Name:  Niger Transport Sector Program Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are to (i) improve the physical access of rural 
population to markets and services on selected unpaved sections of the national road 
network, and (ii) strengthen the institutional framework, management and 
implementation of road maintenance in Niger.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include the two following major components:  
 
1. Component A (US$ 20.5 million): Periodic maintenance and spot rehabilitation of 
unpaved roads; it consists of civil works on selected road sections of the southwestern 
and southern rural areas, consultants’ supervision and other services directly related to 
civil works that aim at improving access of population to markets and services in densely 
populated areas with high economic potential and thus help achieve the first project 
development objective;  and  
 
Page  2
2. Component B (US$ 4.5 million): Institutional support to the main transport sector 
players through provision of capacity building and assistance in management and 
execution of road maintenance activities; this component will help achieve the second 
project development objective through support to the implementation of Niger’s PST. It 
is meant to leverage Component A by improving the management and sustainability of 
road maintenance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The civil works of spot rehabilitation and periodic maintenanace will be executed on road 
sections in the southeastern and southern rural areas, in the regions of Dosso, Tillabery, 
Zinder, Maradi and Tahoua. Around 1,056 km of unpaved roads will be rehabilitated 
under the project. The works will be executed in two phases: about 600km in 2008-2009 
and the rest in 2010-2011.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) & Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
Some potential environmental and social impacts may occur during the physical works 
under Component A. The road works may have an impact on soil, water, air quality, flora 
and fauna, as well as produce noise pollution. Similarly they may contribute to increasing 
the prevalence of HIV/AIDS and SDTs at work sites.  
 
Page  3
A
number of safeguard instruments were prepared by the project recipients, as required 
for Category B projects financed by IDA. They include: (i) Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments and management Plans (ESIA/EMP) related to spot rehabilitation 
and periodic maintenanace of the selected road sections; and (ii) a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the whole project. These 
instuments were disclosed in-country and at the World Bank Infoshop during project 
preparation.  
 
On the social side, it is expected that the periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of 
unpaved roads as well as the support to the various transport stakeholders for the 
implementation of activities under the Transport Sestor Program would have in a positive 
social impact. A successful implementation of the proposed periodic maintenance and 
rehabilitation is likely to improve the quality of passenger and cargo transport, will create 
employment opportunities (mostly in the road construction industry), and indirectly 
contribute to the country's economic development and to improvement in the quality of 
life of the affected population.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
The site impact assessments determined that natural habitats would not be affected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential indirect impacts identified by the above studies can be summarized as 
follows:  
 
-
loss of flora and fauna due to deforestation and land clearing, if tree planting is not 
carried-out to compensate for such loss;  
 
-
soil erosion and degradation if environmental clauses during execution of works are 
not implemented;  
 
-
loss of livelihood and economic activities by project affected people, unless 
compensation and use of proper grievance mechanisms are put in place;  
 
-
potential of SDT transmission if sensitisation of local communities, businesses and 
construction workers is not properly carried-out and/or due to improper waste 
management.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESIA and EMP conducted by the Recipient provides a clear description of project 
components, and extensive baseline information on the bio-physical and socioeconomic 
environments within which the project is to be implemented, potential environmental 
impacts and mitigation measures commensurate to those impacts.  In addition, they 
include sound institutional arrangements -- outlining the roles and responsibilities of the 
Page  4
various stakeholder groups involved with the implementation and monitoring of 
identified measures, along with capacity strengthening measures and awareness raising 
campaigns targeting relevant actors closely involved with project for better 
implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures.  
 
Similarly, the RAP provides a clear assessment of the extent of land acquisition, loss of 
economic activities and number of affected people under the project.It establishes the 
principles of resettlement, organizational procedures for land entitlement, consultation 
mechanisms of and eligibility criteria for Project Affected People (PAP).  It also 
discusses compensation and grievance mechanisms for affected people.  
 
There are reasonable capacity and experience in planning and implementing the 
identified safeguard measures due to the Recipient and implementing agency's s exposure 
to previous IDA financed projects in transport and local infrastructures. The 
responsibility and oversight of project overall compliance with national and IDA 
environmental and social safeguard policies is devolved to the Celule de Coordination du 
Programme Sectoriel des Transports (CC/PST) who will be working in close 
collaboration with Ministry of Environment, in particular the Bureau d’Ã‰valuation 
Environnmentale et des Ã‰tudes d’Impacts (BEEEI).  A convention of partnership 
between Ministry of Equipment and Ministry of Environment, including clear terms of 
reference, the mode of intervention of BEEEI and activities to be carried out, will be 
signed by the two parties prior to the launching of road civil works bidding documents. 
Further, all civil works will be contingent on broad-based and sustained consultation with 
local communities alongside the road sub-projects.  Mitigation measures for identified 
environmental impacts, including sparing cultural and historical resources and other 
environmental clauses will be properly implemented by contractors, as specified in the 
safeguard instruments and bidding documents.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project involves national actors in the road sub-sector: staff of the Ministry of 
Equipment including the regional departments of the concerned road sections; the road 
fund; the Ministry of Environment and its agency; the Ministry of Population; ONGs; and 
the representatives of local communities affected by the project.  
 
All project safeguard instruments have been prepared, in full compliance with World 
Bank and national safeguard policies, by two individual local consultants following a 
broad consultation framework, involving relevant stakeholder groups, both in public and 
private sectors, as well as local communities, consistent with the approach adopted at 
project initiation. This participatory approach will be carried out throughout 
implementation, supervision and evaluation of the project.  
 
Prior to disclosure in-country and at Infoshop a stakeholder workshop was organized by 
the CC/PST on December 1, 2007 involving relevant project stakeholder groups.  This 
approach was utilized with a dual objective: (i) present the results of the studies in order 
to seek feedback and input designed to improve quality and soundness of the instruments 
Page  5
from these stakeholders; and (ii) foster ownership on the part of the stakeholders during 
implementation, monitoring and supervision of the plans. Recommendations from both 
IDA and stakeholders' workshop have been reflected in the final safeguard reports, prior 
to disclosure. These recommendations and relevant provisions from the two set of 
safeguard instruments will be reflected in Project Implementation Manual.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/27/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
01/09/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
01/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
01/09/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
01/09/2008 
Comments:  The team's Environmental specialist cleared the ISDS on behalf of the Social 
Development Specialist as well, since they have been both working on both environmental and 
social aspects of the project. 
