Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC2162
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P090644 
Project Name:  Community and Social Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Foluso Okunmadewa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (30%);Primary education (20%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General public administration sector (20%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (10%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P);Other social protection and risk management 
(P);Decentralization (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (P);Participation and 
civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
180.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
180.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to sustainably increase access of poor people to 
social and natural resource management infrastructure services In specific, the project 
aims to increase the number of poor people (70% women) having access to social 
infrastructure services and NRM facilities; to increase the number of LGAs that are 
incoprating Community development plans into their Local government plans and 
budget.   
 
3. Project Description 
In recent times and flowing from the NEEDS, the Federal Government has reformed 
some of the poverty reduction interventions and instituted new ones with support from 
International Agencies. While there are considerable achievements by many of the 
projects, the community driven development CDD type interventions has been 
Page  2
particularly successful 
–
especially in increasing the access of the poor to social and 
economic service at the grassroot level. Three of these projects are very popular and 
successful: Community-based Poverty reduction Project (CPRP); Local Empowerment 
and Environmental Management Project (LEEMP) and FADAMA II. This has led to 
pressure to expand the projects to additional states of the Federation..  
 
In recognition of success of the CDD based interventions, it was agreed at the Country 
Portfolio Performance Review in 2005,  that all World Bank assisted CDD interventions 
need to be harmonized, especially in their tools and approaches in the short run and in 
their financing windows (i.e. mergers), where possible in the long run.  It was envisioned 
that harmonisation of the projects would (a) make the operations of the individual 
projects more efficient and effective by avoiding duplication of effort and adoption of 
good practices and (b) ensure a common process at the community level.  
 
The harmonization process has almost been completed. One important element of this 
harmonization is that CPRP and LEEMP, currently focused on public goods and common 
(pool) goods, would become one CDD programme focused on the provision of social 
services and natural resource management support in rural areas. FADAMA, on the other 
hand, would be focused on provision of productive goods in rural areas. The Community 
Social Development Project (CSDP) – a response to the proposed merger of CPRP and 
LEEMP will therefore focus on provision of social services and natural resource 
management, especially in rural areas.  
 
The CSDP will support (i) the empowerment of communities to develop, implement and 
monitor micro social infrastructure projects (public and common pool goods) including 
natural resource management interventions (ii) social risk management interventions 
(safety nets), and (iii) strengthening the skills and capacity of LGAs and sectoral public 
agencies to support communities and build a partnership between them. The CSDP 
overall development objective is to sustainably increase access of poor communities to 
basic social services and increase their capacity for natural resource management  
 
The CSDP has three major components.  
 
(i) Coordination and Technical Support Component - At the Federal level, this 
component will be supervised by the Federal Ministry of Finance. This is as a result of 
changes in mandate of federal agencies managing CPRP and LEEMP (NPC and FPSU in 
FMEnv respectively). The Federal project support unit (FPSU) will be responsible for 
implementation of the component and will report to the FMF. There would also be a 
multisectoral Programme Advisory Committee chaired by the FMF and serviced by the 
FPSU. The FPSU will be responsible for the following: (a) technical Support to State 
Agencies and activities on Procurement, Financial Management, Gender, Environment, 
and Local Government Capacity issues. The FPSU will be the collaboration point for the 
various Federal Sectoral Ministries to mainstream support for the CDD agenda, such as 
Women Affairs, Environment, Intergovernmental affairs (for Local Govt.), Education, 
Health, Water resources, etc; (b) CSDP Monitoring and Evaluation; and (c) Poverty and 
CDD Policy design and dissemination.  
Page  3
(ii) LGA/Sectoral Ministries Capacity and Partnership building Component. This 
component will be implemented by the State Agency in all participating States and will 
provide funding for capacity building, skills training and hardware types of investments. 
Specifically, funds will be made available for capacity building, skills training, as well as 
essential facilities for specific state and local government officials 
–
desk officers and 
community development workers –to facilitate their activities with community groups.  
 
(iii) Community-Driven Investment Component This component, managed by the State 
Agency, will provide funding for community development plans- based on specific 
selection criteria, including broad-based community participation in plans formulation, 
micro-project identification and preparation, and a matching contribution from 
communities. The state-level agencies will carry-out the following activities: information 
campaigns on community development plans , agency goals and funding procedures; 
support for community identification of needs and priorities and development of CDPs: 
in collaboration with LGAs, appraising, approving, and financing CDPs  developed and 
implemented by community-based groups; and monitor and evaluate the implementation 
of the CDPs and achievement of set objectives.  
 
Possible micro-projects that may be contained in eligible CDPs include rehabilitation, 
extension or construction of primary schools, health centres, water points, reservoirs and 
sanitation services; rehabilitation or repair of feeder road, small bridges, and other basic 
transport infrastructures; and small socio-economic infrastructure for community use 
(public goods) such as markets and storage or natural resource management facilities. 
More than 70% of the funds in this component will be devoted to funding of CDPs 
produced by community groups. In addition, to the micro-projects that are socioeconomic 
infrastructure, the CSDP at the State level will fund natural resource 
management/environmental initiatives, as well as safety net activities targeting the most 
vulnerable groups   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
One Federal unit and about 28 States Agencies in Nigeria: in Abia, Adamawa, Anambra, 
Bayelsa, Bauchi, Benue, Cross River, Ebonyi, Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo, Jigawa, 
Kaduna, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Nasarawa, Niger, Ondo, Ogun, Osun, Oyo, 
Plateau, Taraba, Yobe and Zamfara. Sub-projects are expected to be small in size and 
site-specific.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the project is designed and expected to have positive environmental and socio-
economic benefits. The safeguard documents prepared for the project (ESMF and RPF) 
confirm that significant or irreversible negative impacts are not expected. The safeguard 
documents provide for the prevention and mitigation of minor environmental and social 
issues. In addition, National and World Bank environmental and social safeguards will be 
complied with during project implementation. Furthermore, the range, scale, location and 
number of sub-projects are not yet determined; they will emerge from the participatory 
process with communities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project sites will be selected based on criteria for selection agreed to by the 
communities/LGAs. Thus, the predictions on long term impact of project activities will 
be general, rather than tied to any specific intervention area. The long term impact of the 
project is to enable communities accrue socio-economic benefits through Community- 
Driven Development (CDD) approach   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which have been reviewed, approved 
and disclosed in-
country on March 27 and 29, 2006. Disclosure at the Bank’s Info Shop 
is in processs and nearly complete.  
 
Page  5
Although sufficient capacity for management of safeguard issues exist at the national 
level, there is limited capacity at the community and local government councils. CSDP 
will make resources available to strengthen lower levels of government through training, 
capacity and awareness building of the various stakeholders in order to mainstream 
safeguard activities into the sub-project cycle.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are:  
 
-
Federal Ministry of Finance  
 
-
Ministry of Intergovernmental Affairs.  
 
-
Federal Ministry of Environment  
 
-
NGOs  
 
-
Participating States and Local Government Councils  
 
The ESMF and RPF have been prepared following a broad-based consultation with 
relevant stakeholder groups. Sub-project specific EIAs will be conducted in close 
consultation with stakeholders, including project affected people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/20/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Foluso Okunmadewa 
04/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
04/12/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
04/12/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
04/12/2006 
Comments:   
