Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/09/2009 
Report No.:  AC4406
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P106172 
Project Name:  Nigeria Electricity and Gas Improvement Project (NEGIP) 
Task Team Leader:  Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Oil and gas (50%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to facilitate improved availability and reliability of 
gas and power supply in the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
The following is a brief description of the activities targeted by the project.  
 
Component 1:  Risk Mitigation through a series of Partial Risk Guarantees (PRG) in 
support of Gas Supplies to increase power generation from existing Public Sector Power 
Plants (PRGs for US$400 million with IDA allocation of US$100 million, Project ID 
P114277).  It is proposed that a series of PRGs be provided in support of gas supply 
payment obligations of Power Holding Company of Nigeria (PHCN) under individual 
Gas Supply and Aggregation Agreements (GSAA) with International and Domestic Oil 
Companies who are in existing Joint Ventures with the state-owned Nigerian National 
Petroleum Corporation (NNPC).  The first two PRGs are expected to be in support of 
GSAAs between PHCN and Shell Petroleum Development Corporation (SPDC) as JV 
Operator and Chevron Nigeria Ltd. (CNL) as JV Operator respectively for a total amount 
of US$315 million.  Once Board approval is obtained for the first two contracts, as part of 
the proposed PRG operation, based on the PRG framework detailed in the PRG Term 
Sheets, it is proposed that the balance amount of US$85 million be deployed for five 
Page  2
subsequent PRGs in support of GSAAs between PHCN and Exxon Mobil, AGIP, Pan 
Oceanic, Total and Addax as JV Operators respectively on a "first come first served" 
basis.  
 
Through this component, the Bank is only guaranteeing financial obligations for gas 
supplied and not investing in gas infrastructure.  
 
Component 2:  Enhancement of Transmission and Distribution Infrastructure (US$180 
million of IDA Credit) through;  
 
(a) 
Rehabilitation and reinforcement of aging 330 kV and 132 kV transmission 
stations including Afam, Akangba, Kaduna, Birnin Kebbi, Ikeja West, Ayede, Aba, Biu, 
Akure, Jerico, Ijebu-Ode, Eket, Ikorodu, Osogbo, Dan Agundi, Port Harcourt and 
Alagbon.  
 
(b) 
Rehabilitation/retooling of existing power transformer workshop.  
 
(c) 
Rectification/corrections of switchyard deficiencies and malfunctioning in 
330/132 kV transmission stations so as to improve communications to strengthen 
electrical systems'  performance, efficiency and reliability.  
 
(d) 
Reinforcement of distribution networks to increase electricity supply in selected 
cities including Kano, Kaduna, Eko, Ikeja, Ibadan, Abuja, Benin, Port Harcourt, Yola, 
Jos and Enugu.  
 
(e) 
Installation of 11 kV sectionalizers in Karu, Kubwa, Lagos University Teaching 
Hospital, Ogba, Agege and Idiaraba to increase customer satisfaction by reducing 
economic loss resulting from chronic power outages in these service areas.  
 
(f) 
Acquisition and installation of metering and other relevant equipment required to 
analyze and measure the quality and quantity of gas supplied to the Project Implementing 
Entity under Component 1 of the Project.  
 
Component 3:  Technical Advisory Services (US$16 million of IDA Credit).  Provision 
of logistical support and technical advisory services required to sustain ongoing reforms 
undertaken by the Recipient to improve the performance of its power sector including:  
 
(a) 
Carrying out studies to identify and select rehabilitation and management options 
to be adopted to promote efficiency for the Power Holding Company of Nigeria' power 
generation subsidiary companies;  
 
(b) 
Improvement of the tariff-subsidies model and delivery mechanisms adopted 
under the Multi Year Tariff Order (MYTO);  
 
(c) 
Design of gas infrastructure and transmission and distribution systems needed to 
handle expected increases in power supply;  
Page  3
(d) 
Activities aimed at building capacity for relevant institutions of the Federal 
Government of Nigeria responsible for the power sector including the Nigeria Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (NERC), Environment Resettlement Social Unit (ERSU) and the 
Market Operator;  
 
(e) 
Enhancing capacity for Federal Ministry of Environment (FME) and Department 
of Petroleum Resources (DPR), specifically with respect to implementation and 
enforcement of environmental rules/regulations governing the undertaking of gas and oil 
operations in Nigeria;  
 
(f) 
Formulation and execution of community outreach activities including a 
communication program to foster and to sustain open and continuous dialogue amongst 
all relevant stakeholders about the Project;  
 
(g) 
Carrying out of selected feasibility and re-engineering studies and supervision 
activities needed for execution of investments identified under Component 2 of the 
Project; and  
 
(h) 
Carrying out of activities designed to strengthen Nigeria Power Training Institute 
(NPTI)'s operational capacity.  
 
Support for incremental operating costs of PMU (US$2.0 million); and  
 
Un-allocated funds (US$2.0 million)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope.  The PRGs will cover payments for gas that is being 
supplied to PHCN using existing infrastructure. Gas will be sourced from the oil and gas 
fields in the Niger River Delta.  The first contracts to be covered by PRGs for gas 
delivery are between SPDC and PHCN, and CNL and PHCN, for supply to existing 
public power generation plants served by the Escravos-Lagos Pipeline System (ELPS).   
The ELPS has been in existence for over two decades.   Additional PRGs will be given in 
support of GSAAs between PHCN and other Oil Companies during implementation of 
the Project on a first come first served basis. The locations of the electric distribution and 
transmission rehabilitation investments are given in the description of Component 2 
above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTU2) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
At concept stage, NEGIP was classified in EA Category A because it included support 
for construction of new electric transmission lines and IPP plants.  These are no longer 
components of the project, and it has been reclassified in EA Category B.  There are no 
large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts.  Potential environmental impacts consist 
of those associated with (i) the public health and safety risks involved in transporting gas 
through existing pipelines and (ii) the rehabilitation and upgrading of electric 
transmission and distribution substations and distribution lines.  
 
Safeguards for Component 1 are being addressed through preparation of pipeline 
integrity studies for the existing pipelines that will supply gas to the PHCN power plants 
under PRGs.  The first integrity study has been completed in the form of an update for the 
ELPS Integrity Study that was prepared for West African Gas Pipeline in 2000.  
Additional studies will be carried out in accordance with the Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) as required when new PRGs involving different 
pipelines are given. Integrity studies are not disclosed for reasons of security.  The 
Borrower#s commitment to a time-bound program for completion of recommended 
actions in the Integrity Study will be a covenant in the legal documents.  
 
Safeguards for Component 2 are being handled by the preparation of Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) (i) prior to appraisal for those sites to be financed in 
the first 2 years; and (ii) according to the project#s ESMF described below for sites to be 
financed in years 3, 4 and 5.  
 
It is possible that OCs / gas companies delivering gas to PHCN power plants with the 
backing of Bank PRGs will see new market opportunities not only for export and for firm 
domestic consumption (facilitated by this project), but also possible future growth in 
domestic consumption thanks to a demonstration of reliable supply of good quality gas.  
If so, OCs may decide to drill new gas wells or construct extensions to gas collection 
systems.  Because of the nature of the production system, gas transport system, and 
Page  5
market, it would be very unusual to know whether any, or which, new wells or extended 
collection systems would be directly attributable to gas deliveries under Bank-guaranteed 
contracts.  Once produced, collected, and processed, gas transported by pipeline becomes 
fungible and potentially delivered to any one of a wide variety of end users.  Under these 
circumstances, it is unrealistic for the Bank to try to reach further #upstream# in direct 
project safeguards work than the integrity studies it is requiring for the existing pipelines 
through which the OCs will deliver the gas.  The Bank does not have leverage to apply its 
policies to such upstream developments.  The more realistic approach is to rely on 
existing Nigerian regulations and to use Bank resources through Technical Assistance to 
help the Government to improve, evaluate and assess their application to gas production 
facilities.  PRG Project Agreements will have an undertaking from the relevant OCs to 
the effect that any new wells would be developed in full compliance with Nigerian law, 
including requirements for environmental assessment, public consultation, and 
disclosure.  The OCs that are parties to the Gas Supply and Aggregation Agreements 
supported by the Bank#s PRG, would notify the Bank about their permit applications to 
the Ministry of Environment and the DPR and confirm to the Bank that the necessary 
permits and approvals have been received.  In the event of non-compliance the Bank 
would have the right to suspend the PRG until such time as the default is 
remedied.Furthermore, the capacity of FME and DPR in implementing and enforcing 
provisions of Nigerian law with respect to OC gas wells and gas gathering systems will 
be strengthened during project implementation through technical assistance.  The 
stakeholder forum to be constituted under the Project (see II.A.5 below for its 
description) will facilitate articulation of any concerns that arise regarding upstream 
developments.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The increases in availability of electric power and in the reliability of its delivery should 
contribute to economic development and improved quality of life nationally and 
regionally.  On the other hand, the type, extent and location of future developments is 
unknown and therefore their impacts cannot be predicted specifically.  Because 
unplanned, poorly planned, or badly executed development can have significant adverse 
social and environmental impacts, reinforcing the ability of local and state governments 
to plan and administer land development and to monitor and enforce compliance with 
environmental standards should be a long-term goal for Nigeria.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives are not relevant in the case of many of the proposed investments, since they 
involve correction of specific problems at existing transmission and distribution facilities.  
The same is true for the PRGs, since they will apply to gas being supplied through 
existing lines.  To the extent that there are alternatives, they will be considered in the 
course of design and assessment of the individual investments.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) resident in the PMU prepared 
the ESMF and the ESMPs for the investments to be financed in the first two years under 
Component 2.  ERSU will prepare ESMPs for investments in subsequent years  Because 
the first PRG for gas supply will include the Escravos-Lagos Pipeline System (ELPS), the 
ELPS integrity study prepared in connection with WAGP has been updated; this was 
accomplished by a specialized consultant.    The updating identified a number of the 
actions recommended in the original Integrity Study that have not been implemented, and 
NGC has developed an action plan to complete these works.  Implementation of the 
action plan is a covenant in the legal agreements.  Similar action will be taken for any 
future gas PRGs that involve different pipelines, following the same template, for 
presentation to the Board for approval.  
 
The ERSU already has demonstrated satisfactory capacity to address impacts of electric 
transmission and distribution projects.  TDP and NEDP supervision carried out in May 
2008 has shown that the ERSU#s capacity to implement the ESMF properly for those 
projects is fully adequate. ERSU has overseen audits of the substations, prepared ESMPs 
(including those for the first two years investments in Component 2 of this project), and 
supervised implementation of ESMPs for substation and distribution line improvements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are Nigerian citizens and businesses that are or would like to be 
consumers of electric power, local and regional governments, communities in affected 
states, Niger Delta communities and civil society organizations active there, 
environmental NGOs, environmental and social development professionals and 
institutions.  They were first briefed on the proposed project and consulted in a 
stakeholder workshop that was held jointly by PMU and the Bank at the Bank's country 
office on May 2, 2008. Additional workshops including one in Port Harcourt (in the 
Niger Delta) will be held during appraisal and repeated at intervals during project 
implementation. Consultations specific to individual investments will be conducted 
according to procedures defined in the ESMF.  
 
A
Stakeholder Forum to be chaired by the Minister of Power, and to include FME, DPR 
and other relevant federal and regional government agencies, civil society organizations 
and industry representatives, will be constituted before the Project becomes effective, to  
function during the Project's implementation period, to discuss project implementation 
issues, give expert opinion, and provide a platform to articulate and address concerns 
about social and environmental aspects of project implementation.  The forum will meet 
at least every six months, to coincide with Bank supervision missions, and may schedule 
additional meetings if it finds this to be useful or necessary.  
 
The final draft of the ESMF was disclosed in Nigeria under the auspices of the Federal 
Ministry for Environment, Housing and Urban Development on October 21, 2008.  The 
document is available for review and comment until November 17, at:  
Page  7
-- 
Offices of the Federal Controllers of Environmental in 14 States  
 
-- 
State Ministries of Environment in 14 States  
 
-- 
Federal Ministry of Environment Library, Abuja  
 
-- 
PHCN PMU office and website  
 
-- 
TCN HQ Office in Abuja and its Regional Offices in Lagos, Kaduna, Bauchi and 
Enugu  
 
-- 
PHCN Distribution & Marketing Zonal Offices in Abuja, Benin, Enugu, Port 
Harcourt, Kaduna, Jos, Yola  
 
-- 
Thermal Generation Stations in Afam, Egbin, and Sapele  
 
-- 
IPP Offices at Ibom Power and Total Elf Port Harcourt  
 
PMU delivered a copy of the draft ESMF to the PIC at the World Bank's Abuja Office 
on October 20, 2008.  Disclosure at the InfoShop occurred on October 23, 2008.  
 
An RPF was prepared before the content of the project was  modified to exclude new 
transmission and generation facilities.  Because of that modification, the resettlement 
policy is no longer triggered.  The RPF had already been reviewed and disclosed along 
with the ESMF and, though it will not be applied in NEGIP, it is available for use in 
future projects in the power sector.  
 
ERSU has prepared a generic ESMP for the first two years# investments in electric 
transmission and distribution, and it has been disclosed in country on PHCN's website 
and at its regional transmission offices (April 17, 2009) and in the InfoShop (April 14, 
2009). It includes in an annex the information on the environmental issues at each of the 
work locations.  Individual ESMPs will be prepared for each site prior to clearance to 
begin work, by incorporating the site-specific information in the text provided in the 
generic template.  ESMPs for the investments that come later will be prepared by ERSU, 
reviewed, and disclosed in country and in the Infoshop prior to approval for financing 
under NEGIP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
06/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
06/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
06/08/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/08/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
06/08/2009 
Comments:   
