Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3180
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P096572 
Project Name:  THIRD NATIONAL  FADAMA  DEVELOPMENT  PROJECT  
(FADAMA III) 
Task Team Leader:  Simeon Kacou Ehui 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P109737 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agro-industry (30%);Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);Irrigation and 
drainage (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
35.00 
 Local 
Communities 
55.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
85.00
175.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Fadama III Project is to sustainably increase the 
incomes of fadama users.  By increasing their incomes, the Project will help reduce rural 
poverty, increase food security and contribute to the achievement of a key MDG. The 
Third National Fadama Development Project (Fadama III Project (Fadama III) aims at 
sustainably increasing the incomes of Fadama resource users by directly delivering 
resources to the beneficiary rural communities, efficiently and effectively, and 
empowering them to collectively decide on how resources are allocated and managed for 
their livelihood activities and to participate in the design and execution of their sub-
projects. A team of Facilitators will be deployed in each community to provide training 
and technical assistance support to ensure that Fadama resource users, including women 
and other vulnerable groups, have a voice in the decision-making process and benefit 
Page  2
equally from project inputs.  These objectives will be achieved through the financing and 
implementation of four main components designed to transfer financial and technical 
resources to the beneficiary groups -- the FCAs in: (i) institutional and social capital 
development; (ii) physical infrastructure for productive use; (iii) income-generation and 
livelihood improvements; and (iv) transfer and adoption of technological know-how; as 
well as (v) implementation coordination.   
 
3. Project Description 
(1) Component 1.  Capacity Building, Communications and Information Support--$65.7 
M.  This component will include: (a) Capacity Building Support for Community 
Organizations; (b) Strengthening Implementation Coordination Capacity; (c) Capacity 
Building Support to Local Governments; and (d) Communications and Information 
Support.  
 
(2) Component 2.  Small-Scale Community-owned Infrastructure --$75 M: Despite 
recent successes in addressing the infrastructure constraint through Fadama I and Fadama 
II, much more remains to be done to improve existing low levels of infrastructure and 
services.  Grant resources will be allocated annually to each of the participating FCAs for 
implementing priority demand-driven community-owned productive infrastructure 
investments of the public good type.  
 
(3) Component 3.  Advisory Services and Input Support $42.9 M: Under this component 
the project will finance: (a) Advisory Services; (b) Input Support; (c) Support to the 
extension function of the ADPs; and (d) Adaptive Technology Development and Transfer 
Support.  
 
(4) Component 4.  Support to the ADPs and Adaptive Research--$37.0 M:  This 
component will provide support to the ADPs to carry out the following specific and 
limited functions:  (a) Support to Advisory Service Providers; (b) Quality Assurance of 
Advisory Services; (c) Training of Facilitators; (d) Sponsored Research and On-farm 
Demonstrations; and (e) Training of Extension Staff.  
 
(5) Component 5.  Asset Acquisition for Individual FUGs/EIGs--$150.1 M:  The 
matching grant will be used as seed money to empower smallholder and poor farmers to 
acquire capital assets which they would use to undertake a wide range of small-scale 
income-generating activities as well as improve farmers' access to markets and 
complementary support that add value to farm produce.  This approach to financing is 
adopted due to the low performance of rural financial markets in Nigeria, which are 
particularly deficient and limited in terms of outreach in the rural areas.  
 
Project Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation--$52.7 M: (a) Technical Assistance 
(to the national and state level implementation coordination function); (b) Project 
Coordination; and (c) Project Monitoring and Evaluation.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
It is expected that the Project will cover the remaining 19 states in Nigeria and some of 
the states currently implementing the Fadama II Project that meet the eligibility criteria.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Six safeguards policies are triggered by this Project.  
 
The Project will abide by the covenants of the three policies of Forestry, Natural 
Habitats and International Waters.  The three safeguards instruments of ESMF, RPF and 
PMP have been prepared by the client and reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  The 
safeguard instruments were disclosed in-country and the Bank's InfoShop on May 4, 
2007.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This Project falls into Environmental category B as no adverse long-term impacts are 
anticipated.  No long-term adverse impacts were identified in the prepared safeguards 
instruments:  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF); and Pest Management Plan (PMP).  This Project will not fund 
activities that would cause an adverse effect on the environment or any form of land 
acquisition or restriction of access to sources of livelihoods.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESMF and RPF carried out during project preparation have provided mechanisms to 
identify impacts beyond the generic ones for which standard mitigation measures are 
built and to be applied during the implementation phase.  The safeguards impacts 
identified are not expected to have any long-term or cumulative impacts.  Environmental 
protection clauses will be included in the contract documents for small-scale 
infrastructure like rehabilitation and/or construction of feeder and fadama access roads, 
culverts and bridges.  
 
Environmental protection criteria.  Experience demonstrates that, because of their small 
scale, most of the subprojects financed under Fadama II do not have a significant effect 
on the environment.  Nevertheless, the detailed environmental checklist, developed and 
used in the LDP process for subproject screening and qualification, will be maintained 
and updated for this Project.  Further, an environmental specialist will be maintained at 
the SFDO to provide additional technical assistance on environmental matters as well as 
provide training to increase environmental awareness of Facilitators and the FCAs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/04/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/03/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/04/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/03/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/04/2007 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/03/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
N/A 
Page  6
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
02/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
02/28/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
02/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
02/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Frank Fulgence K. Byamugisha 
02/28/2008 
Comments:   
