Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4231 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P115036 
Project Name: Malaria Control Booster Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (38%);Sub-national government 
administration (33%);Health (23%);Other social services (6%) 
Theme: Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance (P);Other financial 
and private sector development (S);Child health (S);Population and reproductive health 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The additional financing proposed (US$100 million) would retain the objectives and 
implementation procedures of the original project which are (i) to ensure that the target 
population will have improved access to, and utilization of well-defined set of Malaria Plus 
Package of interventions (MPP); and (ii) to strengthen Federal and States ability to manage and 
oversee delivery of malaria plus interventions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional financing would help finance the costs associated with a proposed scale-up that 
will broaden the scope and reach of the project by focusing on certain core health systems, 
demand side, and communications issues. Specifically, the additional credit will support the 
following activities within the context of health systems strengthening, community systems 
strengthening, and communications.  
 
A. 
Component 1: Health Systems Strengthening  
Page  2
The additional financing will support three subcomponents through:  
 
•
Scaling Up Malaria Laboratory Diagnosis and Improving Quality assurance for malaria 
diagnosis  
 
•
Monitoring of Drug and insecticide resistance  
 
•
Supply Chain management and Logistic management System  
 
B. 
Component 2: Community Systems Strengthening  for Health Service Delivery  
 
The additional financing will support three subcomponents:  
 
•
Health Service Delivery through “Community Systems Strengthening”  
 
•
Strengthening Health Service Delivery through the private sector  
 
•
Increasing Demand for Health Services by Intensifying Behavior Change 
Communication (BCC) and IEC  
 
C. 
Component 3: Communications for Advocacy, Program Implementation and Results.  
 
This component will aim to strengthen and implement the communications strategy of the 
National Malaria Control Program in order to ensure effective advocacy, strengthened program 
implementation, and a stronger emphasis on results.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The additional financing will support seven states of the Nigerian Federation and the Federal 
Ministry of Health in improving the fight against malaria in Nigeria. The States are: Akwa Ibom, 
Anambra, Bauchi, Gombe, Jigawa, Kano, and Rivers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower, Nigeria, has considerable experience in World Bank Safeguard Policies. Indeed 
an Integrated Vector management Plan was prepared for the parent project. Furthermore, there 
exists an environmental specialist in the Project management unit, who is responsible for 
safeguards issues. In processing this additional financing, an environmental audit of the parent 
project was carried out as part of safeguards due diligence. The report of the environmental audit 
informed the revision of the existing IVMP to foster better safeguards implementation and 
compliance. In particular, the revised IVMP clearly contains the institutional arrangements, 
including the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor 
environmental and social mitigation measures at federal, state and local government area levels. 
It also includes capacity building needs of the PMU.   In addition, an ESMF was prepared by the 
project to cater for the added component on community mobilization and minor civil works that 
is involved in component B of the project. Both the ESMF and updated IVMP will be disclosed 
publicly in Nigeria and Bank info shop prior to appraisal mission.  The environmental specialist 
at the PMU will be supported by consultant as and when necessary, and will be hired on an on-
need basis. Additional guidance will be provided by the safeguards members of the project team 
as required.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The implementation of Component B entails renovation of existing buildings and minor civil 
works typical of category B project. An ESMF has been prepared to provide a guide on how the 
minor environmental issues that may likely occur will be handled by the project. The ESMF will 
be disclosed country wide and at the Bank Info-Shop prior appraisal mission.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project also involves the use of Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets (LLINS) and 
Indoor Residual Spray (IRS)  of mosquitoes as part of the interventions to combat malaria. Both 
of these interventions entail the use of insecticides. Therefore, the IVMP developed for the 
parent project will be revised and disclosed in-country and in the Info-Shop prior to appraisal 
mission.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/02/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The implementation of Component B entails renovation of existing buildings and minor civil 
works typical of category B project. The Project also involves the use of Long Lasting 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
Insecticide treated Nets (LLINS) and Indoor Residual Spray(IRS) of mosquitoes as part of 
the interventions to combat malaria and these entails the use of insecticides.  
 
The ESMF and revised  IVMP will be prepared, approved and disclosed publicly in Nigeria 
and at the Bank’s InfoShop prior appraisal mission.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
03/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
03/13/2009 
Comments:   
