Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3570 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P106172 
Project Name: Nigeria Energy Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader: Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 29, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the Project are to increase availability and reliability of power 
supply along with financial sustainability of the power sector.  A secondary but important global 
objective would be reduction of Green House Gas emissions through reduced gas flaring and 
enhanced share of cleaner generation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will assist the Government through a WBG compact of risk coverage, 
potential debt financing and IDA investments blended with technical assistance and knowledge 
transfer.  An APL with two tranches is proposed as the lending instrument of the project.  
Movement to the second tranche of the APL will involve achievement of shared objectives in the 
sector including movement to cost reflective tariffs, meeting gas supply obligations and 
efficiency targets.  The operational features of the proposed project are:  
 
(a)  A well publicized mechanism of guarantees and due diligence to select well structured 
projects for support to attract the necessary capital at reasonable cost.  The existing private sector 
projects will be subjected to due diligence to ensure that they incorporate reasonable, 
Page  2
internationally accepted, technical, operational and financial benchmarks to limit the burden of 
Independent Power Provider (IPP) power on the sector at a sustainable level;  
 
(b)  A transition subsidy mechanism to bring in generation investments even as policy, 
regulatory, and tariff changes are being made;  
 
(c)  Complementary investments in transmission, distribution, and rehabilitation of selected 
generating plants needed to make the additional capacity available to consumers and to achieve 
efficiencies in the sector to gradually reduce subsidies as well as to pilot rural access and 
renewable energy development;  
 
(d)  Promote positive changes in the domestic gas supply framework for power sector in 
particular; and  
 
(e)  Carbon Finance to help reduce gas flaring by adding domestic gas-fired generation 
capacity, leading to the substitution of diesel and other fuel captive generators, operated by 
households and businesses that emit much higher level of greenhouse gases and help Nigeria to 
gain carbon credits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scope.  The exact future locations of generating plants will depend on 
the IPPs that are accepted after due diligence.  This will in turn determine the corridors for the 
transmission lines to connect the plants to the national grid. Gas will be sourced from the oil 
fields in the Niger River Delta, and it is possible that some of the generating plants will be 
located in the Delta as well.  The four gas-fired generating plants that are potential candidates for 
rehabilitation are in southern Nigeria.  Some reduction in gas flaring should occur in the Delta.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) was established in connection with the 
Transmission Development Project (TDP) and strengthened during the National Energy 
Development Project (NEDP), precursors to the current project.  It resides within PHCN and is 
responsible for implementation of the ESMF and RPF that were prepared for NEDP.  The ERSU 
will undertake the tasks of expanding and upgrading that ESMF and RPF to the level needed for 
a
Category A project that includes gas-fired generation so that they can be used to guide the 
safeguards work for NEIP.  ERSU now reports formally to TransSysCo in the organizational 
chart of the power companies.  It has become part of a 10-person environmental and social unit 
in TransSysCo.  However, it is still physically located with the PMU and will be responsible for 
overseeing safeguards compliance in NEIP on behalf of PMU and TransSysCo.  This will 
include oversight of compliance by IPP sponsors and their contractors.  ERSU will receive 
additional training to develop capacity in environmental and social aspects of power generation.  
ERSU’s capacity in transmission and distribution has been developed under TDP and NEDP and 
is adequate.  Direct regulatory oversight will be provided by the Federal Ministry of 
Environment, which is the permit-issuing authority for the plants.   FMEnv makes quarterly field 
visits to the IPP project that may become the first to receive a PRG and issues reports of its 
findings. ERSU will also oversee the preparation of RAPs, EIAs, EMPs, and/or Environmental 
Audits for transmission and distribution system investments and power plant rehabilitations 
Page  3
being financed under NEIP, in accord
ance with the ESMF and RPF.  ERSU’s performance in 
implementing the ESMF and RPF in NEDP was reviewed in a TDP/NEDP supervision mission 
in connection with NEIP pre-appraisal in April-May 2008 and was found to have been fully 
satisfactory. Any additional training needs for strengthening capacity to oversee a Category A 
project that are not met in NEDP, which is being extended, will be addressed in the design of 
NEIP.  
 
Prospective developers of IPPs will have the obligation to prepare EIAs and RAPs for their 
individual facilities in accordance with Nigerian laws and regulations and the safeguards policies 
of the World Bank Group, following the guidelines provided in the ESMF and RPF.  Typically, 
the private companies and their contractors will be the implementers for most of the mitigation 
and many of the monitoring measures for their investments.  The arrangements they propose and 
their capacities to carry them out will be assessed when their individual EIAs and RAPs are 
reviewed, by ERSU, World Bank Group, and the cognizant regulatory agencies. Company 
performance will be closely supervised by the Bank Group, with substantial participation by 
field-based staff. The ESMF will spell out the respective responsibilities of the Federal Ministry 
of Environment, which must review and approve all EIAs, the state environmental agencies, and 
sectoral agencies such as the Directorate of Petroleum Regulation and will identify any needs for 
strengthening to improve the management of the potential impacts of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (OPCQC) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Mr Nicolas Kotschoubey (AFTEG) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Gas-fired generating plants have fewer and more manageable operational impacts than those 
using other fuels, but impacts of construction can be significant.  Transmission-line construction 
involves land clearing, with possible soil erosion and loss of habitat.  Rehabilitation of existing 
power plants almost always entails remedial work to correct health, safety, and environmental 
deficiencies.  To the extent that gas is sourced from oil fields where it would otherwise be flared, 
there will be positive impacts on local air quality and global greenhouse gas production.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Power plants, transmission and distribution lines, substations and gas delivery lines may 
adversely affect natural habitat, such as wetlands in the Niger Delta and forest.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Small temples, burial grounds, and sacred groves are among the cultural resources that could 
be affected, particularly by ROW clearing for transmission lines.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition will be required for plant sites and power and gas line ROWs. Resettlement 
will be minimized as much as possible, but some may be unavoidable. It is possible that one or 
more specific IPPs will be selected for financing during project preparation.  If so, the project 
will have to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), in accordance with the RPF, and submit 
it to the Bank for review and clearance prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The basic safeguards instruments for NEIP will be an ESMF and RPF.  An ESMF was 
prepared for TDP and upgraded for NEDP.  It will be expanded, reorganized, and 
substantially upgraded for NEIP, including:  additional policies triggered; inclusion of 
relevant IFC Performance Standards because of
 MIGA’s participation; description of the 
subproject preparation, approval and implementation process, covering screening, EIA 
preparation and review and approval, consultation and disclosure, and monitoring and 
supervision; expanded coverage of environmental and social impacts and mitigation 
measures as appropriate for a Category A project; an assessment of capacity of relevant 
institutions, with recommendations for strengthening as needed; and an ESMF 
implementation budget.  The RPF will also be modified to suit NEIP, but it is already a much 
more nearly complete document, since there is little difference between Category A and B 
projects where an RPF is concerned.  ERSU is preparing the new ESMF and RPF in-house, 
with close guidance from the task team.  
 
Because the project may finance rehabilitation of some existing and relatively old 
generating plants, environmental audits will be required.  There are four gas-fired plants, and 
the specific ones to be rehabilitated have not been determined.  The ESMF will provide 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
guidelines and sample terms of reference for environmental audit.  A detailed audit will be 
prepared during implementation for each plant selected for rehabilitation, to be used in 
planning the rehabilitation work.  
 
Completion of drafts of the ESMF and the RPF for disclosure in country and in the 
InfoShop is scheduled for July 2008, prior to appraisal, and 120 days before submission to 
Board for approval.  It is possible that one or more specific IPPs will be selected for 
financing during project preparation and, if this is the case, the proponents will be required to 
complete and disclose EIAs and RAPs in accordance with the ESMF and RPF, also prior to 
appraisal.  
 
Additionally, owing to the likelihood of subprojects being developed in the Niger Delta, an 
area that continues to see social unrest, an independent advisor or monitor familiar with 
issues in the Delta and in the energy sector will be retained by the project to serve as 
ombudsman, and to address in a fair and unbiased way complaints and technical uncertainties 
that may arise. The independent advisor or monitor would investigate key issues, serve as a 
third party observer, and would provide information to interested parties on safeguards-
related issues that may arise.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
06/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
06/25/2008 
Comments:   
