Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC3334
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P072644 
Project Name:  Rural Access and Mobility Project (RAMP) 
Task Team Leader:  Justin Runji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.99 
 
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
0.00
11.99 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to provide improved rural transport infrastructure 
in support of rural economic development activities and for better access to 
socioeconomic amenities by rural communities in Kaduna State and assist Kaduna State 
to manage the State road assets in a sustainable manner. RAMP has two components: 
upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of rural transport infrastructure; and 
institutional strengthening, reforms and capacity building. The rural transport 
infrastructure component will support the upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of 
about 600 km of rural roads in four prioritized intervention areas and about 130 river 
crossings spread across the entire state.   
 
3. Project Description 
RAMP has two components, Component A: Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance 
of Transport Infrastructure and Component B: Institutional Strengthening, Reforms and 
Capacity Building. The activities within each one of these two components are detailed 
below:  
Page  2
Component A: Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Transport Infrastructure  
 
The rural transport infrastructure component of the project will support the upgrading, 
rehabilitation and maintenance of about 600 km  (subject to ongoing design work) of 
rural roads selected from the eight top prioritized intervention areas and 132 river 
crossings spread across the entire state. There will be two sub-components within 
Component A: (i) Improvement and maintenance of roads within eight intervention areas 
of the state through long term output and performance based contracting (OPRC), and (ii) 
Construction and rehabilitation of selected river crossings across the entire state. There 
will be four OPRC packages, two in Giwa, part of Birnin Gwari, part of Igabi and part of 
Zaria forming Packages R1 and R2. while part of Kagarko, part of Jema’a, part of Jaba, 
part of Zango Kataf and part of Kachia will form Package R3 and R4. River crossings 
will be grouped into six packages B1 to B6, covering the whole of Kaduna but excluding 
river crossings on roads under OPRC.  
 
A
study was carried out to assess the rural road transport needs of the entire state and to 
prioritize the intervention areas. The delineated intervention areas were prioritized by 
attaching relative importance to: population; land area; population density; number of 
primary/post primary schools; schools enrolment; school to land area; number of 
boreholes to land area; number of health facilities; health facilities to land area; poverty 
index; number of markets; agricultural outputs (in tons); FADAMA/Irrigation farms; and 
cottage industries. The criteria for screening, prioritization and selection of 
links/networks were cost-effectiveness, population of communities along the link, traffic 
volume along the link and community preference.  
 
Regarding river crossings, a comprehensive list of 330 river crossings compiled by the 
State Ministry of Works and Transport based on requests by the Local Governments in 
the State were classified into categories depending on the complexity of the engineering 
interventions, and size of facility needed, with higher priority attached to the less 
complex structures. Other categorization criteria were the importance of the crossing to 
the immediate beneficiaries (which was determined by traffic volume, accessibility 
importance, economic and social importance), the importance of the crossing as part of a 
road network, the potential for the crossings to contribute towards socio economic 
activities such as agriculture, industry and commerce, tourism and social institutions 
including schools and hospitals. The final criterion was the location of the river crossing 
and hence it’s potential to contribute to rural accessibility, with more priority accordedto 
crossings located away from urban centers. The relative importance of each criterion was 
established and weighted, with the higher weight being attributed to criteria relating to 
rural poverty and least weight on financial implications.  
 
Component B: Institutional Strengthening, Reforms and Capacity Building  
 
The five main activities under capacity building component are: project management; 
institutional strengthening and capacity building; institutional reforms; cross cutting 
Page  3
issues including road safety and HIV/AIDS; and preparation of a state funded follow-on 
project. These activities are intended to buttress the sustainability aspects of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
State-wide road network in Kaduna State.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The field visits during project preparation reveals that there are likely to be no major 
significant negative impacts during project implementation; especially as the project does 
not contemplate altering the road layouts or destruction of dwelling and/or farms or 
collective private property.  
 
Potential negative impacts are summarized below and restricted in scope and severity:  
 
•
Dust and noise due to construction and demolition;  
 
•
The establishment of base camps and the opening or re-opening of borrow pits 
and solid rock quarries, which could result in soil erosion and pollution and aesthetically 
undesirable alteration of the landscape;  
 
•
Dumping of construction wastes and accidental spillage of machine oil, 
lubricants, etc;  
 
•
Encroachment to private property; and  
 
•
Risk of damage to historical or cultural property or unknown archaeologicalsites.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The safeguards impacts identified are not expected to have any long term or cumulative 
effects. Obviously, the civil works for the road rehabilitation will be carried out on 
existing road segments of the corridor. The right of way of the targeted road segments has 
been largely respected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower's capacity to manage Bank safeguard concerns within the sector is weak. 
The borrower's institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further 
strengthened, and the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank's 
safeguards specialists on the project team.  The Federal Government of Nigeria and the 
states have environmental management agencies. The state agencies will ensure 
compliance, supervise the mitigation of the safeguards measures and conduct the internal 
monitoring of the implementation. The Federal Ministry of Environment, Housing and 
Urban Development will ensure the external monitoring.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The safeguards instruments have been subject to consultations with key stakeholders such 
as the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, Ministry of Works and 
Transport, Kaduna and the Kaduna Environmental Protection Agency and have been 
disclosed. In addition, project stakeholders, local governments, local communities and 
project affected persons (PAPs), will be continuously consulted at various stages of the 
project cycle, from planning, design review and to implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/11/2007 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Justin Runji 
02/01/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
02/01/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/02/2008 
Comments:  Sanjivi's was a re-approval after his pre-decission meeting approval of Jan 15, 2008. 
