                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             CONCEPT STAGE

  Report No.: 41664


  Date ISDS Preparedmpdated: November 26,2007

  I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A. Basic Project Data
I




  Country: Nigeria                                     Project ID: P098638
                                                       Associated Project ID (Parent):P071340
  Project Name: NG-Lagos Landfill Gas & Composting carbon operation, associated with the
  Lagos Metropolitan Development & Governance Project
  Task Team Leader: Deepali Tewari
  Estimated Appraisal Date: January 18, 2006           Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2006
  Managing Unit: AFTU2                                 Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
  Sector: Urban
  Theme: Climate Change
  IBRD Amount (US$m.):
  IDA Amount (US$m.):              $200mil
  GEF Amount (US$m.):
  PCF Amount (US$m.):
  Other financing amounts by source:

  Environmental Category: B (Partial Assessment)
  Simplified Processing                 Simple [ X]                  Repeater [ ]
  Is this a transferred project         Yes [X ]                     N o [ ]


  B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
  The carbon operation (P098638) is envisaged under the Lagos Metropolitan Development and
  Governance project (P071340). The Project objective for LMDGP is to increase sustainable access to
  basic urban services through investments in critical infrastructure. Progress towards achieving the
  objective of the project will be measured through (i) increase in the percentage of population with access
  to safe water in the selected 9 slums; (ii) reduction in the percentage of households reporting flooding in
  the LGs where the selected drainage basins lie; (iii) increase in the percentage of generated garbage in
  Lagos that arrives for disposal at landfills; and (iv) reduced deviation between actual expenditures and the
  approved budget. The landfill gas component will support the achievement of objective (iii) above and
  the carbon revenues will support objective (iv) above.

  C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:
  The Project has the following components:
   A. Infrastructure: US$160.89 million
   Al. Upgrading (US$39.77m); A2. Drainage (US$62.64m); A3. Solid Waste (US$58.48m)

   B. Public Governance and Capacity Building: US$7.9 million
   B1 .    Public Finance Management Reforms (US$5.0 million)

         (a)Updating Public Finance Legislation; (b)Consolidating the MTEF Approach; (c)Improving
         Budget Execution and Treasury Management; (d)Consolidating the IFMIS; B2. Leadership,
         Policy Dialogue and Governance (US$1.6 million); B3. Economic Intelligence and Service
         Delivery Monitoring (US$1.3 million)
           41664


 C. M&E; Urban Policy Dialogue; Communications and Coordination: US$3.75 million

 A.      Infrastructure: US$]60.89 million
A l .    Urban Upgrading: US$39.77 million: This component will build the capacity of the Lagos
State Urban Renewal Authority (LASURA) to assess, develop, plan and coordinate the execution of a
city-wide upgrading program through the execution of the upgrading subprojects in nine of the largest
slums identified in 1995: Agege, Ajegunle, Amukoko, Badia, Iwaya, Makoko, Ilaje, Bariga, and
IjeshatedoIItire. These slums cover 760 hectares and are estimated to be home to over 1 million people.
The component will also (i) support LGs in developing O&M systems and activities to strengthen
maintenance of tertiary infrastructure; (ii) technical assistance (TA) for LASURA to support development
of a city-wide upgrading program; (iii) TA for Ministry of Physical Planning to develop policies for the
prevention of future slums; (iv) support to LGs to deliver a HIVtAIDS awareness campaign; and (v)
Conflict Resolution.
A2.      Drainage: US$62.64 million: The drainage component will develop a long-term technical
solution to flooding. It will support: (i) the highest priority civil works investments to mitigate flooding;
(ii) the establishment of an efficient GIS database management system using satellite imagery with
relevant GIS software; (iii) a rational reassessment of drain designs to develop a prioritized construction
program; (iv) a deferred maintenance program to clear the large volumes of solid waste, silt, and
vegetation which has built up over the years in the absence of adequately funded drainage maintenance
programs; (v) the development of a routine maintenance program to mitigate the extensive flooding that
annually plagues the city; (vi) technical assistance and training to the ODS; and (vii) Conflict Resolution.
A3.      Solid Waste Management: US$58.48 million: Solid waste activities will be unbundled to
segregate collection, transfer, and disposal activities; and initiate private sector participation in transfer
and disposal activities. The project will finance (i) civil works for the upgrading of six transfer stations,
and two landfill sites; (ii) communal depots; (iii) technical assistance to LAWMA develop appropriate
solid waste collection routes, contract instruments for private sector collection, and contract instruments
for the management of transfer stations and landfills with contracts for disposal and transfer being
financed by IDA; (iv) an Information, Education and Communication to raise awareness on solid waste
issues in the city; (v) a HIVIAIDS awareness campaign on project sites; (vi) technical assistance to
support LASEPA and MoE to enable them to better discharge their functions; and (vii) evaluations of the
overall functioning of the solid waste management system in Lagos thrice during implementation.

B.       Public Governance and Capacity Building: US$7.9million
This component will support public finance and budget reforms, and the institutionalization of
information systems and consultative mechanisms to achieve the following: the establishment of credible
priorities and targets for State interventions; to make the State budget an effective management tool that
ensures adequate allocation of resources to meet targets; and to develop and institutionalize the use of
performance indicators.
BI.      Public Finance Manage~nentReforms (US$5.0 Million).             To support budget preparation and
expenditure management reform, the Project will finance: (i) An update of the Public Finance Legislation;
(ii) Consolidation of the MTEF; (iii) Improve Budget execution and Treasury Management; (iv)
Consolidation of the IFMIS for implementation by ministries responsible for the provision of economic
infkastructure and social services.
B2.      Leadership and Policy Dialogue (US$1.6 million): The Project will support additional
institutional reforms and capacity building initiatives (some of which are already identified), including
records management, public expenditure tracking in specific sectors, leadership training, city-wide

     consultative forums around specific metropolitan growth and poverty related issues, and enhancement of
     LG performance.
     B3.     Economic Intelligence and Service Delivery Monitoring (US$1.3 million). The project will
     support the41664
                 Office of Statistics to undertake data collection and analysis growth and poverty reduction in
     support of MEPB's role for M&E. Thedatawill help agencies plan and prioritize expenditures, monitor
     outcomes, and measure their performance.

     C.      M&E; Urban Policy Dialogue; Communications and Coordination: US3.75 million
     This component will finance systematic monitoring of processes and intermediate results of LMDGP;
     knowledge management to strengthen metropolitan policy dialogue, and communications to inform and
     educate all stakeholders on the potential benefits of LMDGP; and operating costs.

     D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
     known):
     The parent project envisaged a landfill gas collection, flaring and composting operation. All safeguards
     and disclosure requirements for the carbon operation are covered under the process agreed and underway
     under the parent project. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for the parent project. In
     case the upgrading and landfill related activities may lead to temporary impacts on a limited number of
     household, the recommendations in the RPF will be used in preparing the RAP and this will be disclosed
     in-country and at the Info shop prior to the commencement of civil works. This is no need to prepare a
     separate EA document, as the existing EA under the parent project has adequate measures to manage the
     risks of the installation of a gas collection system with vertical wells, flaring equipment and electricity
     generators. The potential environmental impacts are most likely to be small-scale and site-specific typical
     of a Category B project. Mitigation measures planned for the waste collection points, transfer stations and
     the landfills to cover possible leacheate contamination and leakage are well covered in the already
     disclosed EA prepared for the parent project and this will be applicable here.

l    E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
     The Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) is staffed with a qualified environmental and social specialist
     responsible for following up safeguards issues as and when they arise during project implementation
l
     F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
     Africa Eshogba Olojoba (Parent Project)

11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard41664
           Policies Triggered (please explain why)                        Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                      X
Impacts are likely to be small-scale and site specific. The parent project EA will be applicable here.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                           X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                    X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                               X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                         X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                   X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                             X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                        X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                 X
                                                                     I             I            I




111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
    be prepared:
    N/A This carbon operation is associated with the Parent Project, which already has gone through the
    PAD-stage ISDS.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
    N/A (see A.above)

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    N/A. The safeguards instruments (EA and RPF) prepared for the parent project and already disclosed
in-country and at the Info shop will be applicable here.

IV. APPROVALS

