Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3141 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P095003 
Project Name: NG-RURAL ACCESS & MOBILITY PROJECT-Phase 2 
Task Team Leader: Justin Runji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To support the improvement of rural access and mobility in the participating States by: (a) 
Providing improved all-weather access road networks in selected and prioritized rural 
development areas; and (b) Supporting the institutional reform in the transport sector in the states 
to improve management of the state-wide road network. The final indicators will be agreed on 
during pre-appraisal, but may include as output indicator the number of kilometers of improved 
access roads and as outcome indicators, amongst others, the savings in travel time resulting from 
the planned interventions, the decrease in rural transport cost due to the actual interventions 
measured as actual cost to farmers and the increase in rural population living within 2.0 km of all 
weather access roads.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Based on the Federal Government's Policy on Rural Travel and Transport and the respective 
State Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (SEEDS) for Osun and Enugu States, 
the key issues that need to be addressed in the roads sub-sector in the near term are: (i) 
improvement in the capacity of the various institutions across all tiers of Government to better 
Page  2
manage the part of the national road network they are in charge of; (ii) increased investment in 
the upkeep of the existing road infrastructure; and (iii) expansion of the rural road network to 
improve the level of access thus opening up the potential for economic growth in the rural areas. 
RAMP II is designed to assist Osun and Enugu states achieve these developmental goals.  
 
The components to be included in the proposed project are the following;  
 
(i) Institutional Reform, Strengthening and Capacity Building:  
 
This will focus on (a) Strengthening the road management as well as planning, procuring and 
supervising road maintenance contract skills at the State Government levels; (b) Assisting with 
the development and implementation of institutional reform proposals and reporting systems to 
assist with efficient management of rural transport infrastructure; (c) Support with the 
implementation of the Rural Travel and Transport Program (RTTP) to empower the local 
government and communities to participate in the management and provision of rural transport 
infrastructure and services; and (d) capacity building in the procurement, supervision and 
execution of labor based and small scale contracting.  
 
(ii) Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Transport Infrastructure:  
 
This will support the upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of rural and other transport 
infrastructure in selected, prioritized geographical areas in the State. The planned interventions 
will be a mix of contracts including longer term performance-based contracts for complete road 
networks, standard bridge construction contracts and contracts supporting the development of 
labor based contractors and small scale maintenance contractors. The project activities will 
comply with safeguard and fiduciary requirements and will accommodate cross-cutting social 
issues, e.g, HIV/AIDS, road safety, gender and poverty reduction.  
 
Proposed Project design and IDA credit amounts:  
 
The project is designed to support the implementation of the Rural Travel and Transport 
Program (RTTP) of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources. The program is 
designed to include road sector reforms, and development and maintenance of rural transport 
infrastructure as well as improvement of transport services at State and Local Government levels. 
Since RTTP is to be supported by a series of similar and parallel interventions such as RAMP in 
individual States, and given that part of the support will include capacity building, it is foreseen 
that the ideal lending instrument would be a single SIL to the Federal Government of Nigeria, 
covering the two states and making provision for on-lending by the Federal Government to the 
two states. Enugu and Osun States are already selected based on a combination of the Lead 
States benchmarking exercise, the expressed development focus in their respective SEEDS 
documents and their demonstrated commitment towards the project. Based on the work done in 
the preparation of RAMP I in Kaduna State, it is estimated that meaningful IDA support per state 
would be between US$ 50 and US$ 60 million. The financing option to be explored is one where 
IDA finances 100% of Bank supported activities with additional resources  provided by State 
contributions.  
 
Page  3
FY09: RAMP 2 (Enugu and Osun States) US$100 - 120m  
 
Total IDA FY 09 US$100-120m   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will focus on rural roads in Enugu and Osun States in Nigeria.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During project preparation
,
the borrower’s institutional capacity to address safeguards issues and 
in particular the ESMF and RPF will be assessed. Based on this assessment Government's project 
management units will receive needed guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists on the 
project team. Further support, ifrequired will, be incorporated under the capacity building 
component of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Rehabilitation works could trigger site-specific impacts. Potential impacts  include noise by 
machineries and dust during construction and rehabilitation works. As the sites or areas are not 
properly discerned, an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared as due diligence. This will be disclosed in-country and at the Info shop prior to 
appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Interventions could lead to restriction of access to sources of livelihoods. There could be 
encroachment to farmlands. To this end a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will have to be 
prepared by the borrower. This will also need to be disclosed in-country and at the Info shop 
prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/16/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Development of an Environmental and Social Development Framework (ESMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in Enugu and Osun States is being funded under a 
PPF provided for the first phase of RAMP (in Kaduna State). The studies are ongoing and are 
scheduled to be completed by May 15, 2008. These instruments will be disclosed in-country 
and in the Infoshop prior to appraisal. The project is transferred to the Sector Unit so that 
responsibilities and clearances of safeguard issues will be handled by the Sector Unit taking 
advice from the Safeguards Specialist in the project team.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Justin Runji 
03/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
