Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC2286
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P090135 
Project Name:  Federal Roads Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anil S. Bhandari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
330.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
32.00 
 
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
3.00
35.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to reduce passenger travel times, vehicle operating 
costs and traffic related fatalities on targeted federal roads and assist the FGN to manage 
Nigeria’s federal road assets in a sustainable manner. To achieve these improvements, the 
project particularly seeks increased participation of the private sector in the provision and 
long term management of selected federal road infrastructure.  
 
The project contributes directly to the longer term goals formulated in NEEDS and re-
emphasized in the latest Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) from May 2005. The CPS 
results-based framework regards the poor condition of roads and limited access to 
markets as main obstacles to sustainable economic growth in the non-oil sector, 
hampering the reduction of income poverty. It therefore calls for increased access to 
improved and sustainable transport systems, specifically road infrastructure, to facilitate 
trade, the flow of goods and better market access.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The ten-year Road Sector Development Program (RSDP) identifies priority investments 
worth US$2.0 billion to be undertaken in several phases for about 5,700 route km of 
Federal roads, known as Unity Roads. The Bank is expected to support the RSDP by 
targeting specific projects selected from the Unity Roads. Hence the use of a Specific 
Investment Lending Instrument (SIL) in the form of an IDA credit is proposed for this 
project. Out of the total investment of US$2.0 billion, it i
s
expected that Bank’s support 
would amount to about US$1.5 billion in three or more phases. The FRDP constitutes 
part of the first phase, and includes investments on about 1,200 2-lane km of federal 
roads. The physical interventions will comprise sectional rehabilitation, asphalt-concrete 
(AC) overlaying and long-term maintenance. Provision will be made for further 
investments where traffic growth in the future dictates the need for further improvements 
such as widening to increase road capacity.  
 
Subject to successful implementation of FRDP including progress on the sector reforms, 
and Nigeria’s overall performance, Phases II and III would provide additional funds 
under the same or similar output and performance based contracting (OPRC) 
arrangements. The Bank would then assess whether to continue its support through a 
sequence of SILs or whether circumstances allow the use of Adaptable Program Lending 
and/or SWAp.  
 
Key Performance Indicators  
 
The achievement of the PDO will be monitored using the following performance 
indicators:  
 
(i) 
Average passenger travel times - reduced by at least 20% on project roads;  
 
(ii) 
Average vehicle operating cost for a typical car, bus and heavy truck - reduced by 
at least 5%, 8%, and 10% respectively, on project roads;  
 
(iii) 
Number of annual traffic related fatalities - decreased on project roads by at least 
50 percent by the end of project.  
 
(iv) 
RSDT and FRA monitor and enforce long term output and performance based 
contracts as evidenced by the success of at least 500 route km of federal roads under such 
contracts;  
 
(v)  The Federal Roads Authority (FRA), National Roads Board (NRB), and Road Fund 
(RF) are established and functional with successful monitoring of policies by FMT as 
evidenced by its active presence on their management boards.  
 
Project components  
 
Unity Roads Program. The Federal Ministry of Transportation, Roads Department has 
identified a total need of about USD 2.0 billion for rehabilitation, upgrading, widening, 
and routine and periodic maintenance, of about 5,700 route km or about 6,300 2-lane 
kilometers of roads, referred to as the Unity Roads over a period of ten years, to be 
implemented in three phases. The breakdown of the cost by phase is estimated as follows, 
with about 80% required for capital and 20% for maintenance expenditure over 10 years:  
Page  3
Phase 
 Capital 
Investment 
Maintenance 
 Total 
 
 
($m)   
      ($m) 
 
 ($m)  
 
1
600.0
150.0
750.0
2
500.0
125.0
625.0
3
500.0
125.0
625.0
Total  
 
1,600.0 
      400.0 
 
2000.0  
 
The Unity Roads constitute the major backbone of the entire Federal Government Roads 
Network (FGRN) of about 34,000 km. They are Nigeria’s most crucial arterial roads 
connecting the major economic centers and linking Nigeria with the landlocked 
neighbors of Chad and Niger as well as with the bordering countries of Cameroon and 
Benin. Nigeria’s economic conglomerations cluster mainly around two regions: the south, 
stretching from Lagos mostly along the costal states to Port Harcourt, and the north with 
Kano as the major economic hub. The two regions are connected through a western and 
an eastern corridor running south-north up to the capital of Abuja, where they both meet. 
From there one route continues via Kaduna and Zaria to Kano and the other stretches east 
connecting the costal areas and the center with Jos, Bauchi and Gombe, centers of 
metallurgy and mining. Not surprisingly, the exploited mineral deposits, industrial and to 
a
certain extent agricultural production all coincide with Nigeria’s most densely 
populated areas. The Unity Roads directly connect all Nigerian cities with a population of 
more than half a million and all but three cities out of 12 with a population between 
250,000 and 500,000 (Abeokuta, Iseyin and Akure are only indirectly connected to a 
Unity Road but within less than 50 km).  
 
The proposed Federal Roads Development Project will support Phase 1 of the Unity 
Roads Program, under two components: (A) Rehabilitation, upgrading and Management 
of selected Unity Roads; and (B) Institutional Strengthening and road sector reform.  
 
A:  Rehabilitation, Upgrading and Management of selected Unity Roads  
 
The Bank’s potential contribution through all three phases of the Unity Roads Program 
is expected to be about US$1.5 billion over the ten years, while during Phase I, (this 
project) financing for about 2,700 2 lane-km (or about 1,800 route km) of the Unity 
Roads is anticipated. .  
 
Capital Investments comprise sectional rehabilitation of pavements and shoulders as 
well as asphalt concrete (AC) overlaying of all road links and are valued at about 
US$242.10 million. Recurrent expenditure for management and maintenance over a ten-
year period is estimated at US$56.15 million, hence civil works for Project roads in Phase 
I
total US$298.25 million. Over the project period of 7 years, the total cost amounts to 
US$281.40. For the purpose of project design, about 13.5% and 15% contingency is 
added to the capital investment and maintenance estimates respectively (or about 13.72% 
combined), making these amounts US$274.8 and US$45.2 million and the total sum of 
civil works US$320 million, including contingencies.  
Page  4
In addition US$9.00 million will be needed for the preparation (design and engineering) 
of OPRC packages and monitoring of the contracts as well as various road transport 
consulting services. The estimated total cost under Component A therefore amounts to 
approximately US$329.0 million.  
 
B: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform  
 
The second component, Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform is estimated to 
cost US$36.0 million. This entails supporting major implementation steps in the long 
overdue Road Sector reforms and creating the enabling environment for long term Output 
and Performance Based Road Contracts, allowing for more effective and efficient 
management of Nigeria’s road assets. Nigeria’s existing road management and financing 
system does not meet the needs of present day realities and has put road investments into 
jeopardy. Among others, the needed reform steps include:  
 
•
Creation of an autonomous road agency to manage all Federal road assets : 
establishment of a Federal Roads Authority (FRA),  
 
•
Participation of the private sector and road users in the Road Sector decision 
making: establishment of an autonomous National Roads Board (NRB).  
 
•
Sustainable road financing for road maintenance: creation of a Road Fund, being 
a
legal instrument that would act as a ring-fenced repository of road user related 
revenues, and  
 
•
Creation of an enabling environment for private sector participation in managing 
and financing of Nigerian roads: creating the enabling legislation for private sector 
participation in total road asset management on a long term basis.  
 
The FRDP supports the Road Sector Development Team (RSDT), which operationally 
would set the pace for the planned Federal Roads Authority. RSDT was established in 
November 2004 as a special project management entity within the Federal Ministry of 
Transportation (FMT). It operates under an agreed Organization and Operational 
Framework and is managed by an Oversight Management Board composed of 
representatives of FMT and FMF. The team members of RSDT have been selected on a 
competitive basis and are composed of former civil servants or private sector employees. 
RSDT’s present mandate is to carry out the planning, management and implementation of 
the RSDP on behalf of the FMT. It will focus on the implementation of donor supported 
projects like the FRDP but over time would also be in charge of managing domestically 
funded projects. RSDT will procure specialized services from local and foreign sources 
through competitive processes within the public procurement rules, procedures and 
guidelines.  
 
The unit will eventually be absorbed by FRA which in turn will be in charge of 
managing and operating the entire federal roads network. The role of FRA, overseeing 
asset management on a broader scale and the planned OPRC in particular, will be that of 
a
lean, professional and strategic manager. It will combine tasks that currently rest with 
different institutions, thus ending the present fragmentation and overlapping.  
Page  5
The Ministry’s role in so far as the federal road infrastructure is concerned will be that 
of making policy and monitoring its implementation. It will also be responsible for 
ensuring the continued internal allocation of resources for development, rehabilitation 
and any needed augmentation of the proposed Road Fund.  
 
Besides reforming road management, another emphasis is on sustainable financing and 
improved oversight on application of resources. The FRDP will assist in setting up a 
Road Fund, fed from a road user charging system that will include but not be limited to 
levy on petroleum products and license fees. A National Roads Board would be 
established for the purpose of managing the Road Fund in order to create sustainable 
financing mechanisms that go beyond the duration of this project and guarantee effective 
oversight by the road users. Work on the road sector reform is being carried out by the 
Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE) under the Privatization Support Project (PSP) in 
collaboration with the RSDT.  
 
Other activities related to this project but separately financed under the PSP include 
preparation of a 10-year road sector investment plan, review of the axle load control and 
road design manuals. The following table summarizes the activities and associated costs 
planned under the Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform component:  
 
(a) 
Development of 20-year National Transport Master Plan 
 
US$1.5m  
 
(b) 
Development of detailed 10-year Road Sector Development Plan*  Ongoing  
 
(c) 
Establishment of Road Fund, NRB & Roads Authority 
  
US$1.5m  
 
(d) 
Technical Support to RSDT & FRA   
 
 
 
US$8.0m  
 
(e) 
Goods & equipment for RSDT & FRA  
 
 
 
US$5.0m  
 
(f) 
Design & construction of FRA building  
 
 
 
US$5.0m  
 
(g) 
Review of National Road Design Standards & Axle load Control*  On-going  
 
(h) 
Training of RSDT/FMT/FMF/FRA/RF and other  
 
transport sector staff and relevant professional bodies 
 
US$2.0m  
 
(i) 
Incremental operating costs of RSDT & FRA 
 
 
US$3.0m  
 
(j) 
External audit of financial accounts and management 
 
US$0.4m  
 
(k) 
Support to Pavement Evaluation Unit & Bridge Maintenance Unit  US$1.6m  
 
(l) 
Establishment and capacity building of the Infras. Privatization  
 
Commission 
       US$2.0m 
 
 
(m) 
Road Safety Enhancement and Sector Studies,  
 
such as Road Tolling Strategy 
 
 
 
 
US$6.0m  
 
Sub-total (including contingencies)  
        
 
 
 
US$36.0m  
 
*
Financed separately under the Private Sector Support Project, through BPE  
 
The total estimated project costs for components A and B amount to US$365.0 million.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project comprises rehabilitation and long term management and maintenance of 
priority sections of: Lagos-Ibadan Expressway; Abuja-Kaduna-Kano road; and Enugu-
Abakaliki-Mfum road.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The key safeguards issues and impacts include soil erosion, loss of vegetation due to the 
creation of borrow pits, soil and water pollution due to spillage of toxic and hazardous 
materials,  and adverse physical environmental impacts resulting from noise and dust 
during construction. None of these impacts is however expected to be large scale, 
significant and irreversible. Most impacts are localized in relation to the places where 
construction works are carried out. They are also limited in time by the length of the 
construction contracts. All this supposes however that firstly effective environmental 
management plans are put in place to mitigate the adverse impacts; secondly any project 
related social or economic displacement is handled through resettlement action plans; 
thirdly that appropriate support will be drawn as needed from national plans and 
institutions in relevant areas such as HIV/AIDS, road safety and environmental standards.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None are anticipated   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower’s capacity to manage safeguards policies within the sector is weak.  The 
project will provide assistance to strengthen the environmental and social capacity within 
the sector, in particular within the Road Sector Development Team (RSDT) to be later 
transferred to the new FRA.  The Environmental Management Policy Framework and the 
Resettlement Policy Framework for the project have been prepared, approved, and 
disclosed as per Bank guidelines. The project will ensure that the specific EMPs and 
RAPs where necessary for each road segment are prepared on the basis of the already 
approved Environmental Management and Resettlement Policy frameworks by the 
selected long term contractors. These will be approved and disclosed according to Bank’s 
safeguards policies as well as the national policies prior to beginning of construction. 
Basic Environmental and social management capacity is already in place in the RSDT 
with the recruitment of an environmental and social specialist to follow up environmental 
and social safeguards concerns as they arise during project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders including FMT, FERMA, RSDT team, ADB, concerned groups and 
local communities participated through public consultations, field visits and surveys for 
the project. In addition, the local populations along the project roads who are the key 
stakeholders were consulted in the course of the preparation of the environmental and 
social safeguards policy frameworks. They will further be consulted at the 
commencement of works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/26/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/26/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Anil S. Bhandari 
02/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
02/11/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
02/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/11/2008 
Comments:  The Sector Manager, Mr. C. Sanjivi Rajasingham cleared the ISDS on February 12, 
2008. 
