Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3580
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P102354 
Project Name:  COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM (CDD Niger - PAC_2) 
Task Team Leader:  Abdoulaye Toure 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P107841 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (40%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%);General 
education sector (10%);Health (10%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Climate 
change (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.68 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.60 
 Local 
Communities 
3.70
10.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to improve Rural Communes’ capacity to design 
and implement in a participatory manner Communal Development Plans (CDP) and 
Annual Investment Plans (AIP) in order to enhance rural livelihoods.  The project would 
achieve its objective through the empowerment of communes and grassroots 
communities, capacity building for better management of local governments 
(administrative, budgetary and fiscal management, participatory planning, monitoring 
and evaluation), and investments in socio-economic, income generating activities and 
scaling up sustainable land and natural resource management activities which are to be 
proposed and carried out by the beneficiaries.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component A: Capacity-Building (US$ 7.63 million): This component would focus on 
strengthening: (i) the capacities of communes and communities; and (ii) the institutional 
and legal framework for local and community development.  
 
Subcomponent A1. Capacity Building for Communes and Communities: Through 
thissubcomponent, the project will finance strategic activities that will strengthen the 
administrative, technical and fiscal capacity of selected communes to handle their 
institutional mandates as stipulated in the decentralization law, to use decentralized and 
participatory procedures in planning, designing, implementing, and managing their own 
development, through efficient partnerships with grassroots communities.  
 
The project activities will be beneficiary-specific and will support capacity building for 
both communes and local communities. Specifically, the sub-component will finance 
inter alia, (i) a communication strategy to help beneficiaries understand project objectives 
and intervention mechanisms and share good practices and a communication strategy and 
tools adapted to grassroots communities’ training on their roles and responsibilities, local 
governance control, (ii) sensitizing elected officials and local stakeholders on existing 
decentralization laws; (iii) capacity needs assessment at the communes and communities 
levels, and the development of a capacity assessment plan for local development 
management including on decentralization, financial resource management, participatory 
diagnostic and planning, micro project design and execution; (iii) training activities on 
participatory planning, fiduciary management and participatory monitoring and 
evaluation, and (iv) study tours, etc.  
 
The project will also support specific activities aimed at addressing sustainable land and 
natural resources management issues at the local level, including: (i) sensitization 
workshops, training and support to communal and community stakeholders in 
mainstreaming SLM in the local development process; (ii) training on the SLM 
methodological guidelines and on the BioCF transaction operational procedures; (iii) 
setting up and operationalizing communal land tenure committees (COFOCOM).  
 
Finally, the project will organize workshops for local service providers on community-
based procurement requirements, participatory processes and technical requirements of 
key sectors.  
 
Subcomponent A2. Capacity-Building for Institutional and Legal Framework on 
Community Development. The project will finance studies, training, study tours and 
workshops for key national institutions with the mandates on decentralization, local and 
community development and environmental monitoring. Specifically, the project will 
help (i) MIS/D and HCME to clarify, update, and finalize legal texts on local governance, 
intergovernmental transfers, and fiscal decentralization, (ii) MAT/DC to update the 
communal planning guide and establishment communal database; (iii) MDA to set up and 
operationalize an effective monitoring and evaluation system for integrated management 
of the various programmes of the RDS; and set up the various steering committees of the 
RDS at the national and regional levels; and (iv) ME/LCD to supervise the 
Page  3
implementation of SLM activities, the development of a SLM Knowledge Information 
System and a Monitoring and Information System and the implementation of the Niger’s 
Country Strategic Investment Framework (CSIF), and to identify necessary actions to 
address SLM and climate change concerns in RDS programs.  
 
Component B. The Local Investment Fund (US$ 31.80 million): The project will 
finance the Local Investment Fund, which has demonstrated its efficiency during PAC-1, 
to channel grants to communes and grassroots communities to enable them to finance 
socio-economic micro-projects, income generating and land and natural resource 
management activities.  
 
Given that the Government is in the process of setting up a decentralized basket funding 
mechanism for local and community development, it is expected that once reforms in 
form and substance satisfactory to IDA to ensure the effective and efficient local funding 
mechanisms are in place, the funds in LIF will be transferred directly into the commune’s 
budgets through the new system and managed using public accounting principles. The 
mid-term review will assess progress and readiness of the basket funding mechanism, and 
a
decision will be made at that point, with respect to the channeling of the relevant funds 
of the IDA Financing through this mechanism.  
 
Component C. Project Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US 5.54 
million): This component will support: (i) the administrative and financial management, 
(ii) result based monitoring-evaluation system of the performance and impact of the 
project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project implementation will be countrywide and will involve local communities. The 
project is national in scope. The second phase, which is the subject of the present 
document, aims at consolidating and scaling up previous achievements 108 communes 
(or 40% of all communes).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated ’B’ in the environment category. In conformity with the World 
Bank’s Environment Assessment Guidelines OP/BP/GP 4.01 and the Government’s  
 
Environmental impact assessment legislation, the  Environmental and Social 
Management  
 
Framework (ESMF) was updated and disclosed prior to appraisal, along with an update 
of the RPF (Resettlement  Policy Framework (RPF) and Process Framework, on March 
25, 2008.  
 
Potential impacts of the project include, but are not limited to, the following:  
 
Loss of biodiversity both fauna and flora due to deforestation and land clearing, Increase 
incidence of poaching due to access roads, soil erosion and degradation; sedimentation of 
water bodies due to lack or improper borrow pits rehabilitation; improper construction-
related solid waste and health care-related waste management; Noise pollution due to 
operating machinery; Air pollution due to dust and smoke emanating from machinery 
during civil works; Risks of increase in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS and STDs at 
construction sites and at the enterprise base; Land acquisition; loss of livelihood and 
economic activities on the part of project affected people (PAPs); Proliferation of vector 
borne diseases, as a result of irrigation schemes.  
 
The ESMF provides guidelines for screening and identifying mitigation measures, 
whereas the RPF was prepared to provide guidelines for preparing sub-project specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), in the event involuntary resettlement is triggered by 
future sub-projects. The PF was prepared as due diligence to cover the Bio Carbon funds 
Initiative investment in protected area.  
 
The ESMF formulated standards methods and procedures specifying how unidentified 
future subprojects, whose location are unknown, will systematically address 
environmental and social issues in the screening and categorization, sitting, design, 
implementation, operational phases and maintenance of the subproject lifecycle.  
Page  5
The RPF and PF, on the other hand, looked into the policy, legal and regulatory 
mechanisms on how to address cases of land acquisition, loss of livelihoods, and 
restriction of access in protected areas, on the part of affected people, as a result of 
project activities. They also provide a coherent framework, eligibility criteria and asset 
valuation methods for compensation and/or resettlement of affected people, as well as 
grievance mechanisms affected persons could resort to, in case of unsatisfactory 
arrangements between the parties involved.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to deliver significant social benefits by improving the living and 
environmental conditions of low-income communities living in the rural and communal 
area in the form of better health, education and water conditions, improving municipal 
local infrastructures. The main issues would be related to social inclusiveness, access to 
resources, and the cumulative effect of micro-projects, that may individually have 
manageable impacts, but cumulatively have significant impacts. These issues are 
addressed in the ESMF, the  RPF and the PF. No negative social impacts are anticipated. 
One of the main features of the project, during Phase I, was the use of a broad-based 
public consultation approach, with strong local community participation.  The same 
approach was utilized at the on-set of the preparation of this phase and will continue 
through implementation and beyond.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The design of Phase II incorporates lessons learned from phase I with an increased focus 
on inclusive planning processes and institutional sustainability. By maximizing 
stakeholder participation in project implementation, ownership will be expanded.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
This Community Action Program (CAP) is the second generation of such Bank-funded 
operations in the country.  As such, there is reasonable capacity and experience within the 
various sectors and among the various stakeholders involved to attend to project 
environmental and social issues.  Indeed, the first phase of the Community Action 
Program achieved excellent results in building the capacity for project implementation 
unit (PIU) and the regional antenna staff, the member of approval comities, the mayors, 
and local consultants.  The second phase will build on these initial gains. The National 
Coordination Unit (CCN) in collaboration with elected officials and local stakeholders 
established at the district/communes are responsible for ensuring that micro-projects are 
demand-driven, socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable, and can be properly 
operated and maintained. The original project was rated satisfactory in terms of social 
and environmental safeguard compliance during the implementation.  
 
In addition, the updated ESMF, RPF and PF, based on lessons learned from experience 
implementing the existing safeguard instruments, under Phase I, include sound 
institutional arrangements, outlining the roles and responsibilities of key various 
Page  6
stakeholder groups involved, for screening, review and approval of sub-projects, as well 
as implementation and monitoring of their mitigation measures.  Notwithstanding the 
reasonable institutional capacity to addressing project safeguard aspects adequately, 
given several years of satisfactory implementation of Phase I, these safeguard 
instruments, together, include provisions to strengthening further the capacity of the 
various institutions and key stakeholders involved, as well as promoting coordination and 
synergy among the various sectors, in attending to the potential environmental and social 
issues of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Local community involvement is critical for the success of the Project. Activities during 
The initial phase included local diagnostic and local development plans (PDL) 
Communes Development Plans (PDC), a communication strategy to help beneficiaries 
understand project objectives and intervention mechanisms and share good practices and 
a
communication strategy and tools adapted to grassroots communities’ training on their 
roles and responsibilities, local governance control. Project start-up activities included 
training, capacity building field visits, grape of villages/ communes meetings and 
workshops.  
 
The safeguard documents were disclosed in-country and at Bank InfoShop. They are 
publicly available from the CCN, the communes, as well as Bank InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdoulaye Toure 
05/22/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
05/22/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
05/22/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
05/23/2008 
Comments:   
