Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3462 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P106280 
Project Name: Lagos Eko Project 
Task Team Leader: Marito H. Garcia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (60%);Secondary education (20%);General education sector 
(15%);Tertiary education (5%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Lagos EKO project is to improve the quality of secondary 
education (including junior secondary).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Lagos EKO project will focus on quality enhancement of secondary education to 
address the government’s priority of human capital development.  Detailed project components 
will be finalized during further preparation phases, informed by the findings of project 
preparation studies.  The Project components have so far been developed around the following 
areas:  
 
Component 1: Promoting Secondary School Effectiveness through School Development Grants.  
The objective of the school development grant is to provide public secondary schools access to 
discretionary resources with an explicit focus on improving the quality of education services as 
priority needs are defined at the school level.  The grants will be provided based on clear and 
Page  2
transparent school performance criteria.  This component would empower and support SBMCs 
to plan for and improve teaching, learning and participation in their schools.  The grant would 
augment schools’ operating costs and non-salary expenditures to improve learning performance 
of students in public junior secondary and secondary schools.  Two windows of grants will be 
given: (1) school improvement grants demonstrating an impact on student learning outcomes, 
with a cap on infrastructure (30%); and (2) grants to science and technical colleges for twinning 
arrangements with the private sector to strengthen the linkages between skills training and labor 
market demand.  
 
Examples of activities that could be supported under window 1 are: (a) instructional materials 
and learning inputs; (b) training opportunities; (c) training related to identified local skills needs, 
especially in senior secondary and technical colleges, (d) teacher development and support 
programs; (e) mechanisms for improving the quality of intake into secondary/technical colleges 
and reducing failure and drop-out rates; (f) strategies for skill development programs/ICT to 
improve secondary teaching and learning; and (g) minor rehabilitation, upgrading of school 
infrastructure.  To access the grants, a pre-requisite is the training and capacity building of 
SBMCs to prepare school development plans to improve teaching, learning and participation of 
their schools.  
 
Window 2 would support proposals for cooperation between technical colleges and private 
sector institutions to fund activities that would lead to more relevant teaching, research and 
development activities.  
 
Component 2:  Enhancing Quality Assurance for Junior and Senior Secondary Schools.  This 
component would support the improvement of the quality assurance systems in Lagos State to 
measure quality, identify deficits, feedback information to service providers, determine training 
needs, and establish appropriate benchmarks, standards, and ratings.  The compilation of this 
critical data will provide continuous assessments as well as impact evaluation of project and 
government interventions.  Furthermore, it will measure the learning outcomes in private 
education as well as public, to give the government a comprehensive picture of the education 
sector while holding all stakeholders accountable for delivering a quality education.  Activities 
would include: (a) launching a state education census to collect data on all institutions in Lagos; 
(b) strengthening standardized student assessments; (c) using assessments to determine teacher 
professional development needs and provide quality training; and (d) the development of a 
school rating system to establish standards across public and private schools.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Institutional Arrangements.   The project will be 
implemented at the state level, and coordinated by the SMOE in close coordination with the 
relevant parastatals (e.g., SUBEB) and FME and federal parastatals (e.g., UBEC, ETF).  This 
component will support overall project management, monitoring and evaluation and the design 
and implementation of a communication strategy.  The capacity building support for 
implementation would begin during the project preparation stage.  The technical support for the 
implementation of the project may include a team of consultants, specializing in project 
implementation (including project management, financial management and procurement) and 
financed under the Credit.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will support public secondary schools in Lagos State.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has limited safeguards policies capacity, but this will be supplemented during 
preparation with the hiring of local consultants to carry out the safeguard work as necessary. 
During project preparation, the project will further assess the Borrower's current capacity and 
identify measures to strengthen it.It will also outline the institutional arrangements, including the 
roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor environmental and 
social mitigation measures and make appropriate recommendations.  During project preparation, 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared.  An 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will also be prepared to outline the institutional 
arrangements for project implementation, including any capacity building needs and cost 
estimates.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
School Development Grants: This component could support minor rehabilitation, upgrading 
and refurbishment of existing public secondary schools which may contribute to soil erosion, 
pollution or loss of vegetation, thus the EA (OP 4.01) policy is triggered. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be the prepared instrument to address the triggered 
policy.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/27/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF will be prepared, approved and disclosed/re-disclosed prior to Appraisal, in-
country and at the Bank’s InfoShop.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marito H. Garcia 
06/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
