Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4490 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/28/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P113173 
Project Name: MANAGEMENT OF PCBs/POPs IN NIGERIA 
Task Team Leader: Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (35%);Petrochemicals and fertilizers (30%);Power 
(20%);Other industry (15%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (67%);Environmental policies 
and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00
12.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the project is to improve public health and environmental quality by avoiding 
the environmental release of PCBs from on-line and off-line electrical equipment and ensuring 
sound management and safe disposal of PCB and PCB-containing equipment. The main 
outcomes of the project will include (i) increase awareness among key stakeholders and the 
general public, (ii) improved regulations, (iii) enhanced physical facilities management of PCBs 
and PCB-containing equipment and (iv) improved national capacity to manage PCBs in an 
efficient and environmentally sound manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Capacity Building for PCB Management (GEF: $0.8m counterpart fund; $1m)  
 
This component comprises of the following:  
Page  2
Component 1a: Policy, Regulatory and institutional review and strengthening (GEF US$ 
0.40m; Counterpart fund US$ 0.50m)  
 
This will entail the review and formulation of policies and legislations on PCBs. Existing 
regulations do not properly cover POPs/PCBs. Furthermore, enforcement and execution of 
existing policies and regulations are severely constrained by the absence of effective monitoring 
and evaluation measures.The project will therefore support development and update of the legal 
and regulatory system for safe PCB management and disposal. Institutions like the Pollution 
Control Division of the Federal Ministry of Environment, the Environment and Chemicals 
Department of the PHCN as well as the private sector will be strenghtened through dedicated 
training.  
 
Component 1b: Training and Public Awareness (GEF US$ 0.40m; Counterpart fund US$ 
0.50m)  
 
Training in PCB management(e.g the entire cycle of PCB identification to final disposal, 
including sound recycling and reuse of waste oils) will be held in Abuja, Lagos, Port Harcourt 
and Kano. The training will target Ministry of Environment officials at the national and state 
levels, NESREA, electrical companies and environmental/chemicals units at the PHCN. In 
addition, experience from abroad for PCBs containment and disposal technologies will be 
reviewed and knowledge sharing and management organized for the key project stakeholders. 
Public awareness will involve the preparation and dissemination of training and awareness 
raising materials: and would essentially include TV programs / documentaries, posters and the 
production of brochures/pamphlets for raising public awareness of PCBs issues. This capacity 
building and public awareness efforts will be targeted to those handling PCBs and truly 
vulnerable to health impacts (PHCN workers, private sectors, etc.)  
 
Component 2: Design, Development and Implementation of Environmental Sound Management 
(ESM) for on-line and off-line equipment and potentially contaminated sites (GEF US$ 3.0 m; 
Counterpart fund US$ 6.2m)  
 
This will involve the following activities: (i) development of procedures, manuals, management 
protocols and guidelines for the identification of PCB-containing equipment, labeling electrical 
equipment and good maintenance practices (ii) identification and upgrading of laboratories for 
testing PCBs in oils and soils samples, (iii) identification and enhancement of possible interim 
storage locations within PHCN facilities so as to meet the requirements for environmentally 
sound and safe storages of PCBs oils/wastes and PCB-containing equipment, (iv) oil recycling 
and transformer maintenance guidelines, and (v) development of strategies and options for PCB 
disposal at the national level. This will involve the implementation of demonstrations pilots 
aimed at disposing of existing PCB stocks or off-line equipment. These pilots will later be scaled 
up at the National level,once the total volume of PCBs that need disposal is identified and (vi) 
development of guidelines for characterization and risk management of contaminated sites.  
 
Component 3: Baseline national inventory of PCBs and PCB-containing equipment and 
development of national PCB management plan (GEF US$ 1.9m; Counterpart fund US$ 4m)  
Page  3
This component will build on the recently concluded partial inventory study that was funded by 
the World Bank with support from the Canadian Trust funds on POPs and covered 10 states. It 
will complete the existing database of PCB containing equipment to include 15 additional states. 
This component will also assist in the development of the methodology for a comprehensive 
study and guidelines/procedures that Government will follow to cover the remaining 11 states 
and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) in the future.  This will include sampling and testing of 
potentially contaminated equipment owned by the electricity sector, as well as by other economic 
sectors that have never been controlled.  
 
The inventory will wntail the development of a comprehensive database and labeling and 
results from this inventory will provide clearer picture of the extent of PCB contamination in 
electrical equipment across the country on the basis of which a long-term PCB management plan 
will be developed.  
 
The management plan that is envisioned will consist of a cost-effective schedule to phase out 
all potentially contaminated on-line equipment, in a manner consistent to the targets of the 
Stockholm Convention and according to, among other factors, age of equipment, level of risk, 
location, capacity and ownership. The management plan will also include an assessment of 
disposal options for off-line equipment and PCB waste oils. Safeguarding, storage and disposal 
options will be evaluated for equipment and contaminated oils that are currently in storage as 
well as those which will be taken off-line in the future and until 2025. A long-term plan, which 
will include options for financing the costs of disposal, will be developed. The overall PCB 
management plan will be developed in conjunction with PHCN.  
 
Component 4: Project management (GEF US$ 0.6m; Counterpart fund US$ 1m)  
 
This component will ensure an effective and timely project management, coordination and the 
set-up of a project performance monitoring system all of which are pre-requisites for successful 
project implementation. The support will include project management, coordination, reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation for all project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project location will likely be spread over the country; especially as PHCN transformers are 
found throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has limited safeguards policies capacity, but this will be supplemented during 
preparation with the hiring of local consultants to carry out the safeguard work as necessary. 
During project preparation, the project will further assess the Borrower's current capacity and 
identify measures to strengthen it. It will also outline the institutional arrangements, including 
the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor environmental 
and social mitigation measures and make appropriate recommendations. the environmental and 
social management plan of the Nigeria Energy and Gas Improvement Project (NEGIP) which 
was prepared to also handle waste in an environmental manner, will be revised, updated and 
adapted for this project. In-country and Infoshop disclosures will occur prior to appraisal.   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The potential negative impacts concerns the public health and environmental risks associated 
with handling, transporting and storage of PCBs. Thus, triggering the environmental assessment 
policy (OP 4.01).  In fulfilling the requirements of the triggered policy, the environmental 
assessment report of the Nigeria Energy and Gas Improvement Project (NEGIP) will be revised, 
updated and adapted for this project. In-country and Infoshop disclosures will occur prior to 
appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/22/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental assessment policy (OP 4.01)is triggered for the project.  In fulfilling the 
requirements of the triggered policy, the environmental assessment report of the Nigeria 
Energy and Gas Improvement Project (NEGIP) will be revised, updated and adapted for this 
project. In-country and Infoshop disclosures will occur prior to appraisal. The SMU has 
agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
07/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
07/15/2009 
Comments:   
