Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC3823
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P110697 
Project Name:  Second Health Systems Development II - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 11, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (88%);Sub-national government administration (12%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health (P);Child 
health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The additional financing proposed (US$90 million) would retain the same objectives and 
implementation procedures of the original project and would be allocated (on a notional 
basis) as a supplementary credit to the Federal Government and 22 States. Government 
has agreed, that, due to the limited resources available and in order to achieve economies 
of scale and ensure impact, not all of the states will participate in the additional financing.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional credit would help finance the costs that accrued after the project 
was restructured in 2005 and implementation was accelerated and effectively scaled up.  
Of the total proposed supplement of US$90 million, US$80 million is allocated to 22 
States and the Federal Ministry of Health, that were selected based on their performance 
to date, and will support the completion of original project activities that had already 
been approved in work-plans for the improved delivery of primary health care services.  
An additional US$10 million is currently unallocated and is intended to support a limited 
number of states that are also expected to meet the above mentioned performance criteria 
shortly.  . Based on the current workplan projections; roughly 50% of the funds will go to 
support civil works (refurbishing and rehabilitation of health training institutions and 
Page  2
primary health centers and provision of water), 30% for service delivery, including 
commodities and equipment, and 20% for systems development (e.g. M&E) and capacity 
building at the State and facility level.  It is envisaged that the additional funding will 
support the following sets of activities within the broader context of strengthening 
primary health care services:  
 
•
Rehabilitation and Refurbishment of Schools of Health Technology and Schools 
of Nursing and Midwifery US$16.53m.  The objective of this component is to support 36 
health training institutions to secure relevant accreditation in order to improve the quality 
of pre-training of human resources for health. Renovation/upgrading of equipment and 
training facilities as well as the provision of basic pedagogic materials will especially 
improve the supply of skilled attendants at birth.  
 
•
Support to Health Services US$54.06m.  The objective of this component isto 
support activities that would improve the delivery of primary health care services and 
increase utilization rates.  The additional financing would support the refurbishment/re-
equipment of primary health facilities and training of health service workers, as well as 
immunization activities, such as the procurement and repair of cold chain equipment and 
training of vaccinators. 127 primary health care centers are to be rehabilitated are 
designated in each State’s workplan.  
 
•
Strengthening monitoring and evaluation systems and processes at 
NationalandState levels US$9.41m.  The objective of this component is to strengthen the 
processes and systems to ensure evidence-based decision making and confirmation of the 
impact of government interventions in improving the delivery of basic health services.  
The lack of baseline data and inconsistent efforts to track results has impeded the project 
from having the influence to inform policy decisions and build the capacity for managing 
the health system.  The challenges of working across 36 states and the weak capacity at 
all levels for quality data collection should not be underestimated.  Therefore, the focus 
on only 22 states that are already well-performing, combined with a revamped 
monitoring and evaluation framework, is expected to support more meaningful use of 
project data.  A rapid assessment of the current HMIS systems will be conducted to 
ascertain the bottlenecks and remaining data gaps.  The Director of Health Planning, 
Research and Statistics will continue to be responsible for monitoring and evaluation.  
But, the additional financing will allocate supplemental funding to contract M&E firms to 
partner with the Director of Health Planning, Research and Statistics to deliver quality 
project monitoring and evaluation.  These firms will also be tasked with additional 
supervision responsibilities to ensure that field visits are undertaken on a regular basis.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Federal Ministry of Health and the following 22 states are expected to participate: Akwa 
Ibom, Abia, Anambra, Bauchi, Benue, Borno, Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo, Jigawa, Kebbi, 
Kogi, Kano, Kwara, Nasarawa, Ondo, Osun, Plateau, Sokoto Taraba and the FCT.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The rehabilitation and renovation works on existing schools of technology, nursing and 
midwifery will trigger the environmental safeguard, because of the noise and other 
inconvenience associated the civil works. The mitigation measures are well specified in 
the already disclosed ESMF. There are no land acquisition issues or restriction of access 
to sources of livelihood; therefore the involuntary resettlement policy is not triggered.  
 
In addition, no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework(ESMF) 
as the instrument for the triggered environmental assessment policy. It is expected that 
the ESMF will be used as a guide during project implementation; and if necessary, 
project-specific EIAs will be prepared as and when necessary. The ESMP has been 
disclosed in-country (August 31, 2008) and at the Infoshop (September 2, 2008).   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include officials and staff of ministries of Health in the 22 states and 
Federal Ministry of Health. There were consulted during the preparation of the ESMF. 
The Federal Ministry of Health (PIU) will have an important role in supervising the 
rehabilitation and limited constructions of the health institutions, which will include 
compliance with the EMP of the ESMF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
09/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amos Abu 
09/11/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
09/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
09/11/2008 
Comments:   
