Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4383
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P115036 
Project Name:  Malaria Control Booster Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (38%);Sub-national government 
administration (33%);Health (23%);Other social services (6%) 
Theme:  Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance (P);Other 
financial and private sector development (S);Child health (S);Population and 
reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The additional financing proposed (US$100 million) would retain the objectives and 
implementation procedures of the original project which are (i) to ensure that the target 
population will have improved access to, and utilization of well-defined set of Malaria 
Plus Package of interventions (MPP); and (ii) to strengthen Federal and States ability to 
manage and oversee delivery of malaria plus interventions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing would help finance the costs associated with a proposed scale-
up that will broaden the scope and reach of the project by focusing on certain core health 
systems, demand side, and communications issues. Specifically, the additional credit will 
support the following activities within the context of health systems strengthening, 
community systems strengthening, and communications.  
 
A. 
Component 1: Health Systems Strengthening  
 
Page  2
The additional financing will support three subcomponents through:  
 
•
Scaling Up Malaria Laboratory Diagnosis and Improving Quality assurance for 
malaria diagnosis  
 
•
Monitoring of Drug and insecticide resistance  
 
•
Supply Chain management and Logistic management System  
 
B. 
Component 2: Community Systems Strengthening for Health Service Delivery  
 
The additional financing will support three subcomponents:  
 
•
Health Service Delivery through “Community Systems Strengthening”  
 
•
Strengthening Health Service Delivery through the private sector  
 
•
Increasing Demand for Health Services by Intensifying Behavior Change 
Communication (BCC) and IEC  
 
C. 
Component 3: Communications for Advocacy, Program Implementation and 
Results  
 
This component will aim to strengthen and implement the communications strategy of 
the National Malaria Control Program in order to ensure effective advocacy, strengthened 
program implementation, and a stronger emphasis on results.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The additional financing will support seven states of the Nigerian Federation and the 
Federal Ministry of Health in improving the fight against malaria in Nigeria. The States 
are: Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi, Gombe, Jigawa, Kano, and Rivers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The implementation of Component B involves community mobilization and the 
renovation of existing buildings and minor civil works the impacts are expected to be 
minimal, site specific and easy to manage. This project also involves the use of pesticides 
in the form of the insecticides used in the LLINs and in the IRS chemicals. In addition, a 
limited amount of medical waste would be generated at treatment centers.  There are no 
potential large-scale impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
With reference to safeguards due diligence requirement, the parent project was 
categorized as a B since it was not expected to generate any major adverse environmental 
effects. The proposed AF project is also categorized as a B, as it generally follows the 
same category of activities. The implementation of Component B entails community 
mobilization and the renovation of existing buildings and minor civil works typical of a 
category B project and the impacts are expected to be minimal, site specific and 
manageable within acceptable limits. An Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) has therefore been prepared to provide a guide on how the minor 
environmental issues that may likely occur will be handled by the project. The ESMF 
was disclosed country-wide and at the Bank Info-Shop on March 6, 2009.  This project 
also involves the use of pesticides in the form of the insecticides used in the LLINs and in 
the IRS chemicals. Accordingly, the Integrated Vector Management Plan (IVMP) with an 
annex on Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) developed for the parent 
project have been revised and disclosed in-country and in the Info-Shop along with the 
ESMF. The Borrower, Nigeria, has considerable experience in World Bank Safeguard 
Policies. Furthermore, there exists an environmental specialist in the PIU, who is 
responsible for safeguards issues. The environmental specialist at the PIU will be 
responsible for following up environmental and social issues during project 
implementation. Project staff charged with implementing safeguards instruments will be 
given more in-depth training in environmental management. The environmental specialist 
at the PIU will also be supported by a consultant to be hired on an as-needed basis.  In 
processing the AF, an environmental audit of the parent project was carried out as part of 
safeguards due diligence. The report of the environmental audit informed the revision of 
the existing IVMP/HCWMP to foster better safeguards implementation and compliance. 
In particular, the revised IVMP clearly contains the institutional arrangements, including 
Page  4
the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor 
environmental and social mitigation measures at Federal, State and local government area 
levels. It also includes capacity building needs of the PMU. Furthermore, environmental 
safeguards clauses such as World Bank’s “General Environmental Management 
Conditions for Construction Contracts” will be inserted in bidding documents and 
contracts to ensure compliance.Additional guidance, as required, will be provided by the 
Safeguards members of the project team.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ESMF and the environmental audit extensive consultations 
with stakeholders were carried out throughout the country.  Specifically consultations 
were held with the Federal ministry of health, Federal ministry of Environment (EIA 
division), Ministry of health in the participating States in the project and the management 
of designated health institutions. At the community level, interactive meetings were held 
with community leaders, women and youth leaders. Their views were reflected in the 
preparation of the ESMF and IVMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/06/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
04/28/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amos Abu 
04/28/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
04/28/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
04/28/2009 
Comments:   
