Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4006 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/16/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P112956 
Project Name: Lagos Urban Transport Project - Phase 2 
Task Team Leader: Ajay Kumar 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P114762 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (50%);Central government administration (50%) 
Theme: Other urban development (40%);Access to urban services and housing 
(40%);Regulation and competition policy (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
175.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development and global environment objectives are fundamentally the same: to 
promote environmentally sustainable transport by enhancing technical, financial and operational 
efficiency of the public transport system. The specific project development objective is to:  
 
(a) 
Improve mobility along prioritized corridors; and  
 
(b) 
Promote a shift to more environmentally sustainable urban transport modes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
a) 
Capacity Building. (i) Capacity strengthening of LAMATA for continuing to provide an 
overall vision and a strategic planning basis for transport planning, regulation, and monitoring 
for administering and coordinating sector-wide management; and (ii) Develop activity-based 
demand modeling, and baseline studies.  
 
b)
BRT infrastructure construction and supervision, including interchange and traffic 
management at: Anthony-Oshodi-Mile 2-Obalende and Mile 12-Ikorudu, including including 
Page  2
segregated bus ways, interchange facilities, ITS, terminals and facilities for pedestrians and 
ticketing to expand current BRT scheme to the west of Lagos; mass transit alternative analysis 
studies; and development of bus feeder system.  
 
c) 
Road Network Efficiency Improvement. Overlay and upgrading of 22 km of strategic 
roads; routine maintenance of 532 km of the Declared Road Network (DRN).  
 
d)
Project Management. Support management of the project (audit, financial management, 
etc) and outcome monitoring of (i) transport and social impact indicators; (ii) environmental 
impact indicators; and (iii) capacity development indicators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
A
BRT Lite infrastructure will be developed along:  
 
(a) 
Anthony to Obalende via Mile 2.  The corridor is 26 km in length. Oworonski 
Expressway provides the main arterial link between the Third Mainland bridge and Tin Can 
island, via Oshodi and Mile 2. The parallel service roads (about 7.5 meters) provide local access 
to the residential areas.  
 
(b) 
Mile 12-Ikorudu. The corridor is 13.5 km in length and the BRT will involve continuous 
segregated BRT running lanes within the road median. The project will also include road and 
bridge widening to maintain appropriate capacity for other traffic along the existing ROW.  
 
Overlay and upgrading of 22 km of strategic roads: The proposed road project is located within 
the Alimosho Local Government Area of Lagos State. The road will traverse two communities 
namely the Aboru and Meiran communities and will make use of the existing Nigeria National 
Petroleum Company (NNPC) pipeline right of way. The road has been in existence although not 
motorable and it is typically refers to as NNPC road. About 3.59km of the proposed road stretch 
falls within the Aboru Community, while the remaining extent is located in Meiran community.  
 
Construction of LAMATA building for which land has been acquired and detailed plan is under 
preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The client has demonstrated a clear commitment and capacity to addressing safeguards issues. 
Under LUTP, the borrower built the foundation for sound environmental and social management 
within LAMATA. An environmental unit was established which has two sections, environment 
and social.  
 
The social section focuses on five activities: i) social impact assessments; ii) occupational 
health and safety; iii) capacity building of local contractors and consultants; iv) monitoring and 
supervision of resettlement/rehabilitation; and v) analytical work. The focus of the environmental 
section is: i) environmental impact assessments; ii) occupational health and safety; iii) capacity 
building of local contractors and consultants; iv) monitoring and supervision of the 
implementation of environmental management plans and v) analytical work.  
 
The environmental unit has two permanent staff who are complemented by consultants 
contracted on as needed basis. The environmental and social safeguard specialists are highly 
qualified, skilled and with practical field experiences in a range of safeguards issues. In addition, 
Page  3
they have participated in several training programs in different countries (e.g. India, Ethiopia). 
Environment and social specifications are included in the bidding documents for contractors, and 
monitored regularly by the safeguards unit and through environmental consultants. Contractors 
are provided periodic safeguards training. The unit has also provided technical support to the 
Lagos Metropolitan Development and Governance Project. In addition, the unit provides 
guidance to the Lagos State Government's environmental administration. Under LUTP, the 
Environmental Unit prepared key safeguards instruments: Sectoral Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SE/SA); Procedural Manual on Environmental Assessment, Environment 
Assessment (EA); Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs); Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs). The implementation of environmental and social safeguards by the borrower under 
LUTP has been satisfactory.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The potentially adverse impacts to be induced by project operations include: soil erosion, 
noise, traffic delays, temporary and permanent loss of land and property, HIV/AIDS diffusion, 
and other site specific disturbances.  ESMF will be updated, reviewed and disclosed in country 
and Info Shop prior to appraisal. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be prepared 
for the first year of project implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Chance discovery of cultural properties will be handled by the ESMF, and will be disclosed 
in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
RPF will be updated and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/04/2009 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF will be updated, reviewed, cleared by the Federal Ministry of 
Environment and the World Bank, as well as disclosed in-country and Info Shop by July 23, 
2009.  The RAP and EIA for first year works will also be disclosed by July 23, 2009.  
 
The specific Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared as necessary during project 
implementation, in line with  RPF once the locations  are identified and detailed engineering 
design for the civil works have been prepared. The Sector Management has agreed to accept 
transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ajay Kumar 
07/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
07/15/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
