Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/07/2009 
Report No.:  AC4208
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P106280 
Project Name:  Lagos Eko Secondary Education Project 
Task Team Leader:  Marito H. Garcia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (90%);General education sector (10%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (67%);Improving labor markets (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
95.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Lagos Eko project is to improve the quality of public junior and 
senior secondary education in Lagos State. The project will support over half a million 
public school students in 637 secondary schools, over 5,385 teachers, 1,700 school 
administrators and will strengthen the capacity of district, state and education institutions 
to deliver quality education.   
 
3. Project Description 
The credit would support the Lagos government#s priority of human capital development 
by directly supporting public junior and senior secondary schools through school grants, 
performance-based incentives, teacher training and standardized testing of its students.  
School grants will be provided annually to all public secondary schools, (amount based 
on school enrollment), to support activities that impact student learning outcomes.  The 
five technical colleges also will apply for public-private partnership grants to strengthen 
the linkages between the colleges and industry with the aim of making them more 
relevant to the labor market in Lagos.  Quality improvements are further encouraged 
through the availability of additional performance awards to the top 40 percent of schools 
demonstrating learning gains.  The second component of the project establishes a 
Page  2
standardized system for measuring student#s learning achievements in core subjects 
(English, math and science) which will be used to track project results and provide 
important feedback for teachers, principals, parents and students.  Since teachers play a 
critical role in improving the quality of learning, the project also will support enhanced 
professional development for public secondary school teachers, particularly in the core 
subject areas and current pedagogy.  The last component is a small allocation to the 
Federal Ministry of Education to strengthen policy dialogue, build capacity, and provide 
technical assistance for developing the national post-basic education strategy.  Resources 
also will be provided for effective coordination and monitoring and evaluation, and the 
implementation of an information and communications strategy in Lagos.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Lagos State.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Due to the minor civil works that may be associated with the rehabilitation of schools 
under the school grants, the OP 4.01 policy will be triggered. These school improvements 
may entail rehabilitation and some limited refurbishment of existing public secondary 
schools which may contribute to soil erosion, pollution or loss of vegetation. There is also 
the additional need for proper handling of the debris to be generated by such renovation 
and rehabilitation activities as well as the sundry limited civil works that may be needed.  
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and 
was disclosed in-country and at InfoShop on December 15, 2008.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This project is not expected to generate any long term negative impacts on the 
environment nor the population.  The renovation and civil works are small in scope 
without any potential for adverse effects that are cumulative.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address potential negative impact consistent with the requirements of the triggered 
safeguard policy, the Government has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  The framework is consistent with national laws as 
well as the Bank#s triggered safeguard policy, Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01.  
The ESMF contains a screening mechanism that the project would use to identify adverse 
impacts from any proposed construction activities.  The ESMF also contains an 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with responsibilities for mitigation 
and monitoring, costs, duration, and institutional capacity building to implement the 
ESMF.  The EMP and Environmental clauses will be inserted in the bidding documents 
and contracts of the contractors. Environmental Engineers in the contractors# team will 
ensure compliance with safeguards policies through on-site project supervision.  
 
Lagos State has had considerable experience in the implementation of World Bank 
Safeguards Policies. In implementing the project, the PSU shall designate a staff to be 
responsible for following up environmental and social safeguards issues. The designated 
Project Staff charged with implementing safeguards instruments will be given more in-
depth training in environmental management. Day to day monitoring of the 
implementation plan will be the responsibility of the assigned project staff, with support 
from consultants as needed. Project desk officers at the Lagos State Environmental 
Protection Agency (LASEPA) shall provide oversight functions.   Furthermore, the 
World Bank General Environmental Management Conditions for Construction Contracts 
shall be inserted in bidding documents and contracts that involves rehabilitation of 
existing buildings and other minor civil works to ensure compliance. Such contractors 
will be given general orientation and sensitization on safeguards issues. Additional 
guidance, as required, will be provided by the safeguards members of the project team 
during supervision missions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the development of the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) extensive consultations with stakeholders such as the Federal Ministry of 
Environment, Housing and Urban Development, Lagos State Environmental protection 
Agency, Lagos State Ministries of Education, Environment was carried out. The 
safeguards instrument has been disclosed in country and at the Bank Info Shop. 
Page  4
Furthermore, project stakeholders at local government areas and community level will be 
continuously consulted at various stages of the project cycle. In particular, public 
consultations were carried out throughout the project preparation phase to encourage 
participation and foster social inclusion.  Consultations with local communities will be 
continuously organized during project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marito H. Garcia 
04/07/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amos Abu 
04/07/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
04/07/2009 
Comments:   
