Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4226
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P108253 
Project Name:  Niger Reform Management and TA 
Task Team Leader:  Robert A. Yungu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P);Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The project development objective is to improve: (i) the credibility and reliability 
of budgets allocated to budget managers in each ministry; and (ii) the internal controls of 
the use of said budgets. These objectives are related to the first two platforms of the 
sequenced reform approach adopted by this project.  
 
2. 
A successful project will be reflected in a Ministry of Economy and Finance 
(MEF) that is staffed with more competent and better motivated personnel who will use 
efficient business processes and tools to ensure that:(i) sound macro-fiscal framework 
and revenue forecasts are established, (ii) adequate budgets are allocated to managers 
according to agreed-upon programs; (iii) budgets are executed according to plan and 
without undue delays; and (iv) effective internal controls are put in place to hold mangers 
accountable.  
 
3.     Subsequent platforms, which seek to enable more accountability for performance 
management, are realistically beyond the project’s timehorizon. They necessitate 
significant financial resources and sophisticated capabilities which take time to acquire 
and maintain. Ultimately, as capacities and capabilities gradually evolve in later stages, it 
Page  2
will be possible to monitor budget performance through the lenses of service delivery and 
development outcomes.  
 
4. 
To measure and assess progress, the project has adopted quantifiable and 
measurable budget cycle and performance, which in most cases relate to the Public 
Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) framework which are directly 
controllable by decision makers.  Some of the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
include:  
 
(a) 
Ratio (%) of arrears compared to total expenditures  
 
(b) 
Delay (in months) for the submission of financial statements to the Chamber of 
Accounts and the National Assembly  
 
(c) 
Deviation (%) in own source revenue forecasts  
 
(d) 
Deviation (%) in aggregate expenditure  
 
(e) 
Percentage of Exceptional Spending  
 
(f)     Frequency of complete accounts reconciliation between tax/customs assessments, 
collections, arrears, records and receipts by Treasury.  
 
(g)     Timeliness of the issue of semi-annual budget report   
 
3. Project Description 
5. 
The proposed operation is a five-year technical assistance grant which seeks to 
reform MEF by developing capacities that are needed to implement the Public Financial 
Management (PFM) reform. Therefore the focus of the project is first and foremost on 
outcomes (i.e. transparency, accountability, strategic resources allocation, and progress 
towards the MDGs), rather on inputs such as computers or skilled staff. The challenge, 
then, is to ensure that the inputs and incentives for strengthening capacity are aligned 
with and facilitate the achievement of the required outcomes.  
 
6. 
Strengthening capacity of MEF will necessitate continuous improvement of 
technical and managerial skills of staff, rationalization and integration of systems and 
processes, and establishment of enabling institutional arrangements. To allow a more 
coherent implementation of activities envisioned by this project, it was agreed between 
the MEF and the Bank’s team to have three components by functionality/expertise areas: 
human and institutional capacity development, information systems, and project 
management. Thus, the project will have three components:  (i) capacity development; 
(ii) leverage and rationalization of financial management information systems; and (iii) 
support to the project coordination. The estimated IDA financing for this project is US$ 
10 million.  
 
Component 1: Capacity Development (US$3 million).  
 
7. 
Three sub-components were selected to support capacity development: (i) 
strengthening of the key functions of MEF, (ii) support to the training institutes, and (iii) 
support to the diaspora program.  
 
Sub-component 1.1:  Strengthening of Key Functions of MEF (US$ 1.5 million).  
Page  3
8. 
The project will support MEF to improve performance in the critical macro-fiscal 
and budget management functions of the ministry. This will involve strengthening of 
macro-fiscal forecasts, revenues collection, internal controls, budget execution, 
procurement, and treasury operations.  
 
Sub-component 1.2:   Support to Local Training Institutes (US$ 1 million).  
 
9. 
Training institutes will play a critical role in long-term sustainability of the 
capacity development program in Niger. The project aims to strengthen capacity of the 
National Institute of Public Administration and Magistrate (Ecole Nationale 
d’Administration et de la Magistrature - ENAM) and the Faculty of Economics at the 
University of Niamey so as to provide effective training to MEF staff in macro-fiscal 
management, financial programming, program budgeting, information systems, 
leadership, change management, and other key activities envisioned in this project.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Support to the Diaspora program (US$ 0.5 million).  
 
10. 
Leveraging the expertise of Nigeriens from the diaspora is a very effective way of 
sustaining capacity development as has been proven in a few good cases in Niger, 
particularly at the National Institute of Statistics. There are also success stories of the 
diaspora program in some other African countries.  Through their direct participation in 
work program and staff mentoring, diaspora experts will share good practice knowledge, 
thus, ensuring long-term sustainability of capacity development.  
 
Component 2: Leverage and rationalization of Information Systems (US$5.0 million).  
 
11. 
 Given the risks and complexities of developing integrated financial systems 
particularly in the low income countries with limited capacity, the project will primarily 
seek to leverage and rationalize existing systems. The development of completely new 
systems will be very limited.  
 
12. 
In this context, the project will draw on the recommendations of the ITC plan 
(schema directeur) proposed by the EU for strengthening core IT systems of the ministry 
(Tax, Customs, Treasury, and Budget) by working on on-going projects which have 
already been initiated within the ministry.  
 
13. 
In the same vein, the project will capitalize on the improvement of the network 
recently achieved by the local telecommunications provider (e.g. SONITEL), who has 
laid out a fiber- optic network around major government agencies in the capital, so as to 
start interconnecting disparate MEF information systems and deploy the intranet/internet. 
As capacities and capabilities improve, it is anticipated that there will be scope to develop 
a
full-fledged IFMIS at later stages of the platform sequence.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Intranet/Internet deployment (US$ 2.5 million).  
Page  4
14. 
Network extension.  The project will first focus on the capital Niamey which has 
a
relatively secure and reliable network thanks to SONITEL and recent interventions 
from some donors including the EU and the World Bank.  The next step will be to expand 
to regions as the telecommunications providers increase their services across the country 
and the cost of interconnectivity become more affordable. Therefore, the project will 
negotiate the cost of data transfer with providers, who could use any type of cost effective 
technology (fiber optic, satellite, Wimax, etc.) to provide network coverage across the 
country. Thus, the project will not fund the development of network per se, but will seek 
to use available services and negotiate payment of monthly or annual fees. Other related 
network expenditures that will be supported by the project will be the acquisition of the 
connecting and security equipment as well as networking training for maintenance staff.  
 
15. 
Intranet.  Currently, different parts of the ministry do not have a unique platform 
for internal communication. With the establishment of intranet which will firstly be built 
on the existing network infrastructure, business processes will certainly improve as more 
people have direct access to same information about procedures, guidelines, and other 
important administrative documents. Transparency on budget allocation, use and 
monitoring of resources, and dissemination of results shall help improve financial 
accountability and budget credibility.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Systems rationalization and upgrade (US$ 2 million).  
 
16. 
 The current MEF information system platforms which include Budget, Customs, 
Taxes, and Treasury systems have significant deficiencies which need to be corrected in 
the short-term. Successful rationalization and upgrade of these systems will require 
ownership and commitment of adequate resources by the Government and other donors.  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Office Equipment (US$ 0.5 million).  
 
17. 
 Limited office equipment renovation. With the information systems upgrade and 
integration, there will be a great need for adequate office equipment. The project will 
help fund, jointly with the government and other donors, network equipment, computers, 
printers, and communication tools.  
 
Component 3: Support to the Project Coordination Unit (US$ 1.5 million).  
 
18. 
As a way of ensuring project ownership and use of country system, the 
coordination of the project will be carried out by an internal unit inside MEF, not an 
external implementation unit. The PCU will be headed by a Coordinator who will 
supervise the work of the two fiduciary staff (senior accountant and procurement 
specialist), the component managers, and the monitoring and evaluation specialist.  
 
19. 
 Of the $1.5 million allocated to the Project Coordination Unit, a contingency 
fund of $0.5 million will be kept aside for funding of unexpected activities which might 
be required in one of the above mentioned subcomponents   
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Niger Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). The project will be carried out in the 
central and regional entities of the ministry as well as in local training institutes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
N/A 
Page  7
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert A. Yungu 
04/16/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
04/16/2009 
Comments:   
