Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3408 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P103499 
Project Name: Growth Enterprises and Markets in States (GEMS) 
Task Team Leader: Peter J. Mousley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 23, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Information technology (30%);General industry and trade sector (30%);Sub-
national government administration (20%);General finance sector (20%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching objective of this proposal is to assist the government of Nigeria to tackle 
binding constraints to employment generating growth in high potential value chains in the target 
states over the medium term, as measured through the enterprise survey instrument.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Growth, Enterprises, Markets in States (GEMS) program will support non oil growth and 
competitiveness in selected regions by providing an appropriate infrastructure platform and 
strategic interventions in targeted value chains to increase employment and enterprise growth. 
This integrated approach focusing on selected areas allows leveraged strategic deployment of 
limited institutional capacity and optimal allocation of scarce resources. In line with the Country 
Partnership Strategy and strong preparatory support activities under the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSME) project, the Investment Climate Program (ICP), the following four 
States are under consideration to initially lead this work - subsequent States will be supported, 
based on commitment, geopolitical representation and potential economic gain: (i) Cross River; 
(ii) Kaduna (iii) Kano; (iv) Lagos.  
Page  2
The Federal Government's Nigerian Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy 
(NEEDS) to implementing the newly elected President’s 7 point agenda, as well as 
corresponding State-level Economic Empowerment and Development (SEEDS) strategies 
developed by the States themselves, support this agenda, highlighting a need for extending the 
momentum of reform across Federal, State and Local government levels to reduce the probability 
of policy reversibility .  
 
The project includes three primary components (see below) reinforced by concurrent activities 
at the Federal level :  
 
1. Investment Climate and Market Structure:  this component will address a number of areas of 
investment climate and credit risk issues that exist, particularly at the State level.  It will address 
the binding constraints initially identified by the CEM and subsequent analysis by FIAS and 
build on a reform agenda piloted under the DFID-World Bank Group Investment Climate Project 
(ICP) in (i) trade facilitation; (ii) tax administration; (iii) land registration; (iv) contract 
enforcement. This tri pronged diagnostic provides an understanding of the trust and capacity that 
characterizes public-private dialogue and policy performance at the state level.  Strengthened by 
a
partnership and work program agenda that is institutionalized in the form of a Public-Private 
Sector Technical Committees the results of the ICP diagnostics and pilot work can be used to 
define a medium term investment climate reform agenda.  The project will also support capacity 
building to improve credit ratings for targeted states, building on the Doing Business 
benchmarking exercise across states and preliminary work partnering with the Municipal finance 
Team under the ICP.  
 
2.Infrastructure Financing and Guarantees: The project will impact critical value chains not 
already substantially covered by other projects or donors.  The deployment of World 
Bank\IFC\MIGA risk mitigation instruments (Partial Risk and Credit instruments) used 
elsewhere will be considered, including possible deployment of guarantee mechanisms, to 
effectively “crowd in” private sector investmentin infrastructure development and create strong 
demonstration effects. Initial discussions offer some potential in power, transport and 
telecommunications and will be examined during the pre-appraisal phase of project design 
development through an in depth study undertaken by PPIAF. The Investment Climate will play 
a
key role in the shift towards private sector being able to work within a government 
arrangement based on contractual obligations alone.  
 
3. 
Enterprise Development: This component of the project will identify constraints to 
improved industry productivity in the target states over the medium term.Financial and business 
development service inputs and technical training are areas for potential support under this 
project sub-component. The World Bank Group and DFIDs’ experience in VC development 
(Kenya, Cambodia, Mozambique) includes Performance Grants, Challenge Funds, Technical 
Assistance and access to finance products such as microfinance development and partial credit 
guarantees for downscaling.  These are tools to be investigated further, since these are effective 
at strategic intervention in micro and sector economic reforms that make a difference to 
employment and growth.  Attention will be paid to products that address coordination failure 
(industry level PPD) and spillover effects and means to address these key aspects of effective 
Page  3
market development, with particular collaboration with key private sector value chain makers.  
Access to finance products will be considered in the framework of the Financial Sector Strategy.  
 
The value chains will be identified based on their potential to generate and sustain economic 
growth and employment by conducting thorough analytical work and systematically applying the 
framework outlined in the PCN. Preliminary screening has been completed under the ICP 
diagnostics program using the information arising from the State Level Private Sector Policy and 
Institutional Mapping (SSPIM) and the competitiveness methodology. Among the candidate 
value chains for further consideration (see PCN for methodology and rationale) are (i) ICT; (ii) 
Tourism; (iii) Construction; and (iv)Agro-processing  as validated by key public and private 
stakeholders.  In collaboration with the Partnership Network of donors and Nigerian stakeholders 
on non-oil growth, in-depth diagnostics of these and/or other sectors will continue during FY08.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nigeria  
 
Based on discussions with Federal state level stakeholders, on commitment, geopolical 
representation and potential economic gain, the following four states are under consideration to 
initially lead this work; (i) cross River; (ii) Kaduna (iii) Kano; (iv) Lagos.   
 
As this is a concept stage ISDS and further preparatory work needs to be concluded (eg 
selection and location of value chain work)further details on the urban\rural and social\physical 
environment of the project activities will be provided after the pre-appraisal mission and this will 
be contained in the appraisal stage ISDS.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Nigeria has developed some institutional capacity for relevant safeguards policies with the 
satisfactory implementation of the safeguards instruments (EIA, ESMF, ESIA and RPF) of the 
ongoing Lagos Urban Transport Project (LUTP), the Local Empowerment and Environmental 
Management Project (LEEMP) and Fadama II project.  
 
In regards to this project, the Borrower’s institutional capacity will be further assessed, and the 
Government team will receive guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists on the project. 
The proposed project will further strengthen the borrowers environmental and social 
management capacity as per the recommendations to be made in the ESMF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Planned activities under the GPP such as agro-processing; rehabilitation or constructions; and 
infrastructure work related to value chains will likely have potential environmental and social 
impacts that would trigger the environmental assessment policy (OP 4.01). At this stage of 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project preparation where the location and types of activities to be supported by the project are 
evolving, the appropriate instrument to prepare will be an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF). This will be prepared by the borrower, and then reviewed and 
cleared by the Borrower and the Bank. This instrument will have be disclosed in-country and at 
the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
On Agro-processing, the demonstration and introduction of improved and new technologies 
into agricultural production (e.g. improved crop varieties, processing technologies: leather 
tanning, rice hullers, fruit processing etc.) could lead to intensification and increased use of agro-
chemicals and upsurge of pest incidence. An Integrated Pest Management Plan will prepared and 
added as an annex to the ESMF   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since the exact locations and potential adverse localized environmental and social impacts 
cannot be determined prior to appraisal, the project will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). This document will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop prior 
to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/13/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft ESMF,Pest Management Plan and the draft RPF will be ready on March 2, 2009. 
Documents will be disclosed in Nigeria and and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter J. Mousley 
07/30/2008 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/30/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
07/30/2008 
Comments:   
