Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4412 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/13/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: OECS Countries 
Project ID: P117087 
Project Name: OECS E-Government for Regional Integration - St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines (APL 2) 
Task Team Leader: Juan Navas-Sabater 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 2, 2009 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Information technology (60%);Central government administration (40%) 
Theme: Regional integration (25%);Administrative and civil service reform (25%);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (24%);Tax policy and 
administration (13%);Trade facilitation and market access (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.25 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to promote the delivery of high quality key e-government 
services, which will contribute to the countries' higher level objectives of increased 
competitiveness, efficiency and transparency of the public sector and regional integration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
6. The proposed project emerges from increasingly strongly articulated political will and 
determination for regional cooperation and in particular the realization that regional cooperation 
in the area of e-government, understood broadly as the application of ICT for public sector 
modernization, can produce important outcomes in reducing the cost of doing business, 
improving public sector efficiency, transparency and accountability, as well as lead to more 
regional harmonization and integration. The proposed project wishes to follow in the footsteps of 
the widely successful regional cooperation in the area of telecommunications, and aims at 
expanding that cooperation to the broader ICT field.  
 
Page  2
7. The proposed project, stemming from strong client demand as confirmed directly by the 
participating countries’ Prime Ministers, should be seen as a complementary initiative aimed at 
reinforcing the efforts on the ground in implementing various public sector reform and e-
government initiatives across the region. By harvesting the “low hanging fruit” in key priority 
areas as identified by our client countries, and achieving early results, the project expects to 
create additional momentum to achieve further benefits from highly desired reforms and more 
robust e-government implementation. It can therefore be considered as a first stage of what could 
become a wider e-government implementation program across the region.  
 
8. It is expected that the project could entail IDA credits of around $2 million per participating 
country (IBRD loan in the case of St. Kitts & Nevis), adding up to a total in the range of $8-10 
million. Insofar as possible, the team will strive to mobilize donor funding to complement the 
proposed lending operation.  
 
9. The exact scope of the project is currently under discussion with the various counterparts, but 
it is expected to include a subset extracted from the long list of candidate activities mentioned 
below. A stakeholder workshop took place on May 9 and 10, as part of the preparation mission. 
During this workshop, the priorities of the participating countries were discussed and the key 
areas for inclusion in the project were agreed in principle, on the basis of a number of selection 
criteria, such as: (i) the expressed level of priority and alignment with existing national policies; 
(ii) the likely developmental impact and contribution to the public sector modernization agenda; 
(iii) the extent of contribution to or impact on policy harmonization and regional integration; (iv) 
likelihood of achieving early results or “quick wins”; (v) cost of implementation within available 
budget; and (vi) local capacity for adoption and sustainable use.  
 
10. The project’s preliminary design is structured along three broad components or groups of 
activities, complementary with other support already being provided by other donors and with 
the participating governments’ own initiatives:  
 
(a) Key horizontal e-government activities. This component will involve technical assistance, 
capacity building and some investment support for critical horizontal e-government activities at 
the regional level, in a subset of the following candidate areas: (i) implementation of the legal 
and regulatory framework for e-government; (ii) evaluation, updating and regional 
harmonization of ICT strategies; (iii) definition of information systems standards and common 
architecture for interoperability and integration of Web portals; (iv) definition of security 
standards and protocols, in particular for payments portals; (v) connectivity support through 
integration of intranets or implementation of Government Wide Area Networks with sub-offices; 
(vi) creation of integrated public service access centers to facilitate delivery of services to 
citizens and businesses; (vii) technical support and capacity building. This component will be 
closely coordinated with donor assistance already being provided, notably through EU funding. 
The stakeholder workshop identified the areas in (i), (ii) and (vii), as well as to some extent (iii), 
as high priority for the project.  
 
(b) Selected vertical applications. This component will involve mostly investment support for 
the implementation and/or upgrading of a small number of key e-government applications drawn 
from among the following candidate areas: public financial management (treasury, budget); 
public procurement; inland revenue; customs; immigration; civil registries and identification; 
Page  3
business registries; land and property registries; judicial enforcement; agriculture; tourism; 
health; education; environment. It must be noted that, given the focus on “low hanging fruit” no 
specialized system development is envisaged under this component. However, it is expected that 
the activities included in this component could involve the following aspects for each of the 
selected applications: (i) pooled procurement of software application upgrades and licenses (and 
generic off the shelf packages, if required); (ii) outsourcing the creation of a regional Support 
Center to provide assistance and training for selected e-government applications; (iii) training 
and capacity building in the key areas identified. The stakeholder workshop identified the area of 
public finance (including treasury, budget, customs and taxation) as the core for this component, 
as well as the area of identification systems (with linkages to registries), as a key input to any e-
government application. In addition, procurement, agriculture and tourism, and health, were 
retained for eventual inclusion as pilot projects under component 3.  
 
(c) Pilots and feasibility studies for longer term e-government implementation. It is expected 
that a number of e-government applications of high priority for the participating governments 
will have a complexity and long term implementation profile that would not make them suitable 
for full implementation under the current proposed project. This component will therefore 
support the definition of feasibility studies and implementation of pilot projects for eventual 
implementation of these more complex applications in a subsequent phase. Donor assistance will 
be actively explored particularly for the feasibility studies under this component.  
 
11. Project implementation arrangements were discussed with the participating countries at the 
stakeholder workshop, as well as with the OECS Secretariat, which agreed to play a critical role 
in project coordination and implementation, at least in the initial stages. The Secretariat will be 
assisted by a Steering Committee or similar regional structure comprised of local e-government 
champions from each of the participating countries. It is also expected that CARICAD will play 
an important role in project implementation, given their e-government mandate at the broader 
CARICOM level and their capacity to implement similarly complex projects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
OECS countries.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Navas-Sabater 
05/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/22/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
05/22/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
