Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3508 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: OECS Countries 
Project ID: P095681 
Project Name: OECS (Grenada) Skills for Inclusive Growth 
Task Team Leader: Angela Demas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (50%);Other social services (25%);General public 
administration sector (25%) 
Theme: Improving labor markets (P);Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and 
risk management (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.70 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the second phase of the APL is to support the Government of Grenada to 
increase the employability of youth through public/private sector partnerships for technical and 
life skills training that is demand driven. This objective has three intermediate outcomes with 
associated lines of action:  
 
(i) 
 (Training) to increase job-related competencies among unemployed youth through the 
establishment of a competitive training mechanism that supports the financing and delivery of 
demand driven training;  
 
(ii) 
(Framework) to improve the quality and value of training in Grenada and enhance OECS 
collaboration in training through the adoption of an occupational standards framework that is 
validated locally and recognized regionally; and  
 
(iii) 
(Capacity building) to strengthen institutional capacity to plan, implement, and monitor 
training.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
This design of this project will draw upon the design and early lessons learned in a similar 
training project in St. Lucia developed under the first phase of the APL. Hence, the description 
of the Grenada project is expected to resemble that of St. Lucia.  The project will consist of three 
interlinked components:  
 
Component 1 
–
Skills training for unemployed youth;  
 
Component 2 – Establishing an occupational standards framework to improve the quality and 
value of training; and  
 
Component 3 – Institutional strengthening and project management.  
 
The components are closely linked in the sense that Component 1 will support the delivery of 
the skills training to unemployed youth by financing a competitive, demand-driven training 
scheme while Component 2 will support policies and regulation that enhance the quality and 
value of training delivered and the sustainability of the training scheme financed under 
Component 1. Component 3 will finance the strengthening of institutional capacity and project 
management to carry out the establishment of the framework and provision of quality training in 
a
sustainable manner. A monitoring and evaluation system will contribute to evidence-based 
decision making and the agility to adapt to changing market needs.  
 
Specific disbursement and procurement arrangements will be defined during project 
preparation.  The aim is to keep the design simple.  Financing of training (component one) will 
be against training course proposals, based on per capita amount per trainee. One objective will 
be to incorporate a performance-based incentive to training providers to ensure quality delivery.  
A
final percentage of the payment would be contingent on the trainee’s completion of the course 
and certification.  
 
Component 1- Skills training for unemployed youth  
 
This component will finance the training of unemployed youth through a competitive, demand-
driven training scheme.  The objectives of the training scheme are to provide quality, 
competency-based skills and life training to vulnerable youth, and to ensure that the training 
corresponds to labor market needs. Based on international best practice and specific experience 
through the St. Lucia project and prior skills training efforts in Grenada, six principles acquired 
through lessons learned are being employed to guide the design of Grenada’s training scheme:  
(i) training is demand driven and offered in partnership with the private sector; (ii) training 
addresses issues of employability and career mobility of the workforce; (iii) training combines 
behavioral/life skills and technical skills modules; (iv) training is delivered in short and focused 
modules; (v) training includes a monitored apprenticeship in companies; and (vi) the training 
scheme seeks efficiency, quality and value of training through regional collaboration, recognition 
and portability of skills.  
 
Training will be targeted to unemployed youth ages 18-30 who are secondary school leavers 
(drop outs or graduates). More precise criteria for selection of youth will be determined during 
project preparation.  
 
Page  3
Training will begin with the combination of a short, life skills and technical skills module that 
meets at least the minimum criteria for level one certification (about 340 hours of technical 
training).  This will be followed by a structured apprenticeship with a participating public/private 
employer that is monitored by the training provider. Throughout the training scheme, certified 
assessors will be utilized to administer periodic competency assessments of the trainees.  Upon 
completion of the technical and apprenticeship process, trainees meeting the competencies for 
level one certification will earn a national vocational qualification certificate (NVQ).  It is 
intended that the project will begin offering training for entry level trainees in one or two sectors 
(most likely the hospitality and construction sectors according to the Employers’ Needs 
Assessment). Once the implementing agency has gained experience and critical parts of the 
framework supported under Component Two are in place, expansion to other sectors (horizontal) 
and levels (vertical) is envisioned. The timing and pace of expansion will be further explored 
during project preparation.  
 
The training scheme will organize and finance training of young unemployed individuals on a 
regular basis. Each “round” of training entails the following steps:  
 
(i) 
outreach to, and enrollment of, trainees, training providers, and employers;  
 
(ii) 
a call for training course proposals in specific employment sectors;  
 
(iii) 
matching eligible trainees, firms and training providers;  
 
(iv) 
three to four months of pre-service training, including a life skills module and a technical 
skills module, using a standards-based curriculum;  
 
(v) 
four months apprenticeship with an employer/firm;  
 
(vi) 
assessment and certification of trainee’s skills by certified assessors; and  
 
(vii) 
monitoring and evaluation at each step of the process and after certification.  
 
Key criteria for private sector willingness to participate in both the training and the mandatory 
youth apprenticeship scheme will be further explored during project preparation.  Initial 
feedback from focus groups and the Employers’ NeedsAssessment shows that employers are 
willing to contribute when they are sure the investment will directly benefit them versus a 
contribution through a general levy for training.  
 
The project’s impact will depend critically upon its ability to attract unemployed youth, 
employers, and training providers. Through the assistance of a PHRD grant during project 
preparation, these three groups of stakeholders have been consulted by means of focus groups, 
representative membership on the government’s preparation team, and ad-hoc meetings.  They 
will continue to inform project design during preparation.  
 
Component 2:  Establishing an occupational standards framework to improve the quality and 
value of training  
 
This component will finance activities related to the adoption of an occupational standards 
framework that is regionally recognized and adapted to the local context. This will include the 
introduction of occupational standards, their vetting by local industries, and the establishment of 
quality assurance processes. The latter will include: training a cadre of assessors and inspectors, 
accreditation of training providers, and certification of trainees based on competencies.  This 
framework will not only serve the training financed by the project’s first component, but it will 
Page  4
also serve the wider national training system including TVET at the secondary school level. The 
process will involve OECS-wide collaboration, as several OECS countries are moving towards 
the introduction of this type of framework on a comparable time line and in accordance with 
CARICOM recommendations. OECS-wide collaboration will allow countries to reap the benefits 
from economies of scale and will help prepare them for the CSME.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Strengthening and Project Management  
 
This component aims to strengthen institutional capacity of the implementing agency to plan, 
implement, monitor training, and manage the project.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1.  Institutional Strengthening.  This subcomponent will support the Grenada 
Council for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (GCTVET) and the associated 
National Training Agency (NTA) in their role of establishing TVET policy and promoting the 
adoption of a regional, standards-based occupational framework. The GCTVET was approved by 
Cabinet in July 2007, and the NTA is currently being established. NTA would be a small 
operational arm of the GCTVET.  The mandate of GCTVET is to function as a decision making 
body, which determines the national policy for technical and vocational training. The Council is 
composed of TVET officials at the Ministry of Education and representatives of the main 
stakeholders. The GCTVET would direct the validation and ratification of standards, allocate 
financial resources made available, ensure the quality of the training and assessment processes, 
and monitor the performance of training assistance. The NTA would consist of a small core of 
technical professionals who would coordinate technical inputs for standards validation, training 
provider accreditation, the calls for training proposals, and trainee registration and certification.  
It would call upon trained professionals to carry out assessments, inspections and certifications, 
and to serve on training proposal evaluation committees. This core staff should include 
professional counselors and may draw upon MOE guidance counselors to help select and guide 
potential trainees.  
 
While the government of Grenada has allocated a budget for both agencies, the project would 
help facilitate their mandates, structure, responsibilities, reporting, financing, and involvement 
throughout project implementation. The project will also facilitate the acquisition of technical 
assistance from organizations such as the Caribbean Association for National Training Agencies 
(CANTA), the Jamaica HEART Trust, and the Trinidad and Tobago NCTVET. The benefits 
from these investments in GCTVET and NTA are expected to accrue both during and beyond the 
project’s life span.  
 
The MOE has been identified as the agency responsible for implementation of the project.  The 
GCTVET and NTA are established semi-autonomously under the direction of the Ministry of 
Education.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2 Project Management.  This subcomponent would support the implementing 
agency and PCU to closely monitor and evaluate the implementation of the project.  It would 
support the design and development of a management information system (MIS) that would be 
accessible to the project and multiple agencies requiring labor market data for evidence-based 
planning and decision-making.  
Page  5
Subcomponent 3.3 Communications Campaign. This subcomponent would support a targeted 
communications campaign focusing on the three main stakeholders:  youth, training providers, 
and employers.  It would be instrumental in communicating information about the training 
scheme, call for proposals, and trainee registration under Component One and the dissemination 
of information regarding the roll out of the occupational standards framework for Component 
Two.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Grenada.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Safeguards specialist will not be present on the team since no policies are triggered   
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/12/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A.  No safeguards policies are not triggered.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Angela Demas 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:  A safeguards specialist will not be present on the team since no policies are triggered. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
