Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/21/2009 
Report No.:  AC4413
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  OECS Countries 
Project ID:  P117087 
Project Name:  OECS E-Government for Regional Integration - St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines (APL 2) 
Task Team Leader:  Juan Navas-Sabater 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 2, 2009 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Information technology (60%);Central government administration (40%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (25%);Administrative and civil service reform 
(25%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (24%);Tax policy and 
administration (13%);Trade facilitation and market access (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.25 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the project is to promote the efficiency, quality, and 
transparency of public services through the delivery of regionally integrated e-
government applications that apply economies of scale.   
 
3. Project Description 
This project is part of a broader regional horizontal APL program, with two key phases. 
This project is the second project (APL 2) within phase one, aimed at adding St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines to the program, which already includes Dominica, Grenada and St. 
Lucia (APL 1 was approved by the Board in May 2008).  
 
In Phase 1, the project has two main substantive components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Horizontal (Cross-Sectoral) E-Government Interventions. This would 
involve the following sub-components: (i) Policy and Strategy Implementation; (ii) Legal 
and Regulatory Framework Implementation; (iii) ICT Standards and Total Cost of 
Ownership Optimization; (iv) Regional E-Government Institutional Framework 
Strengthening; and (v) Automated Registries and Multi-Purpose Identification Systems.  
 
Component 2: Vertical (Sectoral) E-Government Interventions. This component will 
support further regional harmonization and upgrading of existing information systems in 
the core areas of public finance, as well as extend e-government on a pilot basis to other 
sectors: (i) E-Government in Public Financial Management ; (ii) E-Government in Tax 
Administration; (iii) E-Government in Customs; (iv) Electronic Government 
Procurement; and (v) E-Government in health and other social and productive sectors.  
 
In Phase 2, the program is expected to expand into other sectoral e-government 
interventions, primarily in tourism, agriculture, social protection and education, among 
others.  
 
A
third component for project management is also included in both phases.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
St. Vincent and the Grenadines.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No negative social or environmental impacts are expected from the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will have many positive social impacts related to improved delivery of 
government services. In addition, some long-term positive indirect environmental 
impacts are expected due to reduced use of transportation services by citizens and 
businesses in order to interact with government, since now it will be possible to conduct 
many transactions on-line.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Navas-Sabater 
05/21/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
05/21/2009 
Comments:   
