Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3785
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Grenada 
Project ID:  P095681 
Project Name:  OECS (Grenada) Skills for Inclusive Growth 
Task Team Leader:  Angela Demas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (50%);Other social services (25%);General public 
administration sector (25%) 
Theme:  Improving labor markets (P);Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and 
risk management (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.80 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.70
1.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the second phase of the APL is to support the Government of Grenada to 
increase the employability of youth through public/private sector partnerships for 
technical and life skills training that is demand driven. The project’s main results 
indicators will be:  
 
(i) 
The percentage of youth enrolled in the training scheme that are employed fifteen 
months after the start of their training. Target value: 65 percent.  
 
(ii) 
The number of youth certified at Level I or above. Target value: 640.  
 
This objective has three intermediate outcomes with associated lines of action:  
 
(i) 
(Training) to increase job-related competencies among unemployed youth through 
the establishment of a competitive training mechanism that supports the financing and 
delivery of demand driven training;  
Page  2
(ii) 
(Framework) to improve the quality and value of training in Grenada and enhance 
OECS collaboration in training through the adoption of an existing occupational 
standards framework that is validated locally and recognized regionally; and  
 
(iii) 
(Capacity building) to strengthen institutional capacity to plan, implement, and 
monitor training.   
 
3. Project Description 
This design of this project will draw upon the design and early lessons learned in a 
similar training project in St. Lucia developed under the first phase of the APL. Hence, 
the description of the Grenada project is expected to resemble that of St. Lucia.  The 
project will consist of three interlinked components:  
 
Component 1 
–
Skills training for unemployed youth;  
 
Component 2 – Establishing an occupational standards framework to improve thequality 
and value of training; and  
 
Component 3 – Institutional strengthening and project management.  
 
The components are closely linked in the sense that Component 1 will support the 
delivery of the skills training to unemployed youth by financing a competitive, demand-
driven training scheme while Component 2 will support policies and regulation that 
enhance the quality and value of training delivered and the sustainability of the training 
scheme financed under Component 1. Component 3 will finance the strengthening of 
institutional capacity and project management to carry out the establishment of the 
framework and provision of quality training in a sustainable manner. A monitoring and 
evaluation system will contribute to evidence-based decision making and the agility to 
adapt to changing market needs.  
 
Specific disbursement and procurement arrangements will be defined during project 
preparation.  The aim is to keep the design simple.  Financing of training (component 
one) will be against training course proposals, based on per capita amount per trainee. 
One objective will be to incorporate a performance-based incentive to training providers 
to ensure quality delivery.  A final percentage of the payment would be contingent on the 
trainee’s completion of the course and certification.  
 
Component 1- Skills t raining for unemployed youth  
 
This component will finance the training of unemployed youth through a competitive, 
demand-driven training scheme.  The objectives of the training scheme are to provide 
quality, competency-based skills and life training to vulnerable youth, and to ensure that 
the training corresponds to labor market needs. Based on international best practice and 
specific experience through the St. Lucia project and prior skills training efforts in 
Grenada, six principles acquired through lessons learned are being employed to guide the 
design of Grenada’s training scheme:  (i) training is demand driven and offered in 
partnership with the private sector; (ii) training addresses issues of employability and 
Page  3
career mobility of the workforce; (iii) training combines behavioral/life skills and 
technical skills modules; (iv) training is delivered in short and focused modules; (v) 
training includes a monitored apprenticeship in companies; and (vi) the training scheme 
seeks efficiency, quality and value of training through regional collaboration, recognition 
and portability of skills.  
 
Training will be targeted to unemployed youth ages 18-30 who are secondary school 
leavers (drop outs or graduates). More precise criteria for selection of youth will be 
determined during project preparation.  
 
Training will begin with the combination of a short, life skills and technical skills 
module that meets at least the minimum criteria for level one certification (about 340 
hours of technical training).  This will be followed by a structured apprenticeship with a 
participating public/private employer that is monitored by the training provider. 
Throughout the training scheme, certified assessors will be utilized to administer periodic 
competency assessments of the trainees.  Upon completion of the technical and 
apprenticeship process, trainees meeting the competencies for level one certification will 
earn a national vocational qualification certificate (NVQ).  It is intended that the project 
will begin offering training for entry level trainees in one or two sectors (most likely the 
hospitality and construction sectors according to the Employers’ Needs Assessment). 
Once the implementing agency has gained experience and critical parts of the framework 
supported under Component Two are in place, expansion to other sectors (horizontal) and 
levels (vertical) is envisioned. The timing and pace of expansion will be further explored 
during project preparation.  
 
The training scheme will organize and finance training of young unemployed 
individuals on a regular basis. Each “round” of training entails the following steps:  
 
(i) 
outreach to, and enrollment of, trainees, training providers, and employers;  
 
(ii) 
a call for training course proposals in specific employment sectors;  
 
(iii) 
matching eligible trainees, firms and training providers;  
 
(iv) 
three to four months of pre-service training, including a life skills module and a 
technical skills module, using a standards-based curriculum;  
 
(v) 
four months apprenticeship with an employer/firm;  
 
(vi) 
assessment and certification of trainee’s skills by certified assessors;and  
 
(vii) 
monitoring and evaluation at each step of the process and after certification.  
 
Key criteria for private sector willingness to participate in both the training and the 
mandatory youth apprenticeship scheme will be further explored during project 
preparation.  Initial feedback from focus groups and the Employers’ NeedsAssessment 
shows that employers are willing to contribute when they are sure the investment will 
directly benefit them versus a contribution through a general levy for training.  
 
The project’s impact will depend critically upon its ability to attract unemployed youth, 
employers, and training providers. Through the assistance of a PHRD grant during 
project preparation, these three groups of stakeholders have been consulted by means of 
Page  4
focus groups, representative membership on the government’s preparation team, and ad-
hoc meetings.  They will continue to inform project design during preparation.  
 
Component 2:  Establishing an occupational standards framework to improve the quality 
and value of training  
 
This component will finance activities related to the adoption of an occupational 
standards framework that is regionally recognized and adapted to the local context. This 
will include the introduction of occupational standards, their vetting by local industries, 
and the establishment of quality assurance processes. The latter will include: training a 
cadre of assessors and inspectors, accreditation of training providers, and certification of 
trainees based on competencies.  This framework will not only serve the training financed 
by the project’s first component, but it will also serve the wider national training system 
including TVET at the secondary school level. The process will involve OECS-wide 
collaboration, as several OECS countries are moving towards the introduction of this type 
of framework on a comparable time line and in accordance with CARICOM 
recommendations. OECS-wide collaboration will allow countries to reap the benefits 
from economies of scale and will help prepare them for the CSME.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Strengthening and Project Management  
 
This component aims to strengthen institutional capacity of the implementing agency to 
plan, implement, monitor training, and manage the project.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1:  Institutional Strengthening.  This subcomponent will support the 
Grenada Council for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (GCTVET) and 
the associated National Training Agency (NTA) in their role of establishing TVET policy 
and promoting the adoption of a regional, standards-based occupational framework. The 
GCTVET was approved by Cabinet in July 2007, and the NTA is currently being 
established. NTA would be a small operational arm of the GCTVET.  The mandate of 
GCTVET is to function as a decision making body, which determines the national policy 
for technical and vocational training. The Council is composed of TVET officials at the 
Ministry of Education and representatives of the main stakeholders. The GCTVET would 
direct the validation and ratification of standards, allocate financial resources made 
available, ensure the quality of the training and assessment processes, and monitor the 
performance of training assistance. The NTA would consist of a small core of technical 
professionals who would coordinate technical inputs for standards validation, training 
provider accreditation, the calls for training proposals, and trainee registration and 
certification.  It would call upon trained professionals to carry out assessments, 
inspections and certifications, and to serve on training proposal evaluation committees. 
This core staff should include professional counselors and may draw upon MOE 
guidance counselors to help select and guide potential trainees.  
 
While the government of Grenada has allocated a budget for both agencies, the project 
would help facilitate their mandates, structure, responsibilities, reporting, financing, and 
involvement throughout project implementation. The project will also facilitate the 
Page  5
acquisition of technical assistance from organizations such as the Caribbean Association 
for National Training Agencies (CANTA), the Jamaica HEART Trust, and the Trinidad 
and Tobago NCTVET. The benefits from these investments in GCTVET and NTA are 
expected to accrue both during and beyond the project’s life span.  
 
The MOE has been identified as the agency responsible for implementation of the 
project.  The GCTVET and NTA are established semi-autonomously under the direction 
of the Ministry of Education.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Project Management.  This subcomponent would support the 
implementing agency and PCU to closely monitor and evaluate the implementation of the 
project.  It would support the design and development of a management information 
system (MIS) that would be accessible to the project and multiple agencies requiring 
labor market data for evidence-based planning and decision-making.  
 
Subcomponent 3.3: Communications Campaign. This subcomponent would support a 
targeted communications campaign focusing on the three main stakeholders:  youth, 
training providers, and employers.  It would be instrumental in communicating 
information about the training scheme, call for proposals, and trainee registration under 
Component One and the dissemination of information regarding the roll out of the 
occupational standards framework for Component Two.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Grenada. The Project is of national scope.  There are no salient physical characteristics 
relevant to safeguard analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Angela Demas 
09/08/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Erik A. Bloom 
09/22/2008 
Comments:   
Page  8
