Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4048 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: OECS Countries 
Project ID: P101414 
Project Name: OECS Regional Energy Planning & Regulation Authority 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Audinet 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 13, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (70%);Renewable energy (30%) 
Theme: Managing for development results (P);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
4.10 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.40 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project objective is to enhance the efficiency of electricity provision in OECS countries  by:  
 
(i) 
Strengthening the oversight of the respective States’ ESIs,  
 
(ii) 
Improving the States’ decision-making ability to assess electricity supplyoptions and 
promote electricity supply from renewable energy sources, and  
 
(iii) 
Promoting regional harmonization of regulatory frameworks.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component one – setting up the core functions of an OECS Regional Energy Planning and 
Regulation Authority. This component is aimed at supporting the development of a new 
regulatory, institutional and legal framework for the electricity sector of OECS countries, 
establishing the core functions of the regulator. The project would build up on the detailed plan 
to operationalize a regional energy regulator prepared by the PPIAF-funded consultants in 2007.  
 
Component two – establishing dedicated functions within the authority to implement a regional 
energy policy and enable scaling up investments particularly in new generation from renewable 
energy sources. In a context of volatile oil prices and technology improvements, renewable 
Page  2
energy investments in OECS countries are becoming more attractive. A capability within the 
authority to thoroughly evaluate the feasibility of alternative sources and forms of power 
generation would help turn the current 
–
partly donor-funded – ad hoc efforts and studies into 
actionable goals, licensing terms and investments. The proposed component would complement 
the regional authority’s core regulatory functions, and foster the development of capacity 
currently absent in the OECS and necessary for the States to respond to their energy security 
needs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/17/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
While support for analytical work under component 2 of the project may not necessitate 
triggering of any safeguard policies, the project documents will indicate that any work-
related studies prepared with Bank financing will be consistent with the safeguard policies. 
Unless future projects and implementation of these studies receive Bank financing, 
compliance with Bank policies would not be mandatory for such work.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Audinet 
12/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
12/19/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
