Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  50079 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/11/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: OECS Countries 
Project ID: P103470 
Project Name: Sustainable Financing & Managment of Eastern Caribbean Marine 
Ecosystem 
Task Team Leader: Dinesh Aryal 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 27, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (40%);General finance sector (40%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%);Vocational training (10%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (40%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%);Climate 
change (20%);Other environment and natural resources management (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.75 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.36 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
3.00 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
8.44
14.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to improve the management effectiveness of protected area 
networks across the Eastern Caribbean through the establishment of sustainable financing 
mechanisms. The project will contribute to the Caribbean Challenge and to the participating 
governments# adaptation agenda by making coastal and marine ecosystems more resilient to 
climate change through creating effectively managed protected areas that improve coral health 
and ecosystem integrity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Five preliminary components and related activities are:  
 
Page  2
Component 1 # Establishment of sustainable financing mechanisms: The aim of this component 
is to establish a sustainable financing mechanism for national PA systems through the formation 
of a regional endowment fund and country-specific national PA trust funds (PATFs). The 
regional fund will be composed of five individual sub-accounts (one for each country) of no less 
than US$3 million each. The five sub-accounts will be invested jointly. Each country#s 
endowment returns will flow directly into their respective national PATF on an annual basis 
based on agreed performance targets and co-financing from the government and other sources. 
The national PATFs will be designed to finance sustainable management activities in PAs and 
critical marine ecosystems. Diverse sources of funds will be channeled through the TFs, 
including the interest income accruing from the regional endowment fund, tourism development 
projects, international tourist fees, water services fees, private donations, PA entrance fees, and 
other payments for environmental services as determined by each country.  
 
Component 2 # Establishment and strengthening of policy, legal, and institutional framework 
for sustainable financing: The aim of this component is to establish, strengthen, and consolidate a 
policy, regulatory, and institutional framework across the five participating OECS countries so as 
to harmonize activities for sustainable PA financing. The project will also support each country 
in legally establishing national TFs and defining regional cooperation arrangements, according to 
their own national priorities and pace of implementation.  
 
Component 3 # Consolidation, Enhanced Representatives and Resilience, and phased expansion 
of Eastern Caribbean Marine Protected Areas Networks: The aim of this component is to 
consolidate and strengthen the management effectiveness of existing PAs, especially in coastal 
and marine ecosystems. The component will also support a phased expansion to ensure that 
MPA networks include all priority ecosystems. The expansion of the MPA networks depends on, 
among other things, the availability of resources from the financing mechanisms.  
 
Component 4 # Deployment of regional monitoring and information system network: The aim 
of this component is to establish a decision-support information system that integrates the entire 
Eastern Caribbean PA network along with the relevant management institutions, into one 
regional system. The integrated system will build upon available systems in the region, such as 
the Caribbean Decision Support System (CDSS). The monitoring and information system would 
contribute to improving institutional capacity and would support decision-making by providing 
relevant actionable information on MPAs.  
 
Component 5 # Project management and coordination: The aim of this component is to ensure 
efficient execution of the project funded activities through administration, fiduciary monitoring 
and reporting, and coordination.  
 
Implementation Arrangements: Implementation arrangements for the proposed project will be a 
challenge as it is a multi-country project with diverse sets of stakeholders including government 
entities, non-government organizations, private sectors and communities. It was agreed during 
project identification process that there are several options for the implementing agency that will 
be explored during project preparation.  It was also agreed that the coordination of the project 
preparation activities and the execution of the Project Preparation Grant will be carried out by 
Page  3
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) with each country representative as part of a Steering 
Committee supporting TNC.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency/agencies have not yet been defined.  During project preparation, a 
study will be carried out to review options, and will be agreed on. Therefore, when the 
implementing agency/agencies is defined, the safeguards specialists will compare the possible 
institutions# capacities in order to inform the team#s final decision.  The assessment will 
consider whether the institution/s currently have the necessary capacity to implement the Bank#s 
safeguards policies and what kind of additional support might be needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to have a significantly positive environmental outcome as it will 
improve the conservation and management of ecologically important areas throughout the 
OECS. The project may support small-scale investments in such areas, such as demarcation, 
possibly interpretive centers, trails, etc. As such, project preparation will include an EA to assess 
potential impacts and propose a framework for managing them. The framework will also be 
integrated into the operating rules of the financing mechanisms envisaged as part of component 
1.  Furthermore, principles of OP4.01 in ensuring proper consultation takes places as part of 
project financed studies envisaged as part of component 2.  
 
///  
 
The project is expected to have a significantly positive environmental outcome as it will 
improve the conservation and management of ecologically important areas throughout the 
OECS. The project may support small-scale investments in such areas, such as demarcation, 
possibly interpretive centers, trails, etc. As such, project preparation will include an EA to assess 
potential impacts and propose a framework for managing them   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project is likely to trigger the policy as it is expected to have positive impacts on the 
quality of critical natural habitats. The EA will ensure the policy is addressed appropriately.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project will involve both terrestrial and marine protected areas. As such, it is likely to 
trigger the policy. This will be assessed through the EA.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The areas to be supported under the project are as yet unknown.  However, the potential 
project protected areas may include historical sites and/or archeological findings.  As such, 
impacts and procedures for "chanc
e
findings" from specific investments under Components 2 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and 3 (if applicable) will be assessed within the EA, and the resulting Environmental 
Management Framework will include relevant provisions to mitigate any potentially adverse 
impacts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The team carried out a screening, and there are no indigenous people in the countries 
identified.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The team will evaluate subprojects and activities under the proposed Components 2 and 3 to 
ascertain if there are potential livelihood impacts, that is, nonphysical displacement, from 
regulatory activities, consolidation of protected areas and other activities.  Further information on 
potential sites is still needed. If there is a potential for nonphysical displacement, a Process 
Framework would be prepared.  It is unlikely that project activities would involve physical 
resettlement, but if there is a potential, a Resettlement Policy Framework would be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/02/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Studies should/will be finalized and disclosed by January 2010.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dinesh Aryal 
07/30/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/30/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura E. Tlaiye 
07/30/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
