Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4117 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/04/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P107300 
Project Name: Sindh Education Sector Reform Project 
Task Team Leader: Reema Nayar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (57%);Sub-national government administration (43%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Gender (S);Decentralization (S);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,440.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
46.06 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1,486.06 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to support the GoS’s medium term SERP.  
The objectives of SERP are to increase school participation, reduce gender and rural/urban 
disparities in schooling outcomes, increase retention and completion, and improve quality. 
Success in meeting SERP objectives are proposed to be measured by the following outcome 
indicators:  
 
•
Increase Net Enrollment Rates in primary, middle and secondary education frombaselines 
of 50%, 17%, and 19% respectively  
 
•
Increase in the ratio of girls to boys NER in primary and middle schools in rural areas 
from baselines of 63% and 39% respectively.  
 
•
Increase in the transition rates for rural girls in primary to middle school in rural areas.  
 
•
Regular and improved monitoring of completion rates and student learning outcomes   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project would be a US$300 million SIL that uses a Sector Wide Approach 
(SWAp) to support the implementation of the SERP over a three year period. There are two 
project components: (i) a SWAp component that will reimburse selected SERP Eligible 
Expenditure Programs (EEPs) over six-month intervals, with the event and amount of 
reimbursements conditioned on the achievement of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) which 
are SERP performance benchmarks; and (ii) a technical assistance (TA) component (tentatively a 
maximum of 2% of the credit amount) which would cover residual TA needs after considering 
available non-lending or grant financed TA from all DPs.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguard Impacts and Mitigation: The majority of SERP program 
activities is environmentally benign and will result in enhanced environmental benefits. 
However, some of the activities (e.g. rehabilitation of schools under terms of partnership 
–
TOP 
–
agreements with the districts, or provisionof facilities under the public private partnership 
component), require additional measures as part of the environmental due diligence.  
 
The Sindh public schools face two serious problems that need to be addressed as soon as 
possible: (i) contamination by high levels of arsenic (and possibly by floride and coliforms), of 
the wells that supply the drinking water to several schools; and (ii) vulnerability to natural 
disasters such as earthquakes and severe floods, due to the schools poor design and construction 
quality. The province has two areas considered to be at high risk of natural disasters, with 
hundreds of schools located inside them. Both problems pose a significant risk to the lives of 
thousands of children and teachers, and so far very little have been done to minimize this risk.  
During project preparation analytical work will be carried out to help the GoS to identify and 
assess the magnitude of such problems, and to propose measures to solve them.  
 
In addition to drinking water quality problems, the majority of the schools in Sindh don’t have 
adequate sanitation facilities, either because they do not exist, or because they are in a state of 
disrepair due to the lack of maintenance. The existence of adequate operating sanitation facilities 
is particularly important in the case of girls, and their absence may discourage parents to enroll 
their daughters in the schools, thus contributing to defeat one of the main objectives of SERP.  
 
An implementation plan for gradually addressing issues relating to ensuring safe drinking water 
and sanitation facilities, protection against natural disasters and for improving school design, 
construction, operation and maintenance standards and third party supervision protocol, as well 
as renewable power supply for off-grid schools, is under preparation and will be supported (by 
DLIs and TA) under the project. The plan includes also actions to increase the awareness of 
major stakeholders about the risks of natural disasters, and training in environmental and 
personal hygiene aspects. With regard to social assessment, in view of the keen awareness of the 
various social factors impacting access to and quality of education, and the focus of the program 
on targeting the most needy (girls and rural populations), the team proposes to integrate social 
analysis into the existing monitoring and evaluation framework within SERP.  
 
Possible civil work under the TOP and PPP programs are expected of very small scale.  
Additional new school facilities would be built on existing campus, public or community lands 
as agreed with local communities, or land leasing arrangements with local residents or even 
purchasing of private lands in the markets on a willing-buyer-willing seller basis.  Therefore the 
project is not expecting to trigger the Land Acquisition Act in Pakistan or the World Bank 
Page  3
Operation Policy 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Nevertheless, the land needs and their 
resolution would be monitored under the proposed monitoring and evaluation framework.Project 
planning work and operational experiences also indicate that the World Bank OP 4.20 on 
Indigenous People is not triggered under the project.  
 
These environmental and social safeguard impacts, mitigation approach and monitoring 
arrangements will be elaborated in an Environmental and Social Management Framework under 
preparation at the RSU with guidance from the WB. The ESMF will apply to SERP as supported 
by the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Sindh Province 
–
all districts   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Reform Steering Committee (SC) chaired by the Chief Secretary of the province and 
represented by education, finance and planning and development departments, is responsible for 
oversight, guidance and coordination.  The Reform Support Unit (RSU), established in the 
education department, is responsible for implementation and for monitoring and coordination of 
sector reform efforts.  The RSU will also be responsible for undertaking the planning efforts and 
mitigation measures to address the environmental and social safeguard impacts under the project.  
Consultants will be hired to strengthen the RSU capacity to ensure timely completion of EA and 
other studies and help in the implementation of the environmental management framework and 
Social Impact Management Plan prepared under the project EA/SA studies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASDI) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental assessment will be carried out prior to pre-appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/06/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Management Framework will be prepared by end of February 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Reema Nayar 
12/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/02/2009 
Comments:  cleared. ESMF to be reviewed prior to appraisal 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
12/24/2008 
Comments:  approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
