Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/14/2009 
Report No.:  48586
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P114508 
Project Name:  Third Partnership for Polio Eradication Project 
Task Team Leader:  Inaam Haq 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 18, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (50%);Other communicable diseases (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
74.68 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.02 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
7.95 
 UN 
Children's 
Fund 
9.44 
 
World Health Organization 
41.06
68.47 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to assist Pakistan’s efforts to eradicate polio 
through timely supply and effective use of the Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) for the 
country’s Supplemental Immunization Activities (SIA) during 2009-11. The project is 
part of the WHO led multi-country effort, and will contribute to a global public good, i.e., 
the eradication of polio from the world.  The primary targeted group for the proposed 
project is Pakistan’s under five children.  Successof the program is proposed to be 
measured by the following indicators: a) Timely arrival of OPV at the District stores of 
the Department of Health. Target: vaccines arrive at least three days in the district stores 
before each of the SIAs; and b) # 
Coverage of targeted population in SIA. Target At 
least 90% verified by finger marking of OPV in the targeted accessible population 
(children under-five) of all high risk districts during August 2009-June 2011   
 
3. Project Description 
Pakistan’s Polio Eradication Initiative (PEI) has three components: (i) the procurement, 
supply and effective supply of OPV; (ii) supplemental immunization activities including 
Page  2
cold chain, social mobilization and training; and (iii) surveillance.  The proposed project 
will finance only the first component of PEI which comprises "the Project" as in the 
original project. The proposed project will be financed through Specific Investment 
Lending.  
 
The proposed credit would finance the procurement of OPV for SIAs to be used during 
July 2009-June 2011.The total budget needed for PEI during 2009-11 is about US$ 
154.21 million, of which US$ 87.35 million is needed for OPV procurement.  With the 
Government of Japan expected to finance US$ 12.67 million for OPV procurement, IDA 
will finance the remaining gap of US$ 74.68 million.  The cost of supplemental 
operations and surveillance will be financed by WHO and UNICEF with support from 
various partners.  
 
The proposed Credit does not require additional implementation capacity beyond what 
is already in place for PEI.  However, the implementation arrangements for SIAs in 
security compromised areas will need to be adjusted to take into ongoing conflict. The 
project will be monitored through the existing monitoring mechanisms and already 
functional surveillance system. The existing procurement, financial management and 
disbursement arrangements including accounting and reporting systems will continue as 
applied under the parent project. UNICEF will undertake the procurement and supply of 
OPV through its international procurement division, based in Copenhagen.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Pakistan: all four provinces, Islamabad Capital Territory, Federally Administered Tribal 
Areas, Federally Administered Northern Areas and Azad Jammu and Kashmir.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None of the safeguard policies have been triggered  
 
Environment: The proposed project involves the supply and use of OPV in small plastic 
vials which need to be disposed off. The disposal of the vials is undertaken in accordance 
with the WHO guidelines  for immunization campaigns as being already practiced. No 
sharps such as needles or vial cutters are involved in the oral vaccination methods and the 
program produces no infected medical waste.  
 
Social: A Social Assessment was deemed not necessary as there are no potential 
negative social impacts anticipated. The proposed project aims to benefit under five 
children specially vulnerable and neglected groups by providing polio immunization. 
Quantitative studies have found low utilization rates at public health facilities catering to 
the poor. The project will ensure to address these issues in respect of polio eradication by 
developing specific strategies and by using surveillance data to reach the poor 
households. The project aims to vaccinate very child in each round therefore it is unlikely 
girl child to be missed.  The PEI program already has addressed issues of access to 
households by training and using female health workers to overcome social access 
barriers into the households.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment:  The project is not likely to cause any indirect or long term negative 
environmental impacts.  Rather, implementation and following of WHO guidelines for 
immunization campaigns for waste disposal will facilitate development of safe waste 
disposal culture in the health sector.  
 
There are no potential negative social impacts anticipated. However, some positive 
impacts are built into the project such as ensuring that all households are covered 
including poor households addressing issues of access to health care.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: The Borrower PEI already employs use of WHO guidelines for safe 
disposal of small waste which is produced.  The basic package of training of all staff 
employed in SIAs includes waste disposal and all staff are well trained in them.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
PEI has established a framework for on-going participation largely through national 
provincial and district level committees including members from: (i) key government 
ministries/departments; (ii) NGOs; (iii) community members and (iv) media experts. 
Before each campaign these committees meet to discuss issues and challenges and 
facilitate program implementation.  PEI has achieved success for the last few years by 
placing high priority on mobilizing participation of the beneficiaries, communities and 
other stakeholders.  Local politicians and religious leaders are regularly sensitized and 
contribute by mobilizing local communities. Non acceptance of vaccination is very low.  
The EPI holds consultations with partner NGOs and community groups which actively 
participate in social mobilization activities for SIA.  Recently in security compromised 
areas the program is working closely with local leaders, tribal elders and community 
leaders to come up with solution to ensure access to each child.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Inaam Haq 
03/31/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid 
03/31/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
03/31/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
03/31/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
03/31/2009 
Comments:   
