Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3484 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P110099 
Project Name: Water Sector Capacity Buildling and Advisory Services Project (WCAP) 
Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Renewable energy 
(25%);Irrigation and drainage (25%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Managing for development results (P);Other 
public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
53.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main project objective is to support capacity development and analytical work in Pakistan in 
order to ensure the effective management and development of the Indus River system in the 
context of significant economic, social, and environmental change and needs for infrastructure 
and help in their implementation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions in Water Resources 
Planning and Management (US$18 Million). This component would support capacity building of 
and support to federal institutions involved in water resources planning, management and 
development. The component includes among other things support for building human resources 
and institutional capacity in federal institutions, and support for preparing studies, strategies, and 
plans for improving water resources planning and management. It will have the following sub-
components:  
 
Page  2
Component A1: Capacity Building of and Support to Ministry of Water and Power (MoWP, 
US$5.0 million). This component will cover strengthening of the Indus System institutional and 
regulatory framework. This is likely to include, but not limited to, the following:  (a) water 
resources regulation, policy, and planning; (b) studies and policies for benefit sharing among 
stakeholders; (c) asset development, ownership, and operation (including potential inter-
provincial assets, public-private partnerships, etc); (d) building trusted entitlement and benefit 
sharing regimes (national/provincial/local); (e) studies on the lessons learned from the 
implementation of past and current resettlement action plans in Pakistan and international best 
practices leading to improvements in national resettlement policy and preparation of a handbook 
to improve project specific resettlement plans; (f) strategic sectoral environmental and social 
assessments of the whole Indus basin that could serve as a basis for project specific environment 
assessments and environmental management plans and help address and internalize 
environmental issues in the water resources management planning; and (g) strategy for 
enhancing productivity of water use, studies for improvements in irrigation efficiency and 
groundwater management in collaboration with provinces.  
 
Component A2: Capacity Building of and Support to Indus River System Authority (IRSA, 
US$6.0 million).  Thi
s
component would strengthen IRSA’s capacity to carry out its role as 
envisaged in the 1991 Water Apportionment Accord. This would cover inter-alia: (a) 
establishment of digital and GIS based databases with the capability to integrate satellite images, 
and of management information systems with web-based interfaces for access to information by 
all stakeholders, including the public; (b) studies and development of modern tools for improving 
seasonal, monthly, and 10-daily inflows forecasts to the system, and of possible scenarios for 
water requirements and for demands by various sectors and provinces; (c) development and 
improvement of tools and models for simulation and optimization of operation and management 
of Indus system’s water resources including updatingand enhancement of the Indus Basin Model; 
and (d) establishment of a water flow measurement system at key points on the river system as 
part of a plan to improve water auditing and transparency and communication in water 
distribution and (e) institutional capacity building and training.  Much of this work will be 
carried out in collaboration with WAPDA (and the work program outlined in Component B1) 
and with the provincial authorities responsible for water resources planning and management.  
 
Component A3: Capacity Building of and Support to IPDF (US$6.0 million).  This component 
will build capacity of the Infrastructure Project Development Facility (IPDF), in particular the 
new water cell which is responsible for developing financing strategies for water sector programs 
and hydropower infrastructure and with providing advice on a variety of financial, fiscal, legal 
and regulatory issues.  The support will cover inter-alia the following:  
 
(i) review of the existing institutional, legal and administrative framework for financing water 
infrastructure and the potential for private sector participation in the development of 
multipurpose water resources development projects based on international best practices, asset 
ownership, benefit- sharing alternatives, etc. and define public sector role in financing to 
complement/support potential private investments  
 
Page  3
(ii) development of an enabling framework for licensing and regulating hydropower projects 
(both run of river and reservoir based projects); for establishing tariffs and a carbon credit 
mechanism; and for securitizing existing assets to generate funding for investments in water and 
hydropower development; and  
 
(iii) review of financial and fiscal regimes for private sector, domestic and foreign involvement 
in the development of major hydropower projects in the Indus system, and identification of 
appropriate sources of financing worldwide.  
 
Component A4:  Capacity Building of and Support to the Planning Commission (US$1.0 
million).  This component will support the Planning Commission in various capacity building 
activities, such as workshops and training, and in preparation of studies on water planning and 
management issues, including resettlement planning in coordination with other work approved 
by the Project Steering Committee.  
 
Component B: Improvement in Water Resources Management and Development in WAPDA 
(US$30.0 million).  This would include, inter-alia following:  
 
(B1)  upgrading of existing tools, databases, models and management systems, seasonal, 
monthly and 10-daily planning and operational models and Indus Basin Model Revised, 
development of additional systems client interfaces, operationalization of these tools for 
water/power planning and operation and their linkage and/or transfer to IRSA and to the 
provincial institutions. This would be implemented in close collaboration with IRSA and 
interfaces would be developed for exchange of information, data, models and other tools 
between WAPDA, IRSA, and provinces;  
 
(B2)  sediment management studies for the Indus system in particular possibility of flushing 
sediment through Tarbela reservoir, downstream impact, upstream development of water storage 
facilities, feasibility level designs of sediment flushing facilities etc. The tools and models would 
be developed for future use by WAPDA in continuing work on sediment management as further 
development of the Indus systems proceeds.  Bathymetric surveys of major reservoirs and 
provision of modern bathymetric equipment and systems and training in bathymetric surveys;  
 
(B3)  preparation of power investment plan with a focus on hydropower development in the 
upper Indus and conjunctive operation of dams and other infrastructure.  Development of asset 
management plans for major infrastructure managed and operated by WAPDA and safety 
inspections by national and international panel of experts, etc.  Other laboratory equipment for 
site investigations and quality control of construction and training in use of these equipment 
possibly under specific pilot projects;  
 
(B4)  preparation of feasibility studies and of designs for quickly/easily implementable 
hydropower project suitable for financing by international financing institutions etc., without any 
transboundary and riparian issues.  These studies would also include environment and social 
assessments, and environment/social management plans according to the GOP and World Bank 
and Pakistan.  
 
Page  4
Component C: Project Management and Future Studies (US$5 million). This component would 
support the Government, in particular the Ministry of Water and Power (MoWP) with project 
managementâ
 ”including the coordination of all project related activities, monitoring and 
evaluation of project impacts, and technical and financial audits.   It will also support strategic 
studies and technical assistance that may be identified during the period of project 
implementation. The component is deliberately left flexible in order to include new sub-
components as they arise. Possible areas for funding include training in detailed design, tender 
designs of water/power infrastructure, construction standards and codes, design of dams, 
hydraulic structures, power planning, consulting and contracting services, contract 
administration/management and construction supervision, procurement, financial management, 
legal issues, and environmental, social and water quality issues. Future studies not yet identified 
would subsequently be approved by the Project Steering Committee (PSC) for implementation 
by suitable organizations including federal or provincial governments or other suitable 
organizations.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The TA project mainly features capacity development of the borrower in water resources 
development and management --spread across the entire Indus Basin Irrigation System. No 
physical works are envisaged under the TA loan and both MoWP and WAPDA will be 
capacitated in undertaking various technical studies for water resources development and 
management. Two of the three counterpart agencies MoWP & the Planning Commission are 
located in Islamabad while WAPDA is housed in Lahore. The Indus basin irrigation system itself 
is characterized with gently rolling mountains in the upper Punjab to flat plains of Punjab and 
Sindh province. Most of the Basin system is well developed and presents wheat-rice, wheat-
cotton or Wheat-Sugarcane cropping pattern.  Though area under orchard, vegetables and other 
high value crops is increasing.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
MOWP per se does not have separate environmental unit at its headquarters though WAPDA, a 
water resources development authority as Ministry’s functionary has had dedicated directorate 
for environmental management. Planning Commission on the other hand also runs a fully 
developed environment section, which reviews the adequacy of coverage for environmental 
management of development projects besides number of other activities. Since responsibility for 
the planning, design and implementation of water resources development project rests with 
WAPDA, during the implementation of the TA loan, capacity of the environment directorate of 
WAPDA will be evaluated and enhanced, if required. Similarly the environment section of the 
Planning Commission has been under heavy load of ensuring environmental prudence ever since 
the Prime Minister’s directive in 2005 to integrate environmental management in all the PC-Is of 
the development projects, it is imperative to review their capacity and enhance where necessary. 
In case of MOWP, IPDF will be asked to designate one of their senior technical officer as an 
environment focal person to oversee and ensure compliance by the Ministry’s main functionaries 
with the country’s regulatory and Bank’s safeguards policies requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava (SAROQ) 
Page  5
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/20/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Although the project is category B there will not be an EA. The project is a Technical 
Assistance and it has been agreed with OPCQC that no EA is required for the project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
03/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
03/15/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
