Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/30/2009 
Report No.:  AC4272
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P114278 
Project Name:  Thar Coal and Power Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael C. Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (55%);Power (45%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.20
4.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project Developmental Objectives is to help the government strengthen the enabling 
policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks suitable to attract qualified investors to develop 
the coal-to-power sector in an economic, environmentally and socially acceptable 
manner.  
 
Expected Project outcomes would be as follows:  
 
•
Implementation of enabling policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks  
 
•
Efficiently operating regulatory and investment agencies  
 
•
Qualified investors are attracted to Thar Block I (given the state of financial 
markets in 2009 and uncertainty over their performance over the next few years, financial 
close for an investment of this size may become problematic for reasons beyond control 
of the project.  However, the transaction advisory Terms of Reference will include 
assistance to the Governments of Pakistan and Sindh through negotiations towards 
financial close.)   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be implemented as a partnership between the Province of Sindh (coal 
mining) and Government of Pakistan (coal-fired power development).  The Project 
Page  2
activities will be implemented along the following three components: (i) overarching 
legal, regulatory and institutional strengthening; (ii) transaction advice for Thar Block I; 
and (iii) project management.  
 
Component 1:  Sector Governance and Capacity Building  
 
The objective of this component is to facilitate coal-to-power sector development based 
on international good standards, including ancillary infrastructure development, by 
building the government’s capacity to manage and supervise the sector. To this end, the 
component will comprise:  
 
A. Thar Coal assessment and technical studies (partially co-financed with the 
Government of Sindh under approved PC-IIs schemes):  
 
(i) 
field surveying and data interpretation related to Thar coalfield and in greater 
detail for Thar Block I for which more detailed technical assessment will be undertaken  
 
(ii) 
supervision / technical assistance with the interpretation of the regional hydro 
geological study (in coordination with surface water assessment under the Bank’s Sindh 
Water Sector Improvement Project)  
 
(iii) 
transmission needs study (in coordination with the Bank energy sector projects)  
 
(iv) 
environmental and social sector work, including environmental and social 
baseline assessments for the Thar coalfield, a strategic environmental and social 
assessment for coal-to-power sector, development of a general land-use plan for Thar 
coalfield and a Spatial Development Plan for Block I  
 
B. Policy, legal, regulatory and safeguards advice  
 
(i) 
developing overarching coal and coal bed methane to power sector policy/ legal/ 
regulatory / safeguards (including those related to mineral licensing and tendering 
procedures)  
 
(ii) 
setting up an operational environmental and social management framework for 
coal-to-power sector  
 
C. Institutional Reform and Capacity Building  
 
(i) 
strengthen the capacity of the provincial and federal governments to improve 
sector governance and attract quality private investments for coal and CBM  
 
(ii) 
strengthen and make operational TCEB, including development of procedures, 
guidelines, staff plans and capacity building  
 
(iii) 
Improve regulatory efficiency of the Government of Sindh, including  setting up 
computerized mining cadastre system, geographical information system,  
 
(iv) 
build capacity of the Directorate General for Mines and Minerals (licensing 
authority), the Chief Mine Inspectorate, and Sindh Coal Authority  
 
Component 2: Transaction Advisory Services  
 
The objective of this component is to provide expert advisory services to help attract 
quality private investors to develop Thar Block I.  The methodology and documentation 
that will be developed for this transaction will be applicable to forthcoming developments 
and will assist the government in structuring future coal-to-power transactions.  Proposed 
Page  3
bid methodology is provided in Annex 4.1.  The activities to be supported under this 
component will include:  
 
(i) 
Finalizing bid methodology for a coal mine and power plant(s), Information 
Memorandum, and Transaction Principles and Intentions policy document for Thar Block 
#1 (work will commence under the PPF funding) which will guide the transaction(s)  
 
(ii) 
Provision of transaction advisory services for a coal mine and power plant(s) 
transaction in Thar Block I, including preparation / issuance of requests for proposals, 
and assistance to the government with bid evaluations, negotiations, and financial 
closing.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management and Communications  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure that project financed activities are 
supervised and managed in accordance with the Bank standards.  The component will 
finance:  
 
(i) 
PMU staff costs, including sector specialists (mining, energy), procurement, 
financial management, environmental specialist, social specialist, water specialist, and 
communications specialist  
 
(ii) 
develop communications and outreach strategy in regards to the Project and to 
improve public consultations  
 
(iii) 
training, including short courses, and study tours (not covered under the 
consultants’ assignments)  
 
(iv) 
equipment for the project management  
 
(v) 
security contractors   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in both urban and local areas.  The federal level 
components will be implemented in Islamabad, provincial level - in Sindh Province 
(Karachi and Thar Coal area).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASDI) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is limited to the provision of technical assistance and is not 
expected to result in any negative environmental or social impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The anticipated future activities in the project area include development and opration of 
coal mine, construction and operation of coal-based power plants, and establishment and 
operation of associated ancillaries and support facilities.  These activities may have 
significant potential impacts including changes in topography, land forms and land use; 
soil erosion/contamination; water consumption and/or contamination; air quality 
deterioration; loss of natural habitat and vegetation, and threat/damage to wildlife 
resources; land acquisition and involuntary resettlement issues; effects on the livelihoods 
of the local population; employment opportunities; safety and public health hazards for 
the local community; influx of workforce; and other environmental and social issues.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
No safeguard policy issues are triggered for the proposed TA project. The TA will assist 
the government to assess salient issues and design social and environmental management 
systems to facilitate planning for activities needed to address potential social impacts of 
future coal mining and coal-based power production.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NA   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/30/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This a TA project which will support an environmental and social management 
framework and a strategic environment and social assessment. Details of the approach 
and content of these two outputs are publically disclosed. The disclosure note referred to 
above has been sent to the InfoShop for concurrent release.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
Page  6
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael C. Stanley 
04/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid 
03/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
03/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/23/2009 
Comments:  This TA project is cleared on the understanding that ISDS and ToR for ESMF and 
SESA will be disclosed. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
04/29/2009 
Comments:  Cleared by Salman Zaheer, Sector Manager, Energy, SAR - 04/28/2009 and by Paulo 
de Sa, Sector Minager Oil, Gas & Mining, on 04/29/2009 
