Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4245 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P112901 
Project Name: Punjab Large Cities Project 
Task Team Leader: Raja Rehan Arshad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 5, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (45%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (35%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (33%);Access to urban services 
and housing (33%);Municipal finance (17%);Decentralization (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to support Punjab Large Cities in developing 
more effective institutional and fiscal frameworks for improved management and governance of 
metropolitan areas.  
 
The achievement of the development objective will position and capacitate the GoPunjab and 
Punjab Large Cities to deliver sustainable municipal services in the medium to long-term.  The 
project will align and clarify the roles and responsibilities between the Province and the cities to 
allow for a locally empowered and integrated city management accountable to the citizens and 
province; support the development of strategic and sustainable urban investment programs; and, 
assist local governments to manage their finances and assets better, all in order to lay the 
foundation for economic growth and poverty reduction at the local level through better municipal 
service delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Improving governance, management and service delivery in the cities will require taking a multi-
year sequential and programmatic approach in which the proposed reforms and changes are 
carefully sequenced within an overall vision.  The proposed approach involves three critical 
stages for reform implementation, including: (i) "creating" cities as autonomous entities that can 
be held accountable for their performance through the creation of dedicated management 
structures and political authorities for metropolitan areas; (ii) strengthening the capacity and 
management systems of the city authorities, and; (iii) scaling-up investment in urban service 
delivery, focusing on supporting city governments to make the required investments in urban 
infrastructure.  
 
At its core, the program will use fiscal instruments as incentive mechanisms for institutional 
restructuring of urban service delivery systems, i.e., through grants linked to institutional 
performance, service delivery performance, capacity building and program monitoring. The 
proposed project would support the five City District Governments in Punjab with a focus on 
metropolitan areas, and comprise of four components.  
 
o
Component 1: Empowering and incentivizing cities to improve governance and service 
delivery performance in their management of the built environment (City Performance 
Improvement Component):  This would comprise an outcome-based, programmatic grant that 
would be linked to performance by the provincial government and the cities in the following 
areas:  
 
Provincial Government Undertaking: This will entail: clarification of the administrative 
boundaries of metropolitan areas; alignment of key sectoral agencies with each other and with 
these boundaries; introduction of a new performance-oriented fiscal architecture; strengthening 
of the primary accountability of the urban agencies to elected city governments; and, reorienting 
and strengthening provincial oversight of city performance.  The achievement of clearly defined 
and sequenced actions will constitute the key performance indicators that will determine a 
platform of minimum funding to the cities which will, in turn, be linked, to higher levels of 
funding, according to performance under (b) below.  The higher levels of funding would in turn 
be graduated according to level of performance by the cities.  
 
City Governments' Undertaking: This will entail: improvements in financial management; 
strengthening of sustainability of service delivery; strengthening of oversight and accountability; 
and, building of effective and accountable institutions and service delivery entities and enhanced 
performance by them.  City governments would be able to use this funding for activities which: 
(i) are reflected in the approved budget of the city and its agencies (and are consistent with its 
Capital Improvement Program (CIP)); and, (ii) are only spent within the notified metropolitan 
area of each city.  No further specific expenditure or project approvals would be anticipated.  
 
o
Component 2: Strengthening capabilities for managing the built environment (Capacity 
Building Grant): This component would be available to the province for meeting capacity 
enhancement needs of the provincial and all five city governments and to the city governments 
for specific programs to enhance their planning, management, or operational capabilities.  
 
o
Component 3: Program Implementation Support: Financing for the Program 
Implementation Support Grant would mainly be provided by the GoPunjab from its own sources 
under the already established Urban Unit.  This would include program coordination and 
Page  3
reporting requirements, overall financial management and reporting, as well as monitoring, 
evaluation and performance audit requirements. However, this component will be available in 
case of any additional needs for implementation support.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The CIP program will cover several sectors in urban development, including transport, 
wastewater collection and treatment etc. These will be spread in five large cities of Punjab 
Province - Lahore, Faisalabad, Gujranwala, Multan and Rawalpindi. These cities are in the close 
proximity of rivers, which receive untreated sewage effluent. Surface water is the major drinking 
water source for downstream river water users. The specific investment projects will be 
identified and prepared under annual city CIP programs, which also includes asset management.  
Project impacts, including environmental and social impacts, will be identified and planned for 
mitigation as part of the project planning and approval process.  The project will develop an 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to guide the planning and 
implementation of necessary safeguard impaction mitigation measures.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Urban Unit will assume the overall responsibility for the compliance of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and implementation of planning impact mitigation 
measures.  Under the Urban Unit, the relevant departments and agencies of the five cities will be 
responsible for the actual planning and implementation of necessary mitigation measures to 
address the environmental and social safeguard impacts of proposed investment activities under 
the CIP, including asset management.  The Urban Unit and five municipal governments have 
varying degrees of exposures and experiences in implementing environmental and social 
safeguard measures.  However, their experiences and capacity are limited in planning and 
implementing such safeguard measures following World Bank policies and international best 
practices.  The project teams on both the government and World Bank sides are aware of this 
shortfall in capacity and have planned to address this through capacity building measures in the 
institutional development component.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Annual CIPs and asset management components of the project could have significant adverse 
environmental impacts and therefore require adequate mitigation. By triggering this policy, the 
Urban Unit will develop ESMF, an umbrella document, setting the broader guidelines and 
framework to steer the CIP & asset management preparation & implementation. CIP & asset 
management specific environmental assessments will be carried out as & when prepared and 
implemented per country's regulatory requirements and Bank’s safeguards policies.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Investment of CIP program in some cities may have impacts on physical cultural resources.  
This will be addressed in the planning and implementation of ESMF for individual investment 
projects.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Investment of CIP programs will trigger this policy.  Land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement are expected for investment projects under the CIP programs.  These impacts will be 
identified and planned for mitigation under individual investment projects under city annual 
CIPs. An ESMF will be prepared in line domestic laws and World Bank OP 4.12 to guide the 
planning and implementation of necessary mitigation measures.  The ESMF will lay out the 
basic policy principles, planning and implementation procedures, institutional setup and other 
implementation arrangements to address land acquisition and involuntary resettlement impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF will be developed by October 1, 2009.   It will be approved within the 
government and the World Bank before project appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raja Rehan Arshad 
09/02/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
08/24/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. The ESMF will be reviewed at appraisal stage. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Fook Chuan Eng 
08/25/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
