Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4041 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P110946 
Project Name: PAKISTAN - Technical Assistance Loan for the implementation of the 
National Environment Policy 
Task Team Leader: Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: January 5, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDI 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (30%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (20%);General energy sector (20%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);General industry and trade sector (10%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The ultimate goal of the proposed Pakistan TAL for the implementation of the NEP is to 
strengthen the government’s capacity for environmental management, with the long-term 
purpose of enabling: (i) the set up of an institutional and policy framework that will ensure the 
environmental sustainability, including the sustainability of future infrastructure investments; (ii) 
incremental reductions of environmental degradation and its costs, particularly in terms of 
environmental health and more specifically that of children; and (iii) development and 
implementation of a climate change strategy.  
 
The project development objective is to enhance GoP’s capacity to: (i) strengthen country 
environmental systems, including the capacity underlying its policy and institutional framework 
to identify and address environmental problems/priorities effectively and taking into account 
concerns of stakeholders (including the most vulnerable groups), as well as its processes to 
adequately monitor and evaluate progress to overcome these environmental priority problems; 
(ii) design efficient and effective environmental policies aimed at sustaining the infrastructure 
Page  2
platform needed for accelerated economic growth and improving the business climate; (iii) 
design interventions to reduce environmental degradation and its economic consequences; and 
(iv) develop a strategy for climate change adaptation and mitigation.  
 
These objectives will be met through an approach that combines three components: (i) technical 
assistance activities  to strengthen Pakistan country environmental systems aimed at developing 
local capacity for environmental priority setting and overall sustainable environmental 
management; (ii) design of interventions and implementation of pilots aimed at building capacity 
of provincial environmental management agencies through a direct, participatory approach that 
achieves demonstrable improvements of environmental quality; and (iii) engagement of federal 
and provincial authorities and other stakeholders to hold open discussions and build agreements 
on a climate change strategy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1. Institutional strengthening of country systems (est. US$8 million).  
 
This component will support the government in the strengthening of institutional capacity for 
environmental management, consistent with the provisions of the NEP, both at the federal and 
the provincial levels. It will focus on providing federal and provincial governments the technical 
assistance needed to: i) identify and develop priority setting and coordination mechanisms; ii) 
engage a broad range of stakeholders in the development of environmental policies, and iii) 
design effective and efficient public policies to tackle environmental priorities.  
 
In order to achieve these objectives, Component 1 was designed to promote a learning-by-doing 
approach focused on providing environmental and other key agencies with the skills and 
incentives that will enable them to promote sound environmental management and carry out 
interventions that will result in improved environmental conditions. Activities under Component 
1
will further encourage the development of province-driven mechanisms (i.e. environmental 
priority setting) aimed at achieving concrete improvements in local environmental quality. 
Component 1 will involve the following activities.  
 
i) 
Building the capacity to set environmental priorities linked with economic growth and 
poverty reduction;  
 
ii) 
Establishment of mechanisms for coordination of environmental management agencies to 
ensure that environmental priorities at the federal and provincial level are adequately identified 
and addressed;  
 
iii) 
Establishment of mechanisms of cross-sectoral coordination to ensure that all government 
and non-governmental stakeholders are represented in the management of environmental 
priorities;  
 
iv) 
Improving effectiveness of environmental management agencies to put in place action 
plans and develop efficient and effective interventions at the federal and provincial level that 
address environmental priorities;  
 
v)
Strengthening policy systems, including regulatory frameworks and their 
implementation;  
 
vi) 
Strengthening of social accountability mechanisms to open environmental agencies’ 
performance to public scrutiny;  
 
vii) 
Monitoring and evaluation;  
 
viii) 
Continuous improvement of environmental management.  
 
Component 2. 
Reducing the costs of environmental degradation (est. US$18 million).  
Page  3
With evidence that the poor are disproportionately affected by environmental degradation and 
more so that children are particularly vulnerable, this component will finance the design and 
implementation of pilots aiming at demonstrating the feasibility and the measurable impacts that 
can be achieved through investments focused on decreasing environmental health impacts on 
children. Therefore, pilots will address the country’s top priorities in terms of environmental 
degradation, which are also the leading causes of children mortality from environmental risk 
factors, such as indoor and urban air pollution.  
 
Pilots will be implemented at the provincial and district level with the objective of 
demonstrating specific, replicable measures to improve environmental quality. The scope of 
pilots will vary from province to province in order to target varying local environmental issues, 
but all pilots will be required to address national environmental priorities. For example, a pilot 
aiming at reducing impacts of air pollution in a province may target indoor pollution caused by 
the use of solid fuels for cooking, while one in a major city may focus on vehicular inspections 
controls to reduce mobile air pollution sources.  
 
Consistent with the learning-by-doing approach to be followed through Component 1, the 
design and implementation of pilots will also contribute to strengthening the capacity of 
environmental agencies to develop local methodologies for identifying environmental priorities, 
quantitatively assessing the risks and impacts of the various issues, elevating these risks to the 
provincial or federal governments, designing measures to address risks, informing the affected 
communities and finally implementing and monitoring these measures. Pilot proposals will be 
prepared by the provinces and considered for funding according to the following preliminary 
eligibility criteria: (i) pilots consistent with identified environmental priorities, which are also in 
line with local priorities and that fit within the framework of the NEP; (ii) pilots that contribute 
to the country’s socio-economic growth as reflected by MDGs 1, 4 and 7; (iii) demonstrated 
cost-effectiveness of intervention (e.g. benefit-cost ratio greater than one); (iv) impact of 
intervention benefiting the most vulnerable groups, (v) replicability potential; (v) available co-
financing and resources from other sources, including the private sector and NGOs; (vi) adequate 
quantitative indicators for monitoring and evaluation; (vii) disclosure plan prepared; and (viii) 
procurement and financial mechanisms in place. Institutional arrangements and evaluation 
criteria will be discussed with the GoP in detail and will be refined during Project preparation.  
 
A
national committee with substantial provincial representation will be set up by the Project to 
review and select eligible proposals for pilots. The committee will closely monitor the 
implementation of pilots to ensure the expected level of stakeholder participation, while at the 
same time meeting the proposed outcomes in terms of reductions of environmental-related health 
costs. Results of pilots will be disseminated through periodic nation-wide public awareness 
campaigns.  
 
Component 3. 
Climate change and carbon finance (est. US$2 million).  
 
This component will assist the government in strengthening the institutional capacity of key 
agencies, including the existing Climate Change Cell at the MoE, through the development of a 
national strategy for climate change that will focus on identifying adaptation and mitigation 
measures that are incremental to local initiatives, in a manner that they also capture global 
benefits. The objective of this approach is to leave the government well positioned to participate 
actively in international negotiations on climate change and related issues, facilitate access to 
international resources available to finance local investments by the public and private sectors 
for climate change mitigation and adaptation, and create an enabling environment for public and 
Page  4
private sector investments to deal with the cost of adaptation. There are multiple sources of funds 
currently available to finance climate change-
related interventions, which despite the country’s 
many priorities, are not being fully utilized. There are also multiple groups doing work on 
climate change, in many cases duplicating efforts. The lack of coordination between stakeholders 
makes it difficult to optimize available resources. By assessing the institutional framework, the 
current level of capacity and the current information needs, this component will assist the 
government in making its interventions more focused and more effective. Moreover, private 
sector participation may increase as work in areas where prior market or institutional failures 
made it unfeasible.  
 
The national strategy will also assist the country in aligning its priorities with those of 
international development donors in order to find financing for global climate change needs that 
have distinct local impacts (primarily along the government’s priority sectors). The strategy will 
also identify and propose action plans to address all existing prerequisites to access international 
funds. In general terms the strategy will focus on the following areas:  
 
i) 
Identification of priorities for action.  
 
ii) 
Strengthening of institutional capacity of key agencies.  
 
iii) 
Developing of climate change strategy, action plan and programs for adaptation and 
mitigation.  
 
iv) 
Developing an approach to assess the incremental costs of climate-proofing investments.  
 
v)
Supporting the development and preparation of programmatic carbon financing 
operations.  
 
Component 4.    Project Management.  
 
The goal of this subcomponent is to establish the coordination and oversight mechanisms 
through which representation from federal and provincial environmental management agencies 
and other stakeholders will hold discussions, reach agreements, carry out Project activities, 
monitor and evaluate outcomes, and take measures to continuously improve environmental 
management. The GoP will have overall responsibility for Project management, which will be 
coordinated through the MoE. The following bodies will have a critical role in the Project:  
 
a. 
Steering Committee (SC). The SC will be chaired by the Secretary, MoE and will be 
integrated by the Secretaries of the four provincial environmental protection agencies; the 
Director General, Pak EPA; representatives of the Planning Commission, and P&D Departments. 
SC membership may be adjusted as needed to strengthen Project implementation. The SC will be 
a
high-level body that will provide policy guidance, monitor Project implementation and 
outcomes, and address issues requiring resolution. The SC will hold regular meetings quarterly, 
but may also call to extraordinary meetings if so required by pressing issues.  
 
b.
Project Selection Committee (PSC). The PSC will be a technical body that will deliberate 
and approve specific interventions to be supported by the Project. The PSC will be chaired by the 
Director General, Environment of the MoE, and will be integrated by technical representatives 
from Pak EPA, Planning Commission and representatives from environmental and planning 
agencies of all provinces. The Committee will meet at least quarterly, although the frequency of 
these meetings may be adjusted based on implementation experience.  
 
c. 
NEP Project Management Cells (PMC). A Federal PMC will be created under the MoE 
to provide operational support, carry out all the technical assistance-related procurement and 
financial management aspects of the Project, and integrate information on Project 
implementation. The Federal PMC will serve as secretariat of the SC and PSC and will be 
Page  5
responsible for integrating quarterly and annual reports on Project implementation. In addition, 
small provincial PMCs will be created to support implementation of provincial pilots, oversee 
compliance with SC and PSC decisions, and provide the information that will be integrated by 
the Federal PMC.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nation-wide, as institutional strengthening activities and pilots are expected in all Pakistani 
provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Bank project portfolio in Pakistan is extensive. Through past and current projects the 
Borrower has demonstrated institutional capacity to address safeguard policies. This specific 
project will support the implementation of policies, programs, and tools to incorporate 
environmental issues in key sectors. The TAL will play a key role in mitigating adverse 
environmental impacts associated with long-term environmental degradation in Pakistan. 
Environmental impacts of the project are therefore expected to be positive.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/01/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NA   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
12/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/30/2008 
Comments:  C;eared: Category "C" endorsed at this stage. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Parmesh Shah 
12/30/2008 
Comments:  Cleared on behalf of Karin Kemper, SM.  Clearance filed in IRIS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
