Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC3895
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P101684 
Project Name:  Trade and Transport Facilitation Project - II 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Noel Guillossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 7, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (65%);Other domestic and international trade 
(35%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Managing for development results 
(P);Export development and competitiveness (S);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To improve performance of trade and transport logistics by facilitating: (a) the 
implementation of the NTCIP; and (b) the simplificat
ion and modernization of Pakistan’s 
international trade procedures and practices   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two components:  
 
a. National Trade Corridor (NTC). The NTC component has two sub-components:  
 
•
Technical Advisory Services: This sub-component includes studies and technical 
assistance which will underpin the reforms and investments in support of NTCIP in each 
sub-sector: ports, railways, road freight industry, highways, air transport, energy logistics, 
and other transport logistics.  
 
i. 
The first-year activities include preparation of the Pakistan ports' master plan and 
the preparation of an implementation strategy for the trucking policy including piloting 
implementation of the policy.  
Page  2
ii. 
The project will also help update annual rolling five-year business plans for the 
various sectors involved in NTCIP and consolidate them into one single NTCIP business 
plan that will provide the sectoral objectives, performance indicators and financial 
resources required to achieve the objectives.  
 
iii. 
The project will provide support to targeted industries to improve their in-house 
logistics. This has been estimated to generate ten times the benefits expected from 
reforms and improved efficiencies in the public transport and logistics sector. The 
required support is being defined in an on-going study carried out by IFC.  
 
iv. 
The project will continue support started under an Australian Aid grant for non-
lending technical assistance to build a monitoring and evaluation framework of NTCIP 
and a decision support system for reforms and investment in the Planning Commission. A 
fourth logistics costs study will be carried out at end of project to evaluate progress since 
the similar studies in 1996, 2000 and 2006.  
 
v.
Activities already identified for the subsequent years include: definition and 
support to implementation of a strategy to improve governance and increase 
implementation capacity in the construction industry, (additional activities to be defined 
at appraisal).  
 
vi.Additional activities during the subsequent years will be defined by annual needs 
assessments. This may include development of Public-Private Partnership in the transport 
sector as well as feasibility of investments as identified in the business plans.  
 
vii. 
The component will also support unimodal or multi-modal poverty and social 
impact assessments to implement the recommendations of the Strategic Environmental, 
Poverty and Social Assessment (SEPSA) that is being carried out. The component will 
also provide the resources necessary to strengthen the capacity of the relevant sector 
ministries to manage environmental, poverty and social issues in their sector.  
 
viii. 
A media and communication program will be carried out to promote public 
understanding of the NTCIP.  
 
•
Project Coordination and NTC Component Management: This sub-component 
includes: coordination, supervision, monitoring and approval of the activities included in 
the Technical Advisory Services sub-component; consolidation of progress and reporting 
on activities of each sub-sector; quality control of procurement and financial 
management.  
 
b.
Trade and Transport Facilitation (TTF). The component builds on the results achieved 
by TTFP1, extending efforts to streamline and integrate trade data exchange and official 
controls, sustaining public/private sector collaborative institutional framework and 
strengthening the domestic logistic industry. TTF has two sub-components:  
 
•
Technical Advisory Services: The sub-component includes the following 
activities:  
 
i. 
Reassess and update the national trade facilitation strategy and assist Pakistan in 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations on Trade Facilitation as part of 
Pakistan’s trade policy with realistic program and results to be achieved within the 
framework of NTCIP;  
 
ii. 
Strengthen cooperation mechanisms for international trade facilitation and 
cooperation between public and private sectors at regional, national and local level;  
Page  3
iii. 
Analyze the trade procedures documents and efficiency of trade procedures and 
new facilitation instruments for trade, transport and transit with particular reference to 
negotiations under the umbrella of the WTO;  
 
iv. 
Analyze transit operations. Undertake feasibility studies for investments in 
logistics infrastructureinland clearance facilities;  
 
v.
Evaluate performance of key sectors against benchmarks in the international trade 
transaction chain to measure improvements over time;  
 
vi. 
Provide capacity building to the private sector and selected public sector 
institutions;  
 
vii. 
Conduct small pilot project of transit tracking system and provide ad-hoc advisory 
services to NTCIP in trade facilitation related areas.  
 
•
TTF Component Management: This sub-component includes overseeing, 
monitoring and evaluating the implementation of TA activities in the Technical Advisory 
Services sub-component.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will improve performance of trade and transport logistics along the National 
Trade Corridor which links the main industrial centers in Punjab and neighboring 
countries in the north-west (Afghanistan) and north (China) with international markets 
through the southern Karachi area ports and the Gwadar port.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASDI) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No environmental or social impacts are foreseen.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will finance analytical work for the National Trade Corridor Improvement 
Program (NTCIP). Environmental and social priorities of the NTCIP are being identified 
in the on-going Strategic Environmental Poverty and Social Assessment (SEPSA).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project will support environmental and social impact assessments to 
implement the recommendations of the SEPSA. The project will also provide the 
resources necessary to strengthen the capacity of the relevant sector ministries to manage 
environmental, poverty and social issues in their sector.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders involved in NTCIP are being identified and mechanisms for consultation 
and disclosure are being designed as part of the SEPSA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project does not require an environmental assessment. A memorandum confirming 
this decision is being disclosed at Infoshop.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Noel Guillossou 
01/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
02/01/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
02/04/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/22/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. A formal memo outlining disclosure requirement has been issued. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
01/23/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
