Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
Date prepared/updated:  December 17, 2007 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID: P0101640  
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Pakistan Community-Based Renewable Energy Development in Northern Areas 
and Chitral 
Task Team Leader:  Jeremy Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 2008 
Estimated ERPA Signature: March 2008  
Managing Unit:  SASDN 
Lending Instrument:  Carbon Offset 
Sector:  Renewable Energy 
Theme: Climate change 
Financing amounts by source:  
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (IDA) 
$7.028 million 
Public sources of funding (Northern Area Government, PCRET) 
$1.583 million 
Private Sector  
$1.980 million 
Commercial Loan 
$2.688 million 
Community Investment 
$3.320 million 
 TOTAL 
$16.599 
million 
 
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
The proposed development objectives of the Carbon Offset Project are: 
·
Increase access to modern energy from renewable energy sources. 
·
Reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide.  
 
The Carbon Offset project will provide additional support for the achievement of the following 
objectives, namely: (a) develop hydropower potential in an environmentally and socially 
sustainable manner so as to help meet local electricity demand, (b) improve access of rural areas 
to modern electricity services, and (c) improve standards of living for the poor through provision 
of community level infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description: 
 
This carbon offset project consists of purchase of ERs generated from at least 103 run-of-river 
hydroelectric plants ranging in size from .035 MW to .6 MW, with combined capacity of ~15 
MW in different locations in Pakistan’s remote Northern Areas and Chitral by the World Bank-
42583 
Page  2
managed CDCF.  The program shall be financed by a combination of PPAF grant funds, 
government contributions, equity contributions and domestic borrowing repaid through future 
carbon finance payments and community payments recovered through tariff charges. 
 
The hydroelectric plants would be managed on a community basis, with program implementation 
support from the Aga Khan Rural Support Program, and would include active community 
involvement at the identification, design, implementation and operation stages.   The operation of 
these renewable energy systems will provide increased access to modern energy services to an 
estimated 22,181 households (with associated social benefits) currently depending on traditional 
fuels, kerosene, and diesel-fired gensets to meet their energy needs.  Operational costs will be 
recovered from users through tariffs whose level shall be determined by the operator of the plant, 
a
“Maintenance Committee” formed by the beneficiary community, and other stakeholders at a 
level which shall be sufficient to cover all maintenance, repair, depreciation and loan repayment 
expenses. 
 
Both local and imported technology will by used for the mini-hydel units, depending on site 
conditions and operational specifications.  The private equipment supply companies shall 
provide warranty and after-sales service to the communities. Technical support will be provided 
by AKRSP, with additional support provided by NAPWD and CWD (Chitral Works 
Department) for assistance in identification and commissioning stages and in capacity building. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
The project is located in the Northern Areas and Chitral (NAC). The landscape is characterized 
with high mountains, steep gorges, natural streams, cliff rocks and forests in the upper reaches. 
The area, blessed with nature’s beauty, also houses some famous lakes/wetlands attracting local 
and foreign tourists. NAC is rich in precious and semi precious stones and contributes a 
handsome foreign exchange through exports. Most part of the area is outside the monsoon belt, 
and precipitation is generally in the form of snowfall. Due to the very tough living conditions, 
and relatively smaller population size, only minimum infrastructure is witnessed in the project 
area. Kailash people, an indigenous group, are also a prominent feature of the Chitral valley. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Javaid Afzal, SASDN 
Imtiaz Alvi, SASDS 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous and ethnic groups may be present in communities where micro-hydro scheme will 
be constructed, specifically the Kalash Community in Chitral. Given the successful social 
mobilization and developmental activities currently being carried out by AKRSP, especially the 
inclusion of disadvantaged groups in the formation of self-governing community organizations, 
the policy requirements of OD 4.20 to ensure the participation and empowerment of these 
groups throughout the planning and implementation phases of the micro-hydro schemes and 
that these groups are provided assistance in accordance to their priorities are adequately 
addressed by the design of the project.  
 
In case of Kalash C
ommunity/indigenous groups’ presence in the local community participating 
in micro-hydro scheme, the Terms of Partnership (TOP) to be signed between AKRSP and local 
community includes the following: 
i) 
List of Indigenous groups present in the community; 
ii)  All indigenous groups are actively involved and represented in the community 
organization participating in the micro-hydro scheme; 
iii) developmental interventions being executed and planned by the community 
organization benefit the indigenous groups/Kalash Community as well; 
iv) Indigenous groups are represented on the various project committees set up by the 
local community for project construction and O&M; 
v)  A summary of community managed developmental interventions (both planned and 
executed) benefiting indigenous groups/Kalash Community attached with the TOP. 
 
AKRSP appointed environmental and social supervisor will monitor active participation of 
indigenous groups at all stage of project implementation. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
It is a pre-requisite of AKRSP to have dispute free sites for construction of power house and 
other structures. AKRSP will not initiate any sub-project if there are any disputes about land 
compensation, water rights, etc. The required land will be provided by the community free of 
cost and any disputes before, during or after sub-project implementation will be resolved by the 
community. AKRSP has a mechanism in place to verify that local community has not coerced 
somebody to donate land and that due compensation has been paid, as needed. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The project does not envisage any large scale, significant or irreversible adverse environmental 
impacts due mainly to the smallness of the micro-hydel units, capacity ranges between 30 kW to 
600 kW. However, some potential environmental and social issues may arise due to the design, 
construction and operation of sub-project schemes. Most of the environmental and social issues 
related with the design part have been avoided by siting sub-project schemes close to the 
beneficiary communities, and by employing simpler design practices. Land required for power 
house and other structures would be provided by the community free of cost. Similarly, water 
taken out of a stream for power generation at the power house will be put back into the stream 
therefore insignificant and short term impacts are expected on the aquatic life in the section of 
de-watered stream. Small scale soil erosion, minor physico-biological impacts due to the 
controlled blasting to cut rocks, removal of vegetation and of some trees to be used as poles and 
possible loss of agricultural land due to the siting of power house are some other potential 
environmental and social impacts during the sub-project construction. Inadequate disposal of 
waste material during the construction and/or during the operation of the project may also result 
in some low level environmental impacts. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
The communities in the project area are likely to benefit from the project with improved access 
to modern facilities, and combined with other future development activities, one could imagine 
improvement in the livelihood of the benefiting communities. The project will also contribute in 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, thereby supporting and contributing to the global efforts 
towards minimizing climate changes.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
In the absence of Project, the communities would use firewood, kerosene oil, diesel generators 
and dry-cell batteries to meet their daily livelihood requirements. There is enough evidence to 
suggest that in the absence of this project, the use of diesel based power generation would 
multiply in the area, which would result in increased GHG emissions and deterioration of air 
quality.  As evident by the baseline survey of the area, indoor pollution adversely affects the 
health of local population, especially women and children.  The absence of Project would trigger 
increased use of forest resources for domestic use and would have a negative impact on the forest 
cover resulting in loss of vegetation and increased levels of soil erosion and floods in the rainy 
season. Thus, the proposed project due to its far reaching environmental benefits has been 
presented to the CDCF for purchase of ERs. 
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
AKRSP has, since 1991, successfully completed about 240 micro-hydel schemes in six districts 
of the Northern Areas of Pakistan. Encouraged by the positive results, the organization has, 
recently installed some mini-hydel power plants, which are operating successfully.  By now, 
AKRSP has installed a total of about 10 MW of micro-hydel capacity in the region. These 
projects have been executed and maintained by the local communities, while AKRSP has 
provided technical and financial support and trained community based plant operators. AKRSP 
has also won the prestigious Ashden Award (Green Oscar) in 2004 for its micro-hydel projects in 
the area. AKRSP has developed a series of environmental assessment forms starting from 
screening of projects to scoping of environmental and social issues and their management, and 
environmental review form 
–
evaluating projects’ environmental performance, besides 
undertaking a self-standing initial environmental examination (IEE) study for the project.
 
As outlined in the IEE report and based on the past experience in the similar projects, AKRSP 
through its Program Manager/Coordinator (CPI) will assume the overall responsibility for 
compliance with environmental and social management requirements of the project. The 
Community Physical Infrastructure (CPI) section of AKRSP will be responsible for the 
environmental performance of project committees, and maintenance committees of every sub-
project during construction and operation. Site engineers will ensure that they effectively 
implement all environmental and social management measures stipulated in the EMP, which will 
be predefined in the Terms of Partnership (ToP) with the beneficiary community at the start of 
each sub-project. AKRSP will also appoint an environmental and social supervisor in overseeing 
and monitoring the environmental performance of project committees during construction, and 
maintenance committees during operation.  
 
AKRSP’s past experience in implementing similar projects and the proposed institutional 
structure for environmental management appears to be adequate enough in ensuring effective 
environmental and social safeguards for the project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Approximately 103 sub-projects are expected to benefit as many communities. Almost all the 
sub-projects have been identified and finalized in close consultation with the local communities. 
In fact the local communities requested AKRSP’s assistance for the sub-projects. The local 
communities are not only responsible to provide land for free of cost but also to contribute 20 
percent of the project cost in kind. They are also part of the committees to oversee project 
operations and to ensure maintenance if and when required. Besides communities, the major 
stakeholders in the project are the Government of Northern Areas and the district Government of 
Chitral, NWFP & the NAs EPA. Regulatory requirements of the country have been met by 
attending to the respective EPAs clearance procedures. 
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/26/06 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/25/07 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
NA 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [X ]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Page  7
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [X ]          N/A [  ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [X ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [X ]          No [ ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [ ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [X ]          N/A [  ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [ ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [ ]          N/A [X] 
Page  8
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Jeremy Levin 
12/11/07 
Environmental Specialist: 
Javaid Afzal 
12/11/07 
Social Development Specialist 
Imtiaz Alvi 
12/11/07 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Sanjay Srivastava 
12/13/07 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
2/4/08 
Comments:   
