Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4021 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/07/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P114508 
Project Name: Third Partnership for Polio Eradication Project 
Task Team Leader: Inaam Haq 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to assist Pakistan’s efforts to eradicate polio through 
supply of the Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) for the country’s SIAs during 2009-11. The primary 
targeted group for the proposed project is Pakistan’s under five children. Success of the program 
in meeting its main objectives is proposed to be measured by the following indicative indicators: 
a) OPV administered to at least 90% of the under-five children in the targeted provinces in SIA; 
and b) timely arrival of the OPV at the district stores of the District Department of Health, i.e., at 
least three working days before the scheduled dates of the SIA   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Pakistan’s Polio Eradication Initiative (PEI) has three components: (i) the procurement and 
supply of OPV; (ii) supplemental operations including cold chain, social mobilization and 
training; and (iii) AFB surveillance.  The proposed project will finance only the first component 
of PEI which comprises "the Project" as in the parent projects.  
 
The proposed project will be financed through Specific Investment Lending. As the two Polio 
projects, the proposed credit will be on standard IDA terms with a special provision for a third 
Page  2
party funded Trust Fund to cover the service and commitment fees and purchase the credit at its 
net present value once the project has been successfully completed.  The arrangements for the 
implementation of the IDA buy-down mechanism for polio eradication projects are in place.  
IDA would support Pakistan PEI and global eradication efforts in partnership with the Bill and 
Melinda Gates Foundation and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) through United Nations 
Foundation and  
 
The proposed credit would finance the procurement of OPV for SIAs to be used during July 
2009-June 2011. The estimated costs of OPV for 2009/11 are US $ 80 million.  The Government 
of Japan is likely to provide parallel financing of US $10 million for procurement of OPV. IDA 
would finance about US $ 70 million. The cost of supplemental operations and surveillance will 
be financed by WHO and UNICEF.  
 
The proposed Credit does not require additional implementation capacity beyond what is 
already in place for PEI.  However, the implementation arrangements for SIAs in security 
compromised areas will need to be adjusted to take into ongoing conflict. The project will be 
monitored through the existing monitoring mechanisms and already functional surveillance 
system. The existing procurement, financial management and disbursement arrangements 
including accounting and reporting systems will continue as applied under the parent project. 
UNICEF will undertake the procurement and supply of OPV through its international 
procurement division, based in Copenhagen.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Pakistan: all four provinces, Islamabad Capital Territory, Federally Administered Tribal Areas, 
Federally Administered Northern Areas and Azad Jammu and Kashmir.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Program Manager of the National Program of Immunization is responsible for 
Safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The proposed project involves the supply and use of OPV in small plastic vials which need to 
be disposed off. The disposal of the vials is undertaken in accordance with the WHO guidelines 
for polio vaccination campaigns as being already practiced. No sharps such as needles or vial 
cutters are involved in the oral vaccination methods and the program produces no infected 
medical waste.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
The proposed project as the parent projects will be implemented and support SIAs in Azad 
Jammu and Kashmir, a disputed area between India and Pakistan.  By financing the proposed 
credit, the Bank does not intend to make any conclusion on the legal or any other status of the 
disputed territory or to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed 
areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/20/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Inaam Haq 
01/07/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/07/2009 
Comments:  Cleared as Category C; project is transfered to SASHD for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
01/07/2009 
Comments:  Cleared without additional comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
