Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3588
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P110099 
Project Name:  Water Sector Capacity Buildling and Advisory Services Project (WCAP) 
Task Team Leader:  Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Renewable energy 
(25%);Irrigation and drainage (25%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Managing for development results (P);Other 
public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
53.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project objective is to support capacity development and analytical work in 
Pakistan in order to ensure the effective management and development of the Indus River 
system in the context of significant economic, social, and environmental change and 
needs for infrastructure and help in their implementation.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions in Water 
Resources Planning and Management (US$18 Million). This component would support 
capacity building of and support to federal institutions involved in water resources 
planning, management and development. The component includes among other things 
support for building human resources and institutional capacity in federal institutions, and 
support for preparing studies, strategies, and plans for improving water resources 
planning and management. It will have the following sub-components:  
 
Page  2
Component A1: Capacity Building of and Support to Ministry of Water and Power 
(MoWP, US$5.0 million). This component will cover strengthening of the Indus System 
institutional and regulatory framework. This is likely to include, but not limited to, the 
following:  (a) water resources regulation, policy, and planning; (b) studies and policies 
for benefit sharing among stakeholders; (c) asset development, ownership, and operation 
(including potential inter-provincial assets, public-private partnerships, etc); (d) building 
trusted entitlement and benefit sharing regimes (national/provincial/local); (e) studies on 
the lessons learned from the implementation of past and current resettlement action plans 
in Pakistan and international best practices leading to improvements in national 
resettlement policy and preparation of a handbook to improve project specific 
resettlement plans; (f) strategic sectoral environmental and social assessments of the 
whole Indus basin that could serve as a basis for project specific environment 
assessments and environmental management plans and help address and internalize 
environmental issues in the water resources management planning; and (g) strategy for 
enhancing productivity of water use, studies for improvements in irrigation efficiency and 
groundwater management in collaboration with provinces.  
 
Component A2: Capacity Building of and Support to Indus River System Authority 
(IRSA, US$6.0 million).  This component would strengthen IRSA’s capacity to carry out 
its role as envisaged in the 1991 Water Apportionment Accord. This would cover inter-
alia: (a) establishment of digital and GIS based databases with the capability to integrate 
satellite images, and of management information systems with web-based interfaces for 
access to information by all stakeholders, including the public; (b) studies and 
development of modern tools for improving seasonal, monthly, and 10-daily inflows 
forecasts to the system, and of possible scenarios for water requirements and for demands 
by various sectors and provinces; (c) development and improvement of tools and models 
for simulation and optimization of operation and management of Indus system’s water 
resources including updatingand enhancement of the Indus Basin Model; and (d) 
establishment of a water flow measurement system at key points on the river system as 
part of a plan to improve water auditing and transparency and communication in water 
distribution and (e) institutional capacity building and training.  Much of this work will 
be carried out in collaboration with WAPDA (and the work program outlined in 
Component B1) and with the provincial authorities responsible for water resources 
planning and management.  
 
Component A3: Capacity Building of and Support to IPDF (US$6.0 million).  This 
component will build capacity of the Infrastructure Project Development Facility (IPDF), 
in particular the new water cell which is responsible for developing financing strategies 
for water sector programs and hydropower infrastructure and with providing advice on a 
variety of financial, fiscal, legal and regulatory issues.  The support will cover inter-alia 
the following:  
 
(i) review of the existing institutional, legal and administrative framework for financing 
water infrastructure and the potential for private sector participation in the development 
of multipurpose water resources development projects based on international best 
Page  3
practices, asset ownership, benefit- sharing alternatives, etc. and define public sector role 
in financing to complement/support potential private investments  
 
(ii) development of an enabling framework for licensing and regulating hydropower 
projects (both run of river and reservoir based projects); for establishing tariffs and a 
carbon credit mechanism; and for securitizing existing assets to generate funding for 
investments in water and hydropower development; and  
 
(iii) review of financial and fiscal regimes for private sector, domestic and foreign 
involvement in the development of major hydropower projects in the Indus system, and 
identification of appropriate sources of financing worldwide.  
 
Component A4:  Capacity Building of and Support to the Planning Commission 
(US$1.0 million).  This component will support the Planning Commission in various 
capacity building activities, such as workshops and training, and in preparation of studies 
on water planning and management issues, including resettlement planning in 
coordination with other work approved by the Project Steering Committee.  
 
Component B: Improvement in Water Resources Management and Development in 
WAPDA (US$30.0 million).  This would include, inter-alia following:  
 
(B1)  upgrading of existing tools, databases, models and management systems, 
seasonal, monthly and 10-daily planning and operational models and Indus Basin Model 
Revised, development of additional systems client interfaces, operationalization of these 
tools for water/power planning and operation and their linkage and/or transfer to IRSA 
and to the provincial institutions. This would be implemented in close collaboration with 
IRSA and interfaces would be developed for exchange of information, data, models and 
other tools between WAPDA, IRSA, and provinces;  
 
(B2)  sediment management studies for the Indus system in particular possibility of 
flushing sediment through Tarbela reservoir, downstream impact, upstream development 
of water storage facilities, feasibility level designs of sediment flushing facilities etc. The 
tools and models would be developed for future use by WAPDA in continuing work on 
sediment management as further development of the Indus systems proceeds.  
Bathymetric surveys of major reservoirs and provision of modern bathymetric equipment 
and systems and training in bathymetric surveys;  
 
(B3)  preparation of power investment plan with a focus on hydropower development in 
the upper Indus and conjunctive operation of dams and other infrastructure.  
Development of asset management plans for major infrastructure managed and operated 
by WAPDA and safety inspections by national and international panel of experts, etc.  
Other laboratory equipment for site investigations and quality control of construction and 
training in use of these equipment possibly under specific pilot projects;  
 
(B4)  preparation of feasibility studies and of designs for quickly/easily implementable 
hydropower project suitable for financing by international financing institutions etc., 
Page  4
without any transboundary and riparian issues.  These studies would also include 
environment and social assessments, and environment/social management plans 
according to the GOP and World Bank and Pakistan.  
 
Component C: Project Management and Future Studies (US$5 million). This component 
would support the Government, in particular the Ministry of Water and Power (MoWP) 
with project managementâ
 ”including the coordination of all project related activities, 
monitoring and evaluation of project impacts, and technical and financial audits.   It will 
also support strategic studies and technical assistance that may be identified during the 
period of project implementation. The component is deliberately left flexible in order to 
include new sub-components as they arise. Possible areas for funding include training in 
detailed design, tender designs of water/power infrastructure, construction standards and 
codes, design of dams, hydraulic structures, power planning, consulting and contracting 
services, contract administration/management and construction supervision, procurement, 
financial management, legal issues, and environmental, social and water quality issues. 
Future studies not yet identified would subsequently be approved by the Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) for implementation by suitable organizations including federal or 
provincial governments or other suitable organizations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The TA project mainly features capacity development of the borrower in water resources 
development and management --spread across the entire Indus Basin Irrigation System. 
No physical works are envisaged under the TA loan and both MoWP and WAPDA will 
be capacitated in undertaking various technical studies for water resources development 
and management. Two of the three counterpart agencies MoWP & the Planning 
Commission are located in Islamabad while WAPDA is housed in Lahore. The Indus 
basin irrigation system itself is characterized with gently rolling mountains in the upper 
Punjab to flat plains of Punjab and Sindh province. Most of the Basin system is well 
developed and presents wheat-rice, wheat-cotton or Wheat-Sugarcane cropping pattern.  
Though area under orchard, vegetables and other high value crops is increasing.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project includes capacity building for key federal water resources management 
institutions, and water resources management and development studies, which do not 
foresee physical works other than installation of flow measuring stations on the Indus 
River.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will fund TA activities to enhance the borrower’s capacity to manage 
environmental and social impacts under investment programs in the Indus River Basin, 
covering policies and implementation practice in involuntary resettlement and 
environment management, such as basin level strategic environmental assessment and 
studies on resettlement.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The TA project is not likely to result in any direct environmental or social impacts but 
adverse environmental and social impacts can not be ruled out due to subsequent 
implementation of these feasible projects. The feasibility studies to be undertaken as part 
of TA project would consider project alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The feasibility studies for hydropower projects that will be developed under this Project 
(under Component B4) will include specific environmental and social Assessments as 
well as action plans in accordance with relevant World Bank Policies and Guidelines. In 
order to have better oversight for preparation of EAs and SAs for these potential 
investments, the Project has been classified as Category B based on consultation with the 
OPCQC and following the most recent guidance issued on project screening and 
classification   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Project would support several vital studies necessary for understanding and 
establishing enabling environmental assessment framework for the Indus basin.  This 
includes sectoral, strategic environmental assessment of the Indus Basin that is expected 
to have a broader scope compared to the Sectoral Environmental Assessment of 1991/92 
and also builds upon several studies carried out by the government on environmental 
flows to the Indus delta and Sea and (complementing the work to be done under the 
Sindh Water Sector Improvement project); sediment management study of the Indus 
system.All these studies will build upon a large stakeholders consultation and validation 
process to ensure that their opinions and understading of the project have been fully taken 
into account.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project is provided EA category B. However, this is a TA project, where the output 
would be a set of reports that would outline plans for environmental management.  These 
reports would be reviewed by the Safeguards team before in-country disclosure and final 
delivery.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
04/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
04/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
04/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/13/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. Please refer to clearance memo for specific comments. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
04/15/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
