Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2930 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P104188 
Project Name: Balochistan Local Services and Governance Operation 
Task Team Leader: Roland White 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Access to urban 
services and housing (S);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.70 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to develop strengthened, more accountable TMAs and UAs 
delivering enhanced services and infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have five components (estimated costs US$70.7 million):  
 
Component 1: Investment Grants to the Unions (UAs).  This component will provide grants to 
the Unions to support infrastructure and service delivery at the Union level.  This will flow to all 
Unions in the Province (with the exception of those in Quetta) which pass an annual enhanced 
audit.  
 
Component 2: Investment Grants to the Tehsil Municipal Administrations (TMAs).This 
component will provide grants to the TMAs to support infrastructure and service delivery at the 
Tehsil level.  This will flow to those TMAs within a universe of 18 which pass an annual 
Page  2
enhanced audit and performance assessment process to incentivise institutional performance and 
deepening of accountability among the targeted TMAs.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building for Unions and TMAs.  This component will provide 
resources to the UAs and TMAs to improve their performance, ensure that funds are properly 
controlled and spent, to ensure environmental and social management while implementing 
infrastructure projects.  
 
Component 4: Enhanced Support for Fragile/Conflict-Affected Unions.  This component will 
provide support to ma
ke
up
for security and deficits in these areas, and for the “Single Town” 
Unions where the service-delivery and infrastructure investment role of Unions needs to be 
expanded.  
 
Component 5: Program Management and Implementation. This component will provide support 
to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation system, and the government’s management of the 
project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All Unions (with the exception of those in Quetta) and the 18 Tehsil Municipal Administrations 
in the Province of Balochistan that pass the annual enhanced audit (and assessment, in the case 
of the TMAs) will receive the grants.  In addition, resources will be provided to Unions in fragile 
and conflict-affected areas and to Single Town Unions located in the Province of Balochistan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The local government institutions will provide local and small-scale infrastructure and the 
project will thus not have significant irreversible or long-term environmental impacts.  The 
implementing agency, the Balochistan Department of Finance is preparing the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Operational Manuals for the grants to the 
Unions (UAs) and Tehsil Municipal Administrations (TMAs).   The ESMF will enable sub-
project implementers to identify, assess and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts.  The ESMF will outline an environmental and social screening process to be applied to 
future sub-projects, and will be implemented by the recipient local authorities. Modular sector 
specific environmental checklists will be prepared for the project and these checklists will be 
used to determine that the investments conform to environmentally appropriate guidelines and 
that they incorporate the mitigation measures defined therein.  Local governments will be 
required to apply the environmental checklists for appraising their investments and comply with 
the mitigation measures contained therein. Pursuant to the ESMF, recipient local governments 
will be required to develop sub-project Resettlement Action Plans as per guidelines outlined in 
the ESMF in cases where land acquisition is necessary.  The project will provide capacity 
building for local authorities in respect of the ESMF.  Quality assurance of the application of the 
ESMF by local governments will be undertaken by the implementing agency.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The ESMF which is under preparation will enable sub-project implementers to identify, 
assess and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social impacts.  The ESMF will outline 
an environmental and social screening process to be applied to future sub-projects, and will be 
implemented by the recipient local authorities. Modular sector specific environmental checklists 
will be prepared for the project and these checklists will be used to determine that the 
investments conform to environmentally appropriate guidelines and that they incorporate the 
mitigation measures defined therein.  Local governments will be required to apply the 
environmental checklists for appraising their investments and comply with the mitigation 
measures contained therein.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Recipient local governments will be required to develop sub-project Resettlement Action 
Plans as per guidelines outlined in the ESMF in cases where land acquisition is necessary.  The 
project will provide capacity building for local authorities in respect of the ESMF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/23/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The Environmental and Social Management Framework and Resettlement Policy 
Framework to be completed by December 31, 2009.  
 
Public Disclosure of the Frameworks 
–
January 23, 2009 (to meet the 120-day disclosure 
period required for B projects).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roland White 
11/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
11/20/2008 
Comments:   
