Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3973 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/20/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P114278 
Project Name: Sindh Coal and Power Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Michael C. Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (55%);Power (45%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
26.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives are (a) to help the Governments of Sindh and Pakistan 
strengthen the enabling policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks conducive to new investments 
in the coal-to-energy sector; and (b) assist the Governments of Sindh and Pakistan to attract 
qualified private investors to develop Thar coal deposits and build new capacity for coal thermal 
power generation, guided by high standards of environmental and social sustainability.  The 
Project will ensure that the coal-to-power sector development responds to the needs of Pakistan's 
long-term energy strategy.  
 
Expected Project outcomes would be: (i) various policy, legal and regulatory instruments, 
consistent with international good practice, used by the Governments of Sindh and Pakistan in 
developing coal-to-power sector; and (ii) bidding and negotiations leading to financial close on 
new investment into at least one coal mine and at least one independent power producer (IPP) in 
Thar.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is proposed as a technical assistance Credit of approximately $26 million to the 
Government of Sindh and Government of Pakistan. Preliminary component description is 
provided below:  
Page  2
Component 1:  Sector Governance and Capacity Building: Provide policy, legal and regulatory 
advisory services to key government agencies and other counterparts in order to (i) facilitate 
coal-to-power sector development, including ancillary infrastructure development, and (ii) 
complete the transaction for a selected Thar coal block. To this end the project will assist in 
developing the coal sector policy and the coal development road-
map in line with Pakistan’s 
long-term energy strategy, updating applicable laws and regulations (including those related to 
mineral licensing and tendering procedures), and setting up operational environmental and social 
management framework for coal-to-power sector.   The project will also strengthen the capacity 
of the provincial and federal governments to improve sector governance and attract quality 
private investments.  
 
Component 2: Transaction Advisory Services:  In support of the governments’ efforts to attract 
quality private investors to develop Thar coal and to produce thermal power, the project will (i) 
update, or develop where needed, key technical, financial, market, and local impact analysis and 
other information relevant to the investors, including a basin-wide land-use plan for Thar; and 
(ii) provide transaction advisory services and due-diligence monitoring for a coal mine and an 
IPP transactions in a selected block of Thar, including preparation / issuance of requests for 
proposals, and assistance to the government with bid evaluations, negotiations, and financial 
closing.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management and Communications:  Finance costs associated with 
managing the proposed Project, including project coordination among implementing agencies, 
procurement and financial management, and environmental and social management. The project 
will also assist the Government of Sindh and Government of Pakistan to develop 
communications and outreach strategy in regards to the Project and to improve public 
consultations.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in both urban and local areas.  The federal level components 
will be implemented in Islamabad, provincial level - in Sindh Province (Karachi and Thar Coal 
area).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will assist building up the capacity needed for adequate implementation. 
Specifically, the project will help prepare environmental and social frameworks specific to coal-
to-power sector, and formulate policies for community development, including on management 
of environmental and social impacts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASDI) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Although the proposed Project is limited to the provision of technical assistance and is not 
expected to result in any negative environmental or social impact, SCP-TAP has been classified 
as Category B, because of the potential impacts of follow-on investment projects.  Since 
locations, timing and technical features of follow-on investments are unknown at this time, a 
coal-to-power Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared and 
disclosed for public comment prior to project appraisal.  The SCAP-TAP will assist the 
government design its own environmental and social frameworks consistent with the World 
Bank and international standards and to build capacity to manage environmental and social 
impacts of coal mining activities and coal-generated power production.  
 
(a) Prior to project approval the client will (i) develop ESMF acceptable to the Bank; (ii) 
commence a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for Thar basin; and (iii) 
prepare the Terms of Reference for Environmental Impact Assessment for a selected block of 
Thar deposit (ESIA will be undertaken by a future project sponsor)  
 
(b) During Project Implementation (env / soc components) the project will (i) complete 
Thar Basin land-use plan; (ii) develop an Environmental and Social baseline data monitoring 
program and data register; (iii) carry out policy, legal and regulatory reforms (provincially and 
federally); and (iii) build capacity on environmental assessment procedures (provincially and 
federally).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The Bank project will not trigger resettlements, but the potential impacts of follow-on 
investment projects, the feasibility of which is studied under the Project, may include 
resettlement.  Locations, timing and technical features of follow-on investments are unknown at 
this time.  There is a need to assess existing Resettlement Policy Framework(s) whether 
additional work will be required to comply with the Bank’s safeguards.  The work will need to 
coordinate with the Provincial Board of Revenue which is mandated under the law to handle 
land-related issues.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project through transaction advisory services may indirectly trigger this OP/BP should 
subsurface waters extend beyond the Pakistani border.  More consultations will be required.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/21/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF will be prepared and disclosed for public comment prior to appraisal (planned for 
May 2009) both within the country and in the World Bank InfoShop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael C. Stanley 
10/15/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/17/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Silvana Tordo 
10/15/2008 
Comments:  Cleared subject to Regional Safeguards Coordinator's clearance. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
