Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.44486 
 
Date ISDS Updated:    04/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P106652  
Project Name: Lahore Composting 
Task Team Leader: Mihaly Kopanyi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  May 2008 
Estimated ERPA signing date: June 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Carbon Offset 
Sector: Solid Waste Management 100% 
Theme: Climate change (P), urban development (P), environmental resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT (US$m.):                       5.58 
Financing Gap                                                            0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
 
The development objectives of the proposed Carbon Offset project are to: avoid generation of 
methane emission from biodegradable wastes; reduce health hazards by decreasing the amount of 
waste disposed off in a landfill; and improve cultivated land by using compost as a natural soil 
conditioner. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
 
Lahore Compost Private Ltd. (LC) has received the concession from the City District 
Government, Lahore to operate a waste processing and composting plant; a first attempt to 
implement composting technology on a large scale in Pakistan. The LC management intends to 
increase its initial pilot processing of 300 TPD to 1,000 TPD. 
 
This carbon offset project aims to purchase ERs generated from the processing of solid waste. 
The LC, the sole sponsor of the planned investment, had intended to qualify for CERs from the 
beginning.  However, in the absence of operational strategy and mechanism from the 
Government of Pakistan, no action could be taken to further the case.  Therefore, emission 
reductions arising from the operation of an initial 300 TPD waste processing should be eligible 
Page  2
for carbon finance as of project registration with the CDM Executive Board, on the basis that it 
has been operating at a loss due to the absence of a compost market in Pakistan.  The baseline 
scenario would be to cease operations without carbon revenues.  Three phases can be 
distinguished in this composting development: 
 
Phase I:  Since March 31, 2006 the company has been processing compost from 300 TPD intakes 
on pilot basis.  Preliminary results suggest that this composting methodology is well suited in 
Lahore circumstances, the technology is stable, the final product is high quality compost, and the 
amount of waste disposed off is reduced by half.  
 
Phase II:  Scaling up composting operations gradually to 750 TPD by September, 2008 and to 
1000 TPD by April, 2009. LC expects to support this capacity expansion by strengthened 
revenue streams including the sale of carbon credits. 
 
Phase III:  In the final phase the company plans to increase processing capacity to 1,500 TPD.  
The final decision in this regard would be taken after the implementation of Phase II.  
 
The present and planned technology is a relatively simple windrow type composting. But, in 
absolute terms the capital investment is high including primarily civil structures and equipment 
for handling and screening the composting material at different stages. Further, the operation and 
maintenance cost including the cost of debt servicing is fairly high as compared to the low 
market price of compost.  Therefore, additional support is necessary to make the urban waste 
based compost plant viable and sustainable.  
 
In the aerobic windrow type composting, the incoming garbage is weighed, inspected, and then 
screened for sorting of large non-compostable items followed by crushing, to harmonize the 
input for composting.  Next is stacking in windrows (160 m long piles with a base width of about 
4m and height of 2m). These windrows are turned mechanically at consistent intervals.  At the 
end of about 6 weeks of windrowing, the material is fairly stabilized and is ready for further 
screening through a train of rotary sieves. At each stage, some rejects are screened out, which are 
either picked up by recyclers or sent to a landfill. Compost is a healthy soil conditioner, dark 
brown, free-flowing, rich in humus, and has a faint musty odor. 
 
D.  Project location (if known):  
 
The project is located at Mehmood Booti bund on the eastern bank of the river Ravi in the city of 
Lahore. The city District Government is using this location as an open solid waste dumping site, 
a
part of which is now given to the Lahore Compost Pvt. Ltd. to operate a composting plant. The 
adjacent area is occupied by land encroachers and a very few title holders and is used for 
cultivating vegetables and rearing animals. Since the enlargement of the composting plant will 
remain fully within the border of the Mehmood Booti landfill, neither involuntary resettlement 
nor constraining activities of indigenous people is expected. 
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]:  
 
Lahore Compost is a company already engaged in the environmental improvement of the area by 
converting solid waste into soil conditioner/fertilizer. There are therefore strong expectations 
from the company to adhere to standard environmental management practices in their operations 
and also to comply with the safeguard requirements. The LC has adopted standard operation 
procedures and will assign a monitoring officer for quality control.  The company is fully 
capable of implementing the mitigation measures to be proposed in the ESA study. Capacity 
gaps that might be highlighted in the ongoing ESA study will be addressed in the environmental 
and social management plan (ESMP) accordingly. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Mr. Javaid Afzal, Environment Specialist, SASDN 
Mr. Imtiaz Alvi, Social Safeguard Specialist, SASDS 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category: 
 B
–
full assessment  
Page  4
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   
Since this is a simple project, QER is not required. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  May 30, 2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: 
ESA study is planned to be completed by April 30 and published in Pakistan and disclosed in 
InfoShop in May, 2008  
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mihaly Kopanyi 
04/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Eric Brusberg 
04/16/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
04/30/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
