Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/12/2009 
Report No.:  AC4349
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P116355 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Sindh On-Farm Water Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Tumurdavaa Bayarsaihan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (25%);Rural policies and institutions (25%);Other 
rural development (24%);Participation and civic engagement (13%);Pollution 
management and environmental health (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.70 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
9.00
11.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objectives of proposed activities under Additional Financing are to improve 
water resource management and enhance agricultural productivity in the project area 
through: (a) improving the efficiency, reliability, and equity of irrigation water 
distribution at watercourse levels; (b) supporting agricultural productivity enhancement 
measures to complement and enhance the benefits of improved water management; and 
(c) enhancing long-term financial sustainability of the irrigation system by fostering self-
sustaining farmer organizations - Watercourse Associations - at the watercourse levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
The description of individual components of the proposed additional financing is 
summarized below:  
 
a) 
Watercourse Improvement Component. Under this component, around 2,500 
watercourses, comprising earthen improvements, lining, installation of pucca nuccas 
(concrete turnouts) and culverts, will be improved.  Also, under this component, a series 
of social mobilization and capacity building activities directed at WCAs will be carried 
Page  2
out. The project will supplement the ongoing institutional development and policy reform 
efforts of the GoSindh by establishing and/or strengthening 2,500 WCAs and building 
their capacities. The WCAs would be involved in planning, designing, and 
implementation of watercourse improvement works as well as in operation and 
maintenance of improved watercourses.  
 
b)
Productivity Enhancement Component. This component comprises the precise 
leveling of 11,000 ha of farm land using laser guided equipment; development and 
dissemination of improved seeds, demonstration on tunnel farming for high value crops, 
training of farmers in improved water management and agricultural practices and new 
technology; and integrated pest management (IPM), monitoring pesticide residue effects 
on crops, information systems, and market/marketing.  
 
c) 
Project Management Support Component. It includes, inter alia, technical 
assistance for project launch, supervision (quality assurance), mid-term review, 
development of a project management information system, productivity enhancement, 
preparation of and assistance in implementing a training and capacity building program 
for project staff, and WCAs. Monitoring and Evaluation will be an important part of 
Project Management Support, which will include design and implementation of a 
monitoring and evaluation system and establishment of a spatial GIS database. The M&E 
system would provide continuous feedback to project management  on the project 
performance and assess its physical, agricultural, social, financial/fiscal, environmental 
and economic impact, so that, corrective actions could be taken in a timely manner.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Province of Sindh is located in the southeast part of Pakistan, comprising four 
topographically distinct parts, with the Kirthar mountain range on the west; a central 
alluvial plain bisected by the Indus river in the middle, a desert belt in the east and the 
Indus delta in the south.  
 
The climate of the province is arid and hot. Rainfall is generally low â## averaging less 
than 260 mm a year-Â¬and temperatures in summer exceed 37 degrees Centigrade 
resulting in high evaporation rates and making irrigation essential for agriculture. Rainfall 
contributes only 2 to 3% of the total water supply during Rabi (winter crop season from 
mid-October to mid-April). Canal water, groundwater and sub-irrigation contribute 
approximately 75%, 5% and 15%, respectively. About 5.7 million ha is commanded by 
canals. Net area sown is about 3 million ha, with about 1 million ha sown twice a year. 
With groundwater in most of Sindh being brackish and unsuitable for crop irrigation, 
over 95% of the irrigated areas rely on surface water resources.  
 
There are a number of protected areas, including game reserves, wildlife sanctuaries and 
wetland sites that fall within the irrigated areas in Sindh, and could potentially become a 
part of the project area. Prominent among these are the Nara Game Reserve, Nara Desert 
Wildlife Sanctuary, and Takkar Wildlife Sanctuary in the Khairpur district, and the Rann 
of Katch Wildlife Sanctuary in districts Badin and Tharparkar. The wetland sites 
generally cover areas of less than 5,000 ha each, and are typically generated by the 
accumulation of seepage from canals, surface runoff and direct inflows from surface 
drains. Species of concern include marsh crocodiles and migratory birds that use these 
areas as winter refuges on migratory routes.  
Page  3
Sindhi society is intricately structured into a hierarchical formation of considerable 
complexity and antiquity in a patrimonial domain. It is a pyramid of depressed incomes 
with widespread rural poverty at the base (sharecroppers or haris) and high levels of 
wealth at the narrow apex (landlords or waderas). The decision-making process generally 
involves just the apical players, while small farmers and sharecroppers have only modest 
participation. Further complexity is added with elements of state authority interacting 
with traditional society for the regulation of justice and revenue. There is a meshing and 
manipulation of state authority and traditional hierarchy at every level. Bonded labor is 
another unfortunate aspect of tradition in Sindh, whereby indebted tenants and 
sharecroppers undertake wangar (labor without pay), which does not suffice to work off 
their debts.  
 
While farming activities are largely performed by the men, women#s participation in 
agricultural activities such as planting seedlings, cotton picking, and weeding is fairly 
extensive. In areas and households where there are either no men or have migrated to the 
cities to find work, women are left to handle the agricultural role of men. In spite of this, 
women role in the agricultural sector generally remains unrecognized as a majority does 
not own land and has low visibility. Indigenous people in Sindh include the Mohanas 
â##or the boat peopleâ##living on Manchar Lake, and the Tharis who live mostly in 
district Tharparkar, which lies outside the project area.  
 
The proposed Additional Financing will focus in the areas of three participating AWBs 
(Nara Canal, Left Bank Canals, and Ghotki Feeder).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Physical interventions proposed under the additional financing are limited to the 
rehabilitation of existing watercourses.  The additional works are of the same scope and 
nature as the on-going project.  They are located within the same area, with the same 
Page  4
social, ethnic and economic setting. GOSindh carried out an Integrated Social and 
Environmental Assessment (ISEA) for the on-going Sindh On Farm Water Management 
Project, to identify and assess any safeguard issues and potential environmental and 
social impacts of the project. The Sindh Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) 
reviewed the Environmental Assessment and approved execution and implementation of 
the project, with the condition that any works carried out in a protected area will require 
prior clearance from the Sindh Wildlife Department.  
 
The ISEA flagged the following issues as areas of concern: (i) the impact of soil and silt 
removal and disposal during rehabilitation activities, which may contaminate soils, 
communtmity wells, and water ponds, and block the natural drainage; (ii) use of lined 
sections of watercourses for washing clothes; (iii) increased use of chemical pesticides 
hanning human health and the environment; (iv) some tree clearing that may be required 
where watercourses need to be realigned; (v) lack of participation of small, tail-end and 
women farmers in WCA's and FOs; and (vi) sharecroppers obliged to work for 
watercourse improvements without being paid.  
 
Frameworks were developed under the ISEA to mitigate against these and enhance the 
positive impacts of the project. These measures included: (i) safe disposal or recycling of 
silt for agricultural purposes and construction of washing bays and cattle baths to avoid 
polluting water; (ii) setting specifications for the quality of borrow earth to avoid 
deterioration in the quality of existing soil; (iii) implementing a pest management plan; 
(iv) avoiding cutting of trees as far as possible, and where essential, planting at least 
double the number of cut trees as replacement; (v) enhancing the skills and abilities of 
farmers, through training in new technologies, better water management practices, and in 
assessing and collecting abiana;(vi) empowering communities, including women, through 
improved participation opportunities in WCAs and FOs; (vii) incorporating mechanisms 
that recognize and pay for labor contributed by sharecroppers; (viii) strengthening the 
institutional capacity of WCAs and FOs; (ix) reducing conflict and improving social 
relationship between farmers at the head and tail-ends of canals and watercourses; and (x) 
improving networking among WCAs, FOs, area water boards (AWBs), community 
organizations and NGOs.  
 
On the other hand, it was predicted that the use of pesticides in the project area could 
increase as project interventions improve availability of water with corresponding 
increase in cropping intensity. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was, therefore, prepared 
to rationalize the use of pesticides in the project area. The National Agricultural Research 
Center (NARC), with support from FAO, is currently implementing a National Integrated 
Pest Management Project. The Sindh Department of Agriculture is an active participant 
in this program, and has so far trained over 3,000 fanners in IPM technology. Recently, a 
National IPM project of much larger size has been approved by the federal govermnent 
under which 55,000 farmers would be similarly trained. To rationalize the use of 
chemical pesticides, the PMP adopts the strategy of promoting IPM in the project area, 
besides introducing the concept of Integrated Plant and Soil Nutrient Management 
(IPSNM) to reduce the use of chemical fertilizers. The main activities under the PMP 
would be training of farmers in IPM practices, introduction of IPSNM, monitoring of 
Page  5
pesticide residues on selected crops (horticulture produce/vegetables), research, and 
dissemination of information, which would be continued as a part of the productivity 
enhancement component of the project.  
 
In terms of triggering OP 7.50 #Projects on International Waters# The task team for the 
on-going Sindh On Farm Water Management Project reviewed Article VII of the Indus 
Waters Treaty of 1960 between India and Pakistan and concluded that: (i) a notification 
by Pakistan to India under paragraph (2) of the said Article VII was not required, as the 
project will not cause interference with the waters of any of the Rivers and will not affect 
the other riparians materially, and (ii) the exception to the external notification 
requirements of OP 7.50, set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50, was fully applicable. 
Accordingly, a waiver from the notification requirement was sought and received. Since 
project interventions under the Additional Financing are continuation of the existing 
program, the project does not require afresh waiver.  
 
The project involves the rehabilitation of existing canals and watercourses; construction 
of new canals or watercourses is not envisaged.  Involuntary acquisition of private land 
and physical displacement is, therefore, not involved. Watercourse improvements, 
hoWever, may involve minor realignment requiring some voluntary land acquisition.  In 
such situations, the experience of similar projects implemented in the past, has been that 
WCAs/FOs carry out such voluntary land donation or acquisition with consensus. Even 
so, evidence of any voluntary land acquisition and compensation will be documented to 
ensure fairness and transparency. Schemes that involve involuntary land acquisition 
and/or resettlement will not be undertakenz.  
 
Indigenous people are not the target beneficiaries of the project. The project area does 
not include the Tharparkar desert where most of them live. Poor and landless indigenous 
people, however, do move to the inrigated areas in search of wages, working on farms 
and construction sites. Though most of this movement is temporary, it is not uncommon 
to find these people settled in irrigated areas as sharecroppers. Those living in the 
irrigated areas would benefit from improved employment opportunities resulting from the 
project. The participatory mechanisms detailed in the ISEA aim at better inclusion of 
share croppers, including those belonging to these groups.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impacts due to project components and the application of the 
Environmental Assessment and Pest Management safeguards are positive and include: 
more efficient use of water and higher productivity due to improved water management 
practices, and trainings; more equitable distribution of water through participation of 
farmers in institutions that are more inclusive and better managed; and improved use of 
pesticide and pest management practices.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The ISEA examined the following options: (i)no project; (ii)doing a project using 
existing structures and methods; and (iii) doing a project with improved and strengthened 
Page  6
institutions and more inclusive methodology. The first two options were rejected as the 
irrigation system in the province has deteriorated over time and needs immediate 
attention, and the recognition that trying to deliver through an existing system, that has 
had, at best, limited impact, was not appropriate.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ISEA recommended project implementation assistance consultants for providing 
sub-project designs that meet enviromnental and social standards and adequately 
incorporate  
 
mitigation measures as articulated in the Framework. The consultants were also 
responsible to ensure that these standards and mitigation measures were met during 
implementation. These arrangements will be continued for the implementation of the 
proposed project activities under the Additional Financing.  
 
Capacity Building -Capacity of the DGAEWM, WCAs, and FOs, to manage the 
environmental and social impacts as envisaged by the ISEA was built and enhanced, 
particularly in areas, including conflict management, gender sensitivity, and poverty 
analysis. This capacity building support was provided by the implementation consultants 
in partnership with Training Institutes and NGOs. The trained staff will continue 
providing support on the implementation of activities under the Additional Financing.  
 
Monitoring & Evaluation -A provincial steering committee supported by M&E 
consultants, financed under the project had overall responsibility for monitoring and 
evaluating project outputs and outcomes, and compliance with environunental and social 
safeguards as well as the implementation of the pest management plan and related 
monitoring.  
 
To operationalize the environmental management plan, an environmental manual 
consisting of the following was developed and adopted before implementation started: (i) 
guidelines for implementation of the EMP; (ii) a standard checklist for identification of 
environmental impacts and applicable mitigation measures; and (iii) formats for quarterly 
enviromnental monitoring reports. These on-going activities will be continued for better 
implementation of the proposed activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders with whom extensive consultations were held during the preparation of 
ISEA and Implementation Framework, and project implementation included: (i) large, 
small, and tail-end farmers; (ii) sharecroppers; (iii) Government of Sindh agencies, 
including Agriculture, Irrigation, Local Govemment, and Wild Life Departments; (iv) the 
Sindh Enviromuent Protection Agency; (v) WCAs, FOs, and AWBs; (vi) community 
organizations, including women groups; (vii) civil society organizations; and (viii) 
indigenous people, and farm laborers. These consultations included field investigations, 
focus group discussions, key informant discussions, household surveys and, village 
profiles, based on which the project was designed.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/24/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/24/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2003 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
Yes 
Page  8
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tumurdavaa Bayarsaihan 
05/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
05/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
05/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/11/2009 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
05/12/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
