Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3968 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P102608 
Project Name: Punjab Education Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Sofia Shakil 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3,000.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  90.00
3,090.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This project proposes to provide technical and financial support to the medium term education 
program of the Government of Punjab which has the objectives of: (i) enhancing the quality of 
school education to improve student learning outcomes; (ii) improving and expanding access 
through improvements in school participation and completion rates and reduction in gender and 
regional disparities.  Underpinning the program is strengthening of school management and 
governance in the education sector. Success of the program in meeting its main objectives is 
proposed to be measured by the following indicative outcome indicators:  
 
1.
Increase in net enrolment rates at primary, middle and secondary levels.  
 
2.
Increase in completion rates at primary level.  
 
3.
Improvement in gender parity at primary, middle and secondary levels.  
 
4.
Improvement in measurement of and additional support for student learning outcomes at 
primary and elementary levels.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
In the past, support to the education sector was provided through Development Policy Credits 
(DPCs). However, the current weak macroeconomic situation at the national level is not 
conducive for a DPC.  Important sector wide reforms are already under implementation.  In 
addition to the Bank, two bilateral development partners want to support the program. Due to 
these reasons, the team considers the program more suitable for support under a Sector Wide 
Approach financed through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL).  This programmatic approach will 
not only enable continuation of the reforms initiated through the PEDPC series, but will deepen 
the focus on implementation and results by linking disbursements to performance. The Bank 
anticipates providing $350 million over a three year period to this program. This will be 
accompanied by proposed DFID parallel financing of $140 million over five years ($30 
million/year), and additional support from CIDA through possible co- financing arrangements. In 
total, $405 million is expected for the first 3 years, approximately $135 million yearly (about 8-
10% of total government education expenditure).  
 
Government Program: The main pillars of the Government’s program are: i) enhancing the 
quality and relevance of education to improve student learning outcomes; (ii) improving and 
expanding access through improvements in participation and completion rates and reduction in 
gender and regional disparities; and (iii) strengthening service delivery mechanisms through 
improved management and governance in the education sector.  The Government is 
implementing the following programs aligned with these three pillars:  
 
To enhance quality, ongoing and proposed interventions by the Government include: (i) 
Teacher Professional Development through the Continuous Professional Development program 
which has established a system for training and on-site support for teachers;  (ii) Teacher 
Recruitment & Rationalization through a merit and contract-based facility specific policy; (iii) 
Performance Based Incentives for Teachers and Heads of Institutions, to give incentives to 
teachers on the basis of performance, and also focus on development of head teachers; (iv) 
Textbook Development and Printing Reforms:  to develop multiple textbooks for each subject 
and grade in all subjects on an open competitive basis; (v) the Government is setting up an 
independent school examination system to conduct universal examinations and will institute 
programs to provide targeted support to poor performing schools.  On the access side, key 
interventions include (i) the Female Stipend Program under which over 350,000 girls are 
receiving the stipend in grades 6–10 of the 15 target low literacy districts of Punjab; (ii) 
provision of free textbooks to students - for the academic year 2008-09, a total of 28.6 million 
books have been distributed covering pre grade 1 to grade 10; (iii) each school to be provided the 
full range of missing facilities through a Whole School Improvement approach; (iv) Upgradation 
program to increase access to elementary and secondary levels; (v) Support to the low cost 
private sector, through the Punjab Education Foundation (PEF) to expand access and improving 
quality of education, especially in underserved areas (PEF is already supporting over 400,000 
students enrolled in low fee private schools).  To support management and governance, key 
interventions include (i) implementing a comprehensive monitoring system at district and 
provincial levels; (ii) strengthening of district education capacity; (iii) education management 
reforms; and (iv) mobilization of local communities and capacity building of school councils.  
 
Project Design: The project proposes to support the above Government program under two 
components:  
Page  3
Component I - Program Financing: This component will account for about 95% of the total 
financing provided by the Bank and development partners. The development partners will 
appraise the full sector program, and will select 5-6 Eligible Expenditure (EE) items (out of a 
range of overall expenditure items) in consultation with the Government that respond most 
directly to the desired outcomes of the program. Examples of EEs include: stipends, textbooks, 
grant to PEF, performance bonuses for teachers, and teacher salaries.  
 
Determination of eligibility of disbursements will be based on:  i) expenditure reports (this 
requires adequate financial reporting arrangements); and ii) performance reports to track 
accomplishment of agreed disbursement linked indicators (this requires a strong and credible 
internal M&E system, with periodic third party monitoring). An agreed percentage of EE will be 
disbursed contingent on achievement of agreed disbursement linked indicators and achievement 
of agreed level of expenditures (e.g., 70% of allocation) by government (see Annex 1 for some 
indicative performance and annual disbursement linked indicators [DLIs] for the project).  
 
Component II 
–
Capacity Building and Technical Cooperation: Support will be provided to 
strengthen existing capacities for implementation and monitoring. About 5% of the project could 
be allocated in two sub-categories:  
 
i)  Capacity building of provincial and district education teams, and strengthening school 
council capacity (development partners could consider disbursing against the approved 
Government programs in these areas).  
 
ii)  Technical assistance including workshops, training, and evaluation of ongoing programs and 
development of new initiatives  
 
Safeguards: Environment Issues. Majority of the program activities to be financed by the Bank 
are environmentally benign and will rather result in enhanced environmental benefits.  However, 
an environmental management framework (EMF) as part of environmental assessment (EA) and 
arrangements for its implementation will be prepared.  Social:  A Social and Gender assessment 
would be carried out. This would provide a sectoral overview including major issues, constraints 
faced in reaching the planned outcomes; an institutional assessment including of relevant civil 
society and private sector partners; a stakeholders’ analysis; recommendations; social safeguards 
triggers and if triggered, mitigation measures.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Punjab - all districts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Department of Education has designated the Deputy Director of the Program Management 
and Implementation Unit (PMIU) as the environmental and social focal person, who has been 
made responsible to supervise the environmental assessment as well as the Social & Gender 
Assessment and Social Safeguards Mitigation studies for the project. He along with his aides will 
ensure timely completion of EA and other studies and help in the implementation of the 
environmental management framework and Social Impact Management Plan prepared under the 
project EA/SA studies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Majority of program activities to be financed by the Bank are environmentally benign. 
However, an environmental management framework as part of the enviornmental assessment and 
arrangements for its implementation will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The Social Assessment will determine if any indigenous people are affected, and if so, offer 
guidelines.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment is being initiated, and the social assessment will also be launched 
during December 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sofia Shakil 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/02/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. Environmental and Social plans / reports to be reviewed before appraisal. 
Decision to transfer to sector to be taken at QER stage. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
11/28/2008 
Comments:  cleared 
