Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/05/2009 
Report No.:  AC4268
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P107300 
Project Name:  SINDH EDUCATION SECTOR PROJECT (SEP) 
Task Team Leader:  Reema Nayar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (57%);Sub-national government administration (43%) 
Theme:  Education for all (40%);Gender (20%);Decentralization (20%);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,872.00
1,872.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the SEP is to support the SERP.  The objectives of SERP 
are to increase school participation, reduce gender and rural-urban disparities, increase 
progression, and improve the measurement of student learning.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is a US$300 million SIL that uses a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) 
to support the implementation of the SERP. Credit disbursements will reimburse selected 
key education budget line items referred to as Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs). 
Disbursements will be based on the achievement of pre-specified results, referred to as 
disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), which represent priority elements in the SERP.  
The project also includes a small technical assistance (TA) component. The following 
paragraphs provide a summary description of the project.  
 
Component 1:  Financing of SERP [Total: US$2,166 million, IDA: US$294 million]  
 
This component finances key SERP EEPs up to capped absolute amounts, with 
disbursements based on the achievements of agreed DLIs. The DLIs reflect priority 
Page  2
targets in SERP. SERP activities and sub-programs fall within four broad thrust areas 
which aim to improve: (i) fiscal sustainability and the effectiveness of public 
expenditures including in education; (ii) education sector management; (iii) access to 
quality schooling with a particular focus on rural areas and girls; and (iv) the quality of 
teaching and student learning.  
 
(i)Improving fiscal sustainability and the effectiveness of public expenditures: To ensure 
adequate and effective use of public education expenditures, SERP seeks to (i) improve 
budgetary processes to introduce medium term, results based budgeting, reduce 
vulnerability of provincial finances and ensure adequate allocations to SERP and other 
priority sectors through the preparation of Medium Term Fiscal and Budget Frameworks 
(MTFF, MTBF); (ii) enhance internal controls and financial accountability in the 
education sector through the resolution of audit paragraphs; (iii) improve procurement 
management in the province through the adoption of a new procurement regulatory 
framework, revised procurement rules, and standard bidding documents, a monitoring 
and evaluation system, and implementing regulations; and (iv) improve procurement 
management and supervision of  schools’ civil works rehabilitation through third party 
construction supervision and ex-post procurement reviews.  
 
(ii). Improving education sector management:  To improve education sector 
management and strengthen the functioning, capacity and accountability of provincial, 
district and school level management for education service delivery, SERP sub-programs 
support: (i) strengthened provincial monitoring of education sector inputs, outputs and 
outcomes and evaluation of priority programs through the implementation of the annual 
school census (ASC) with defined improvements in the quality, reliability, and use of 
data (ii) strengthened district education management through the gradual introduction of 
a
new education management cadre and a new inspection and advice/support system; (iii) 
improved performance of districts in school rehabilitation and education service delivery 
through performance based funding partnerships and requirements for compliance with 
fiduciary and environmental safeguards guidelines; and (iv) strengthening School 
Management Commitees (SMCs) and the effectiveness of school level management 
through the development and implementation of capacity building programs to strengthen 
school improvement planning.  
 
(iii). Improving access to quality schooling in rural areas and for girls:  To improve 
access to quality schooling, SERP seeks to: (i) improve the performance and 
effectiveness of GoS’s existing programs to provide incentives to poor families to send 
their children to school and to reduce costs associated with attending public schools; and 
(ii) to leverage the provision of schooling by private entrepreneurs in underserved rural 
communities. In the first case, SERP seeks to improve the performance and 
implementation of the free textbooks program and the secondary school girls’ stipend 
programs for students attending public schools. It also supports the introduction, rollout 
and impact evaluation of a geographically-targeted conditional cash transfer program for 
secondary school girls (the differential stipends program).  In the second case, SERP 
supports the introduction, rollout and impact evaluation of an innovative public-private 
partnership program that uses public funds to leverage provision of schooling by private 
Page  3
entrepreneurs in targeted underserved rural communities. To facilitate the effective 
implementation and scaling up of public-private partnerships in the province, the project 
supports the transition of the Sindh Education Foundation (SEF) to an autonomous 
institution.  
 
(iv). Improving the quality of teaching and student learning:  SERP seeks to put into 
place and improve incrementally, institutions and practices that will improve teaching 
and learning in classrooms. These include improved procedures for the recruitment of 
teachers, for their professional development, and for assessing learning by students. 
Together with the incremental institutional changes to improve education sector 
management and the inspection and advice/support system for schools and teachers (see 
II above), SERP seeks to gradually improve the quality and effectiveness of teachers and 
teaching.  These institutional changes are also a sine qua non to sustained improvements 
in education quality after the life of the credit. SERP thus supports (i) implementation of 
the policy for merit based recruitment of teachers; (ii) implementation of the new 
program for strengthening teacher education and development (TED) through 
accreditation and quality assurance of continuous professional development (CPD) 
programs, introduction of needs based (CPD) and launch of a new teaching diploma; and 
(iii) implementation of the first cycle of provincial diagnostic learning assessment and 
improved classroom assessment. Universal teacher competencies and standards will 
increasingly underpin the recruitment and professional development of teachers and 
student learning standards will be monitored and their achievement supported through the 
introduction of diagnostic assessment by teachers.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance [Total: US$ 6 million; IDA:  US$ 6 million]  
 
The proposed project has a US$ 6 million component to finance essential technical 
assistance activities to assist GoS in the implementation of SERP. These include 
activities such as the MTBF, monitoring and evaluation activities (including third party 
supervision of school rehabilitation works, validation and tracking exercises of provincial 
programs and expenditures), capacity building particularly at district and sub district 
levels including SMCs in education management, procurement, and financial 
management, for example.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in all districts of the Sindh province. The province is 
located in a region that is prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, severe floods, 
and landslides. In some areas the geological conditions are favorable to the contamination 
of groundwater by arsenic and fluoride, two dangerous pollutants that may cause serious 
and irreversible health problems. A large number of schools in those areas use 
groundwater for drinking purposes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASDI) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDI) 
Page  4
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The activities to be financed by the project will result in environmental benefits. 
However, some of them, such as construction and rehabilitation of schools, adding 
missing facilities, and waste disposal during school operation may lead to minor negative 
environmental impacts.  Hence the project has been categorized as ‘B’, in accordance 
with the Bank OP 4.01.  
 
In order to address the above concerns and in compliance with OP 4.01, an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) has been carried out and an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed. The EA evaluates the potential 
adverse impacts that may be caused by the project activities, and to address these adverse 
impacts, provides environmental guidelines to be implemented during the design, 
construction and operation phases of the schools. With the implementation of these 
guidelines, the potential negative environmental impacts will be greatly reduced, if not 
completely eliminated.  
 
A
significant number of schools in Sindh are without safe drinking water and adequate 
sanitation facilities. Similarly, a large number of schools in the province are without 
electricity. Furthermore, currently the school building designs do not provide protection 
against natural disasters such as earthquakes and severe flooding in risk prone areas. 
Below is a list of the environmental, health and safety measures included in the project to 
address these issues.  
 
•
Optimization of architectural design to improve building’s energy efficiency by 
optimizing the use of natural lighting and ventilation thus reducing the use of energy.  
 
•
A
significant number of schools in Sindh face risks from natural disasters such as 
earthquakes and severe flooding. The project includes development of  maps to better 
Page  5
identify risk prone areas; field inspections to identify the most vulnerable schools; 
development of guidelines and technical specifications that schools in these areas would 
have to meet; preparation of model designs for schools that reduce their vulnerability to 
natural disasters; implement a pilot program to reinforce the structures of vulnerable 
schools in high risk areas; and provide natural disaster preparedness trainings to teachers 
and students.  
 
•
The project includes also the identification of schools with serious problemsof 
water contamination and the adoption of cost-effective measures to remove dangerous 
contaminants such as arsenic and fluoride, and to disinfect the drinking water. A water 
quality monitoring program will be implemented to ensure the effectiveness and 
sustainability of the interventions.  
 
•
All schools build or rehabilitated under the project will have adequate and fully 
operational sanitation facilities. The existence of toilets that take into account the girls’ 
needs would also contribute to increase the enrollment of girls.  
 
•
Personal hygiene promotion. The focus of this activity is to foster the adoption of 
personal hygiene practices such as hand washing, which coupled with the availability of 
sanitation facilities, are crucial to improve student’s health and learning conditions.  
 
•
Low-cost renewable energy supply technologies will be assessed to address 
shortages of grid electricity supply, and the high costs of expanding connections to rural 
schools.  
 
The Project does not require any acquisition of land for public purpose. The TOPs with 
the Districts and the PPP program may involve new classroom construction or expansion.   
Given the design of the program and the small size of the facilities, the land needs if 
necessary will be resolved through using existing campus, leasing or community 
donations. In case of donations, in order to ensure a transparent process, non-pressuring 
environment and its voluntary nature, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) is prepared that requires documentation of the following (i) the 
ownership of the land and evidence indicating the voluntary nature of the donation; (ii) 
appropriateness of the donation for the intended purpose; (iii) economic status of the 
donor that he/she is above the poverty line or whose remaining holdings are economically 
viable; (iv) no encumbrances on the land; (v) no negative livelihood impact on any 
vulnerable groups; vi) no compensation will be paid, and (vii) that the owner gives up all 
claims on the land and the title will be transferred to the recipient through procedure 
prescribed by the law of the state. Documentations of such will be submitted to the World 
Bank for review. A grievance mechanism is also described the in the ESMF to address 
any grievances that arise during the project implementation.  Thus, World Bank OP 4.12 
on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered under the operation.  
 
Planning efforts so far from the government side and mission field visits and 
consultations have not identified any Indigenous groups in the project areas.  Thus OP 
4.10 on Indigenous People is not triggered.  However, should any such group get 
Page  6
identified through the social assessment, an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will 
be prepared and necessary programs will be designed to mitigate any adverse possible 
impacts and include of such groups for culturally appropriate benefits.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Reform Steering Committee (SC) chaired by the Chief Secretary of the province and 
represented by the Education, Finance and Planning & Development departments, is 
responsible for oversight, guidance and coordination.  The Reform Support Unit (RSU), 
established in the Education department, is responsible for implementation and for 
monitoring and coordination of sector reform efforts. The RSU will also be responsible 
for undertaking the planning efforts and mitigation measures to address the 
environmental and social impacts related to the project.  Consultants will be hired to 
strengthen the RSU capacity to ensure timely and adequate implementation of the 
environmental measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Reema Nayar 
04/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
04/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
04/15/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/15/2009 
Comments:  cleared, please refer to memo dated 04/01/2009 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
04/15/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
