Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4275
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P102608 
Project Name:  Punjab Education Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sofia Shakil 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3,000.00
3,000.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project’s development objectives are to improve access and equity, and the quality 
and relevance of education in Punjab. Success of the program in meeting its objectives 
will be measured by the following outcome indicators:  
 
Primary NER (Baseline) - 62% (59% female; 64% male)  
 
Primary NER (Target)   - 66%  
 
Middle NER (Baseline) - 20%  
 
Middle NER (Target)   - 22%  
 
Rural Female: Male NER ratio, primary (Baseline) - 88.7%  
 
Rural Female: Male NER ratio, primary (Target)   - 92%  
 
Rural Female: Male NER ratio, middle (Baseline) - 73.7%  
 
Rural Female: Male NER ratio, middle (Target)   - 78%  
 
Primary School Completion Rate (Baseline) - 61%  
Page  2
Primary School Completion Rate (Target) - 65%  
 
Learning levels monitored through assessments and examinations (Baseline) - Grade 4 
&
8
national assessments in 4 key subjects; Grade 5 & 8 School Examinations, and Grade 
10 matriculate exams.  
 
Learning levels monitored through assessments and examinations (Target) - Improved 
quality of Grade 4 & 8 provincial assessments in at least 2 key subjects; improved quality 
of national and school exams.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will support the Punjab Education Support Reform Program (PESRP) which 
aims to: (i) enhance fiscal sustainability and the effectiveness of public expenditures 
including in education; (ii) enhance the quality of school education; (iii) improve and 
expand access through improvements in school participation and completion rates and 
reduction in gender and regional disparities; and (iv) strengthen school management and 
governance in the education sector. The Government is implementing the following 
programs aligned with these pillars:  
 
To improve fiscal sustainability and public expenditures in education, the Project not 
only supports an increase in the education sector budget over the medium-term, but also 
promotes improvement in the composition, quality and efficiency of sector expenditures. 
Underpinning this are the fiduciary reforms and actions.  The Project supports 
improvements in financial management practices to instill a culture of remedial action on 
audits and strengthening capacity and awareness for better and increased spending in line 
with sector objectives, including improved internal audit capacity. Procurement reforms 
will continue, pending work under the procurement reform strategy will be undertaken, 
and work on new rules for procurement of goods and works will be completed, supported 
with capacity building in managing and monitoring procurements.  Better procurement 
practices in civil works, textbooks, and furniture will be developed and implemented.  
 
To enhance quality, ongoing and proposed interventions by the Government include: (i) 
improved teaching practices through a teacher professional development program 
including on-site mentoring; (ii) enhanced use of teaching and learning materials through 
the development and implementation of a program for provision of good quality teacher 
resource and supplementary material; (iii) establishment of a provincial teacher 
accreditation system; and (iv) provision of performance-based incentives to well-
performing schools as well as a program to provide additional support to low performing 
schools.  
 
On the access side, key interventions to improve completion and participation rates, and 
increase the transition from primary to secondary level by: (i) provision of demand side 
interventions, such as on-time delivery of free textbooks to public school students in 
Grades 1-10 and continuing textbook publishing and printing through open competition, 
and on-time provision of stipends to eligible girls; (ii) implementing supply side 
interventions, including program to decrease missing facilities in schools, up-gradation of 
schools from primary to middle, and middle to secondary levels according to criteria that 
Page  3
favor girls and rural areas; and (iii) providing greater support to the private sector in areas 
with low enrollments, through the Punjab Education Foundation (PEF).  
 
Strategic objectives to support management and governance are: enhanced 
accountability of teachers to parents and stakeholders at the local level; increased 
capacity of School Councils (SCs) for effective school management; reduction in teacher 
absenteeism; recruitment and placement of teachers on a merit and need basis; 
transparent examination and assessment systems to enable quality information on student 
learning.  The Project supports SC capacity building through phased mobilization and 
capacity support to all primary schools, and ensuring a streamlined mechanism for 
transfer of recurrent non-salary budgets to all SCs.  The Project builds upon the well-
established monitoring systems in the sector, strengthens field monitoring, mainstreams 
monitoring in the district education departments and creates greater capacity for planning 
and evaluation at the provincial level.Transparent recruitment of teachers on need basis 
and strengthening of the examination system managed by a fully autonomous and 
functional Punjab Examinations Commission (PEC) are also key elements of this sub-
component.  
 
Project Design:  The proposed Project is a US$350 million Specific Investment Credit 
that uses a programmatic approach to support the implementation of the PESRP.  It is 
structured around two components:  (i) Component I - Program Financing: This 
component accounts for the large part of the total financing provided by the Bank and 
Development Partners (DPs).  This component includes the four pillars of the PESRP 
mentioned above that together help contribute to the project development objectives; and 
(ii) Component 2 
–
Technical Assistance - which will provide support to strengthen 
existing capacities for implementation and monitoring of the sector program.  Credit 
disbursements will reimburse selected key education budget line items referred to as 
Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs), up to capped absolute amounts.  Second, the 
event and amount of credit disbursements will be based on the achievement of pre-
specified results, referred to as disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), determined in 
partnership with Government.  As currently structured, the total disbursement amount is 
evenly divided across the total number of DLIs in a given year, conditional on meeting at 
least 80 percent of the agreed DLIs. Third, the small technical assistance component 
disbursement under which is not linked to the DLIs and EEPs, will disburse as in a 
traditional investment operation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented across the entire Province of Punjab, which has several 
types of geo-physical characteristics. Geographically, the province can be divided into 
five zones: (i) Northern Hilly Region including Murree hills and adjoining areas; (ii) 
Potohar Plateau including Rawalpindi, Chakwal and Jhelum districts; (iii) Central Plain 
which mostly consists of river interfluves and includes the districts of Lahore, 
Gujranwala, Faisalabad, Sheikhupura, Sahiwal and others; (iv) desert like plains in South 
Punjab, including Multan, Rahimyar Khan and Bahawalpur districts; and (v) Cholistan 
and Thal Deserts.  The Northern Hilly region is prone to earthquakes, whereas the river 
Page  4
interfluves experience occasional flooding during the monsoon periods.  Water 
availability is a problem in the Thal and Cholistan deserts, while water quality 
–
both 
surface and ground water – is a serious issue in and around most of the urban centers of 
the province.  Groundwater is generally available, though at varying depths, in the 
Potohar Plateau, Central Plain and Desert Like Plains, though its quality is generally poor 
in the southern parts of the province.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment: A majority of the program activities to be funded by the Bank are 
environmentally benign and will rather result in environmental benefits.  Some of the 
Project activities however, such as rehabilitation of existing schools, construction of 
missing facilities, and sewage disposal from schools may cause low levels of negative 
environmental impacts, including soil and groundwater contamination and ambient air 
quality deterioration.  However, none of these activities are likely to have any large scale 
and/or irreversible negative impacts.  
 
Social: Land acquisition is not envisaged hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. However, the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) lays down the conditions 
that will be met for any voluntary land donation.  It states that for any donated  land an 
agreement/MOU will be signed  between the donor and the recipient that will ensure: (i) 
the ownership of the land and voluntary nature of the donation; (ii) that the land is 
appropriate for the intended purpose; (iii) that the land does not belong to any donor who 
is below the poverty line or whose holding would be reduced below the minimum size as 
stipulated to be economically viable (2.5 acres); (iv)  that there are no encumbrances on 
the land; (v) that  it does not negatively impact the livelihood of any vulnerable groups, 
Page  5
and if so, that community developed mitigation measures are acceptable to the affectees, 
(vi) that no compensation will be paid for the land; and (vii) that the owner will give up 
all claims on the land and the title will be transferred to the recipient through the notary 
public or a registered deed or any other procedure prescribed by the law of the state. The 
Social Assessment did not identify any Indigenous groups (as defined by OP 4 10) in the 
Project area hence this policy is not triggered. However, during implementation should it 
be triggered, the Borrower will prepare an IPDP, get it cleared by the Bank and 
implement it.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment:  The Project is not likely to cause any indirect or long-term negative 
environmental impacts.  Rather, some of the Project interventions 
–
such asprovision of 
sanitary blocks with proper waste disposal arrangements, and provision of safe drinking 
water at schools – will have positive environmental impactsin future.  
 
Social: There are no potential negative social impacts anticipated.  However, some 
positive impacts are built into the Project such as ensuring that any person below the 
poverty level does not suffer from any land donation. The Project is sensitive to the needs 
of girls/boys and the less developed districts that will receive focused attention in the 
planned interventions of the Project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No Project alternatives were considered owing to the low significance of the potential 
impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: The Borrower has conducted an Environmental Assessment and developed 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  The mitigation 
measures proposed in the EA/ESMF address the negative environmental impacts of the 
Project activity to the acceptable level.  The ESMF includes steps to enhance the 
Borrower’s capacity to implement the EA/ESMF.  The ESMF also proposes appropriate 
institutional arrangements to ensure effective implementation of the safeguards; and in 
this respect, an environmental coordinator has been designated within the PMIU, and an 
environmental focal point will be designated in each district.  
 
Social: The Borrower has conducted a Social and Gender Assessment to inform the 
Project design and identify social safeguards triggered and has also prepared an ESMF. 
The ESMF will (along with environmental assessment) also enhance the capacity of the 
Borrower to address social safeguards issues.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the students (girls and boys), parents/guardians, communities 
where the schools are located, School Council (SC) members, teachers, Department of 
Education (different categories of staff), NGOs/CBOs located in the area, PEF, media, 
think tanks etc.  Consultations have been held with all these groups during the 
preparation of the Social and Gender Assessment (SGA)  and the ESMF.  In addition the 
SGA provides a consultation strategy to involve the major stakeholders over the life of 
the Project.  All documents will be disclosed at the website of the School Education 
Department, at the public libraries of the province, as well as at the Project office and at 
the district level. Furthermore, the executive summary will be translated and disclosed at 
all these locations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sofia Shakil 
04/14/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid 
04/14/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
04/14/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/14/2009 
Comments:  cleared. Please refer to safeguards clearance memo of 04/01 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
04/14/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
