Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC4317
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P105075 
Project Name:  Third Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund Project 
Task Team Leader:  Kevin John Crockford 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (70%);Other social services (10%);Water supply 
(10%);Roads and highways (5%);Irrigation and drainage (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Improving labor markets (P);Gender (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective for the proposed project is to empower the targeted rural poor 
with increased incomes, improved productive capacity and access to services to achieve 
sustainable livelihoods. This will be achieved by increased organization and inclusion of 
the rural poor 
–
including women and ultra poor households – in community 
organizations and their enhanced participation in economic activities, skill enhancement 
for taking-up higher value employment, and increased income through an increased asset 
base, improved infrastructure and market linkages. The project has mainstreamed gender 
into its objectives and design, the key outcome indicators to assess achievement of the 
PDO will be the following:  
 
•
Community institutions that are inclusive, viable and sustainable  
 
•
An increase in household incomes (or a consumption based proxy)  
 
•
Improved access to municipal and local services   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed PPAF III project builds on 8 years of PPAF experience and aims to 
improve poverty outcomes through consolidation and a saturation approach in targeted 
Page  2
areas, a stronger focus on the marginalized groups of the most vulnerable and poorest 
households including women, and through integrated approaches to livelihood 
enhancement that learn from other programs in Pakistan and South Asia. The PPAF III 
project would also strengthen its approach to building inclusive institutions of the poor 
and improving their access to markets and local government. The approach of PPAF III 
to credit would be to facilitate outreach, improve capacity and build access to (rather than 
primarily provide) micro-credit.  
 
The project comprises of five components: i) Social mobilization and institution 
building and; ii) Livelihoods enhancement and protection; iii) Micro-credit access; (iv) 
Basic services & infrastructure; and v) Project implementation support. The key features 
of each proposed component is as follows:  
 
Component 1: Social Mobilization and Institution Building (US$ 50 million): The 
objective of this component is to target and empower the poor by supporting their 
organization into three tiers namely the COs and aggregation at a higher village 
institution and Union Council level, to build voice and scale for an effective interface 
with local government bodies, other development programs and markets. PPAFs Partner 
Organizations will be entrusted with the task of intensifying their coverage within the 
Union Council and strengthen new and existing community institutions.  
 
Component 2: Livelihood enhancement and protection (US$ 62 million): The objective 
of this component is to develop the capacity, opportunities, assets and productivity of 
community members to reduce their vulnerability to shocks, improve their livelihoods 
initiatives and strengthen their business operations.  
 
Component 3: Micro-credit access (US$ 50 million): The objective of this component is 
to improve availability and access of the poor to micro-finance to enhance their 
capacities, productivity and returns from livelihood initiatives. In most areas, the 
intention would be to improve access to existing micro-finance (both PPAF financed and 
other sources).  
 
Component 4: Basic Services and Infrastructure (US$ 80.0 million): The objective of 
this component is (a) to establish and upgrade basic services and community 
infrastructure to serve the poor (US$50m), and (b) improved health and education 
facilities (US$30m).  
 
Component 5: Project Implementation Support (US$ 5 million): The component will 
facilitate various governance, implementation, coordination, monitoring & evaluation, 
learning and quality enhancement efforts in the project. It will consist of the following 
four sub-components: (i) Governance Management; (ii) Project Management; (iii) 
Monitoring and Evaluation; and (iv) Capacity Building for institutional development.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented throughout the country. PPAF is an apex organization 
that has a strong outreach at the community and village levels in 112 districts of the 
country. Through a network of 70 Partner Organizations (POs) they have organized over 
92,000 community organizations in 32,000 villages/rural and urban settlements in 112 (of 
the 114) districts of the country. The various development activities such as microcredit, 
infrastructure, education and health, skills trainings are executed through the POs with 
field offices around the country. The proposed PPAF III project builds on 8 years of 
PPAF experience and aims to improve poverty outcomes through consolidation and a 
saturation approach in targeted areas at the Union Council Level with a stronger focus on 
the marginalized groups of the most vulnerable and poorest households including women, 
and through integrated approaches to livelihood enhancement that learn from other 
programs in Pakistan and South Asia.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The conventional infrastructure projects proposed under PPAF-III are small in scale and 
operation and maintenance by communities guarantees effective use of natural resources, 
thereby, ensuring environmentally benign interventions. Similarly the projects are 
socially beneficial. Since there is no land acquisition or resettlement or relocation, there 
are no large scale significant social impacts anticipated.  
 
Furthermore, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
developed by PPAF addresses whatever negative impacts of these interventions may 
cause. Owing to their size and nature, the interventions planned under the project are not 
Page  4
likely to cause any significant, large scale and/or irreversible environmental or social 
impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not likely to cause any indirect or long term negative environmental 
impacts.  Rather, some of the project interventions 
–
such as provision of safe drinking 
water and sanitation facilities for the communities – will have positive environmental 
impacts in future.  
 
It is expected that PPAF's poverty reduction initiatives will continue to have a beneficial 
impact on the poor and low-income, particularly women. Findings of independent studies 
as well as feedback from monitoring visits will be undertaken to confirm that the 
interventions are inclusive in nature and benefits are distributed equitably among the 
communities and regions. No long term negative social impact is anticipated in the 
project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No project alternatives were considered owing to the low significance of the potential 
impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard Policies and their Effectiveness: PPAF's ESMF is based on the Bank’s 
Safeguard Policies and it has been cleared by the Bank. It addresses the potential negative 
impacts of the project interventions, provides policies and procedures for social and 
environmental management, and also furnishes simple tools for early screening of 
activities to ensure that they are subject to an adequate, but not unnecessarily 
burdensome, level of social and environmental assessment and mitigation.  
 
To ensure compliance,  the ESMF will  be a part of the Financing Agreement signed 
between PPAF and POs as well as of the sub-project Financing Agreement signed 
between a PO and a community.  
 
Monitoring & Documenting Compliance: Rigorous preliminary and desk appraisal 
screens out  NGOs that do not comply with safeguards. For POs, compliance with social 
and environmental safeguards (as provided in the eligibility criteria and the ESMF 
checklists)will be  monitored during site visits . Findings will be documented in field visit 
reports, and any issues reported to the concerned PO. The field visit reports are collated 
by PPAF every 6 months to reviewe performance and compliance trends.  In addition, 
PPAF will engage consultants to conduct external monitoring on an annual basis, to 
validate the safeguard compliance reported by the POs and the findings of the internal 
monitoring carried out by PAPF staff.  
 
Page  5
Institutional Arrangements:  In order to ensure effective implementation of ESMF, 
PPAF will establish an Environmental and Social Management Group (ESMG) within its 
organization.  ESMG will plan and implement capacity building activities for the PPAF 
and PO staff defined in ESMF.  In addition, ESMG will carry out environmental and 
social monitoring in the field mentioned above, and also develop quarterly and annual 
reports based on the internal monitoring carried out by the PPAF staff and the external 
monitoring conducted by the consultants engaged for this purpose.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The PPAF Project is designed by the Bank in partnership with the Government, PPAF 
and it POs. The apex continues to solicit feedback from all stakeholders (including poor 
communities) for improving its service delivery. PPAF also carries out an extensive 360 
degree feedback with its POs to reflect on its business processes and better facilitation 
and understanding by all stakeholders. The Major stakeholders are the communities 
benefiting and CBOs participating in the program (men and women), The Participating 
POs, the federal and provincial government (ministries, departments’ agencies, boards 
etc.) Civil society organizations, think tanks, academia, NGOs working on gender and 
poverty issues, financial institutions i.e. banks (commercial and investment,) media, 
donors, IFIs, etc.  
 
Consultation is a regular feature of PPAF’s work and is an on-going activity with the 
major stakeholders. Round tables are regularly held with the different stakeholders to 
receive feedback, monitor activities, etc. The same will be followed for consultation on 
safeguards issues.  
 
The ESMF will be disclosed in the website of the PPAF and the POs along with the 
offices of PPAF, POs, and participating Community Organizations and will also be 
placed in the public libraries of the major cities. In addition the executive summary will 
be translated into the local languages and disclosed in a similar manner.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/16/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/23/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
N/A 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  7
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kevin John Crockford 
04/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Omar Khalid 
04/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
04/23/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/23/2009 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
04/23/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
