Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3291 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Panama 
Project ID: P106445 
Project Name: PA Health Project 
Task Team Leader: Fernando Montenegro Torres 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Health system performance (P);Nutrition and food security 
(P);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Th
e
proposed Project would support the Government’s efforts in meeting two mainobjectives:  
 
(i) Improving the delivery and financial sustainability of basic primary health care and 
preventive services of MoH to rural poor households and indigenous communities; and  
 
(ii) Improving the health system’s performance by strengthening the stewardshiprole of MoH.  
 
Specifically the Project would provide support for:  
 
i) Technical assistance and investments to ensure continuity and improved provision of basic 
health care and preventive services to the poor in rural areas, including better planning and 
coordination of the mobile provider teams that deliver PAISS+N services with the rest of the 
public network at the regional level.  
 
ii) Technical assistance and investments for strengthening the stewardship role of the MoH.  
 
Page  2
iii) Technical assistance to support the Government’s efforts to develop an incentive framework 
for more effective and efficient provision of health care among public sector providers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The estimated Project cost is US$ 50 million with a Bank loan of US$ 35 million to be 
implemented over four years.  Building upon the experience of the Rural Health Project that was 
financed by the World Bank and on the Multifase Project currently financed by the IADB until 
October 2008, the proposed Project would have four components.  
 
Component 1: Ensuring continuity, sustainability and improved delivery of basic health and 
preventive services to poor households and indigenous communities in remote rural areas (US$ 
45 million)  
 
Subcomponent 1.1 Financing capitated payments for provision of PAISS+N  (US$ 41.7 
million):  
 
This component would include financing to support capitated payments for PAISS to 119,000 
beneficiaries of RO living in indigenous communities, and PAISS+N to approximately 281,000 
individuals from poor households living in remote rural areas.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2 Support for improving the primary health care network focusing on the poor 
in rural areas including the improving the integration and supervision of PAISS+N at the 
regional level (US$ 1 million):  
 
This subcomponent would include financing to support:  (i) technical assistance and training for 
improving planning and supervision of PAISS+N and its integration to the primary health care 
network in all health regions, prioritizing rural areas and improving access for individuals from 
poor households and indigenous communities living in rural areas; and (ii) technical assistance, 
training and investments for improving cultural appropriateness in the delivery of primary health 
care services to indigenous communities, with an emphasis on mother and child health care.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Basic investments to ensure adequate supply side capacity in the MoH 
(US$ 2.3  million)  
 
This subcomponent would finance technical assistance, training, equipment and refurbishment 
of health establishments to improve the supply capacity of MoH health care providers at the 
regional level, with an emphasis on primary care and children and mothers’ health and 
preventive services for the poor in rural areas. The Project would finance rehabilitation of 
existing health infrastructures.  No involuntary resettlement is anticipated.  
 
Component 2: Support for strengthening the stewardship role of the MoH (US$ 3 million)  
 
This component would finance:  (i)  technical assistance, training and investments to improve 
procurement, quality control and distribution of pharmaceuticals in the public sector; and (ii) 
technical assistance and training to improve collection, management and monitoring of data in 
the health sector and to improve decision-making by and performance of public providers.  
Page  3
Component 3: Support for unification process of public health system (US$ 1 million)  
 
This component would finance technical assistance:  (i) for the development of the national 
strategy, adjustments to legal framework and critical pathway for integration of public health 
system; and (ii) to design and implement a social marketing campaign to inform and educate the 
population about the process of integration of the public health care system and the strengthening 
of the stewardship role of MoH.  
 
Component 4: Development and implementation of M&E system (US$ 1 million)  
 
This component would finance technical assistance:  (i) to support the design and 
implementation of a monitoring system, which will provide timely data on the PAISS+N strategy 
to decision makers at the regional and national level about the implementation of PAISS+N; and 
(ii) for measuring the impact of PAISS+N.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National scope.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Currently being evaluated.  To be submitted at appraisal stage.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is not expected that the proposed Project would generate substantial negative 
environmental impacts, but an increased generation of healthcare waste is likely as are temporary 
impacts arising from small-scale civil works such as the refurbishment of health centers.  An 
assessment of current healthcare waste disposal practices will be prepared, which will inform an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that will include guidelines for the transportation and 
final disposal of healthcare waste generated by the project.  In addition, environmental guidelines 
for the rehabilitation of health centers will be included in the EMP as well as bidding documents 
for contractors.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
U
-
Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Both Indigenous Peoples Plan and Environment Management Plan will be completed and 
disclosed before appraisal.  The specific dates for each will be submitted at appraisal stage.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres 
01/08/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
01/08/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
