Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3424
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P106445 
Project Name:  Health Equity and Performance Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Fernando Montenegro Torres 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (P);Health system performance (P);Nutrition and food security 
(P);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
19.20
19.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project’s Development Objectives are to: (i) increase access of targeted  underserved 
rural communities to basic health services known to help reduce under-five child 
mortality; and (ii) support the development of strategic planning, regulatory, and 
monitoring mechanisms known to improve health system performance.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would be financed with an Specific Investment Loan and would have four 
components:  
 
Component 1:  Support for ensuring access to primary health care services by the poor 
in rural areas. The objective of this component is to increase access by targeted 
underserved communities to basic health services known to help reduce under-five child 
mortality.  
 
Component 2: Increase responsiveness of primary health services networks to 
vulnerable populations in rural areas. The objective of this component is to increase 
Page  2
capacity of primary health care networks to respond to health care service demand by 
poor and indigenous rural communities.  
 
Component 3:  Enhancing MOH institutional capacity to conduct strategic planning to 
improve health system performance. This component seeks to improve health system 
performance by supporting the development of strategic planning, monitoring, regulatory 
and enforcement mechanisms.  
 
Component 4: Strengthening institutional capacity to manage monitoring and 
information systems for results-based financing. This component aims to increase MOH 
institutional capacity to develop and manage monitoring and information systems, and 
impact evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1 will target poor rural areas of Panama.  The remaining components are 
expected to have nationwide benefits.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Ms Amy Faust (LCSDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment  
 
The Project triggers OP 4.01 due to possible increases in the production of healthcare 
waste (HCW) and minor rehabilitation works. The Project is not expected to generate any 
large scale, significant, or irreversible impacts, but localized impacts are possible from 
the improper transport, treatment or final disposal of HCW by mobile teams or regional 
health facilities.  In financing the refurbishment of existing health establishments, no new 
Page  3
construction will take place, although minor impacts could result from rehabilitation 
activities and the disposal of construction wastes.  
 
Indigenous Peoples  
 
The present project supports GOP efforts to improve access to basic health services by 
the poor in targeted communities of rural areas of Panama including some indigenous 
communities. Therefore, the project triggers OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. Consistent 
with the latter, the borrower prepared an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) based on the 
regional consultations carried out by a technical team conformed by representatives of the 
Planning, Promotion, Services Provision and General Directorates of MINSA. The IPP is 
part of MINSA’s  Indigenous Health Framework (draft) which was consulted with the 
National Commission of Indigenous Peoples of Panama (CONAPIP).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Improper disposal of needles and pathogenic waste could result in indirect impacts on 
human health and environmental contamination. Mobile health teams perform services in 
varied locations, from schools to open-air areas, and face difficult transportation logistics 
to and from the often remote areas in which they work.  A lack of proper equipment for 
treatment, transportation and disposal of wastes coupled with undefined procedures from 
generation to disposal increase the risks of indirect impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Assessment  
 
The Panama Social Protection Project, financed by the Bank and approved by the Board 
in 2007, includes a health component that is also expected to increase access to basic 
health care in rural areas through extending access to a basic package of ambulatory 
services with mobile teams (kown as PAISS).  A preliminary diagnostic of the 
regulations and practices for the management of healthcare waste generated by mobile 
teams was completed in January 2008.  This study indicated that, while legislation and 
guidelines for HCW management exist in Panama and there have been past initiatives to 
implement rules and regulations, actual management of HCW in the field and in regional 
health establishments has been inadequate.  
 
As this Project complements and expands work done under the health component of the 
Panama Social Protection Project, the MOH has carried out additional consultations with 
mobile health teams and regional health establishments, and has produced a more in-
depth analysis of HCW practices from generation to disposal as well as an action plan for 
the mitigation of potential impactsin order to identify and mitigate environmental impacts 
Page  4
of HCW generated by the Project.  The action plan includes detailed checklists of 
procedures, from generation of waste to final disposal, specifically tailored to the unique 
situations of mobile teams and regional health centers.  Given that project activities 
would also include the refurbishment of existing health centers, the MOH has also 
conducted an environmental screening of sites of proposed refurbishments and developed 
procedures for contractors outlining environmental, health and safety guidelines specific 
to minor works in the health sector that are consistent with national regulations.These 
guidelines will be included in the Operations Manual, as well as bidding documents for 
rehabilitation works.  
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan  
 
The Indigenous Peoples Plan seeks to support MOH in the formulation of its own 
Health and Indigenous Peoples Policy (Politica de Atencion a los Pueblos Indigenas), by 
means of a number of activities to strengthen health policies to better respond to the 
particular needs and demands of the different ethnic groups of the country, inside and 
outside the Comarcas.  One of the main objectives of the IPP is to carry out the cultural 
adaptation of the health care services to improve access and utilization by indigenous 
people.  Most of the IPP activities will be included under Component 2 of the Project.  
The MOH unit responsible for carrying out the IPP is the Indigenous Planning Office in 
coordination with the Regional Health Directorates and the Health Services Provision, the 
Promotion, and Statistics, and General Directorates of MINSA.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Assessment  
 
The key stakeholders include national, regional, and local health authorities, mobile 
health teams from both MOH and Non-Governmental Organizations (known as 
Organizaciones Externas - OEs) that deliver basic health services in rural areas.  The 
previous assessment conducted by MOH included consultation with one health region 
(out of fourteen) and a selection of professionals from mobile health teams.  Both the 
assessment and action plan produced under the Panama Social Protection Project have 
been published on MOH’s website.  For the expanded study under this Project, additional 
health regions and mobile teams have been consulted and results of these meetings were 
incorporated into the environmental assessment and action plan. The revised EA and 
action plan will be disclosed prior to appraisal.  
 
Indigenous Peoples  
 
Consultations with stakeholders and beneficiaries of health care services were carried 
out by a team composed by staff from the central and regional levels of MOH, with 
technical assistance from the World Bank.  Consultations took place in three indigenous 
areas of the country:  Eastern Panama (Comarca Kuna Madungandi), Comarca Ngobe 
Bugle, and Bocas del Toro and interviews with Kuna Yala Regional authorities.  Focus 
groups and interviews were conducted with indigenous men and women, midwives, 
Page  5
traditional healers and health promoters, staff from health facilities of MOH, and other 
indigenous representatives, caciques, sahilas, indigenous Congress representatives, 
hospital directors and staff, casa materna and albergue administrators, and users.  The 
National Commission of Indigenous Peoples of Panama (CONAPIP) was consulted.  The 
main objective of the consultations was to identify together with stakeholders and users, 
good practices of cultural adaptation of health care services as well as potential 
geographic and/or cultural obstacles affecting the access and utilization of health care 
services in indigenous areas.  The recommendations were considered in project design.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  6
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres 
04/08/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Faust 
04/08/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
04/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
04/15/2008 
Comments:   
