Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3532 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Panama 
Project ID: P109361 
Project Name: PA Sustainable Tourism 
Task Team Leader: Daniel A. Hoornweg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 6, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other industry (40%);Water supply (30%);Sewerage (30%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to assist the government in regulating and managing the 
tourism sector in an inclusive way that provides benefits to the poor and ensures sustainability.  
 
The objectives will be attained through:  
 
Component 1: Technical assistance, capacity building and improved information monitoring of 
the Ministry of Tourism and related agencies.  
 
Component 2: Support of detailed investment planning and implementation in one tourism 
destination, with a particular focus on ensuring that proposed investments maximize benefits to 
the poor and minimize potential environmental impacts.  
 
The first component, support in implementation of the recently ratified Tourism Law is at a 
National Level, while the second component is at a local, tourism destination level and focuses 
more on the details of assessment and implementation of specific investments. The Colon-
Portobello area is the tentative destination area for the second component as requested by the 
Page  2
Ministry of Tourism.  There are several related World Bank projects working in the same area, 
e.g. the land titling project and micro-finance. Efforts will be made to coordinate activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project’s $30 million financial influence is small compared to overall investments 
needs in the sector. Nevertheless, the project will provide assistance to establish clear standards 
for sustainable tourism and generate relevant information on the distribution of tourism benefits 
to the poor.  In addition, the proposed project includes support to strengthen local government 
capacity to safeguard cultural and environmental preservation.  
 
The project is considering the following components:  
 
Component 1: Technical assistance, capacity building and improved information monitoring of 
the Ministry of Tourism and related agencies.  
 
This component will improve overall performance of government’s management of the tourism 
sector through the development of: (i) analytical tools and eligibility criteria to tailor investments 
in tourism that maximize benefits to the poor; (ii) certification standards and indicators on 
sustainable tourism that include social and poverty and local environmental impacts, and; (iii) 
integrated land use planning (and public consultation).  This component will include an emphasis 
on cultural preservation and community participation with a possible pilot in an indigenous 
community. The project will help develop capacities of all relevant groups to engage in tourism 
related activities.  
 
This component includes institutional strengthening of IPAT at central, provincial and regional 
level. This component will support an Annual Sustainable Tourism Report that will collect socio-
economic data across the different regions of the country, and complement the information from 
the Travel and Competitiveness Report published by the World Economic Forum. The Project 
will also support relevant agencies (e.g. IPAT and the Statistics Department - Contraloria) to fill 
data gaps needed for more accurate monitoring of the sector’s impacts at the local level.  
 
Component 2: Support of detailed investment planning and implementation in one tourism 
destination.  This component will have a particular focus on ensuring that proposed investments 
maximize benefits to the poor, and minimize potential environmental impacts. During 
preparation of infrastructure investments, cost-benefit analysis and value-chain analysis will 
identify the areas where the project could have the most impact. The Government has shown 
preliminary interest in intervening in the Colon-Portobelo area, in which case, investments will 
include redevelopment of cultural heritage sites, revitalization of urban areas, roads, water and 
sanitation, community facilities, signage.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The preliminary area of intervention is Colon and Portobelo area, located in the north part of the 
country, at the entrance of the Panama Canal on the Caribbean Sea. Colon, being a port city, is a 
free trade free zone and it is expected to be the home port for cruises at the end of 2008. Any 
adverse impacts of tourism related activities would be mitigated by environmental and social 
assessments. In collaboration with the CEA team, a Social Accounting Matrix model will be 
Page  3
developed to permit ex-ante assessment of the direction and magnitude of the local economic and 
poverty impacts of the growth of the tourism sector.  
 
Portobelo is located about an hour’s drive from Colon, with tourism potential, given its history 
and cultural assets. The project will safeguard cultural and environmental preservation in this 
area. Early in project preparation the team will confirm with government if a pilot project is to be 
supported in one or more indigenous comarcas. If so, a comprehensive indigenous people’s 
framework will be completed prior to appraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Environmental Authority (ANAM) is responsible for strengthening environmental 
regulation and has achieved significant progress in implementing policy measures to protect 
natural resources, coordinate among other entities and make information accessible to civil 
society.  
 
The Panamanian Institute of Tourism (IPAT) is in charge of planning and regulating the 
tourism sector. Recent legislation, Law Decree No. 4 of 2008, will transform IPAT into an 
autonomous entity with the responsibility of promoting a competitive and sustainable tourism 
sector.  
 
Coordination between ANAM and IPAT is necessary for developing the Sustainable Tourism 
Master Plan (STMP) that IPAT is envisioning for the year 2020. The team has identified that the 
STMP needs to strengthen the emphasis on environmental analysis in order to identify 
infrastructure investments. The project will work with IPAT and ANAM to develop certification 
standards on sustainable tourism that include actions to mitigate social and local environmental 
impacts.  
 
The Government of Panama has considerable experience with World Bank safeguard policies. 
Currently a detailed Country Environmental Assessment is being prepared, which includes a 
chapter on tourism and tourism related impacts to the environment. Panama also has an ongoing 
program of identifying unique needs and aspirations of indigenous communities and these are 
integrated within the Ministry of Tourism’s long term development plans.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental framework will be prepared for the project. During project preparation, the 
Bank will work with the government on establishing eligibility criteria for financing civil works 
that are expected to be of a small to medium scale. It is expected that these will have a range of 
impacts with known mitigation and management measures.  The project will include certification 
standards for the tourism industry, actions to mitigate local environmental impacts and public 
awareness for environmental management.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The protection and safeguarding of natural habitats will be included and as an integral 
component of the environmental assessment framework. Consistent with Bank practices and 
Government of Panama legislation natural habitats, that could be impacted by project activities, 
will be delineated and mitigation programs identified prior to any civil works.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
N/A   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
N/A   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Some of the sub-project investments will be based on cultural heritage in the area of 
Portobelo and Colon. The sub-project screening process will ensure that measures are taken to 
protect historic sites and patrimony assets. The Sustainable Tourism Master Plan highlighted the 
potential of developing culture based activities related to tourism. The Bank will work with 
IPAT in ways to enhace visitor appreciation of the cultural manifestations and put in place 
management strategies in the tourist destinations.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project may have a pilot in one of the indigenous comarcas, in which case an indigenous 
peoples plan will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
At this early stage of preparation it is not envisioned that the project will have involuntary 
resettlement. It will be determined once investments are identified.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
N/A   
Environmental Category:
 
U
-
Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/10/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Project preparation is following a programmatic approach. At project appraisal the team does 
not envisage that specific infrastructure investments will have been identified. Therefore 
during project preparation frameworks for environmental and social assessments will be 
developed and agreed with government. These will include issues such as legal framework, 
natural habitats, cultural protection, and involuntary resettlement.  
 
At this stage of project preparation, the environmental category is not defined as specific 
investments or locations have not yet been identified. The project team will meet with SAT 
prior to the QER to agree on categorization and review safeguard requirements.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel A. Hoornweg 
04/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
04/22/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
