Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3916 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Panama 
Project ID: P110024 
Project Name: PA (AF) Land Administration 
Task Team Leader: Frederic de Dinechin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Land administration and management (P);Personal and 
property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
23.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objective of the additional financing operation would remain the same as the 
restructured parent project: to modernize the land administration system, including priority 
protected areas and indigenous territories.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
All four parent project components are proposed for scaling up.  
 
Component 1: Land Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework: This component aims at 
providing the policy, legal and institutional framework, as well as the capacity needed by the 
project agencies to deliver land administration services. The original project envisaged actions 
on three specific sets of activities: (a) introducing a series of land policy, legal/regulatory, and 
institutional reforms to simplify land titling, enable land sales and rentals, consolidate protected 
areas and indigenous territories, and serve as a basis for land valuation and taxation; (b) 
establishing inter-institutional co-management mechanisms at the national and local level; and 
(c) building capacity in local level NGOs and municipalities.  
Page  2
The AF loan will support the following: (a) studies on land valuation, real estate taxes and land 
markets, and any additional strengthening of institutions from the legal and regulatory 
standpoint; (b) continued functioning of the Superior Council (CS), Operational Technical 
Committee (CTO), the Consultative Council at the national level, and the establishment and 
operation of at least three additional Technical Operating Units at the local level in the new areas 
proposed for coverage under the scaling up; and (c) participation through local level civil society 
organizations and round table conferences, and strengthening municipalities in the new areas 
proposed for the scaling up.  
 
Component 2: Land Regularization: This component aims at activities required for the massive 
land regularization process in project areas. The original project envisaged actions in four sets of 
activities: (a) modernizing the geodetic network and generating maps and satellite images to 
identify parcels in rural and urban areas for regularization, and for demarcation of protected 
areas and indigenous territories; (b) carrying out cadastral surveys to feed ground truths into the 
satellite imagery and to resolve issues relating to property rights; (c) developing an integrated 
information system (SIICAR) and updating it with cadastral survey data; and (d) establishing 
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.  
 
The AF loan will support the following in relation to the geodetic network: (a) limited 
strengthening of the mapping agency to improve its capacity to maintain the geodetic network 
and cartography; (b) generation of ortho-photos for the remaining 50% of the country.  
 
Cadastral surveys will be carried out to facilitate land regularization in the following areas in 
the proposed two provinces of Panama and Colon, namely, Panama East (Chepo, Chiman, 
Panama), Panama West (Chame, San Carlos, Capira, La Chorrera), and Colon (excluding coastal 
areas). It will also cover urban areas in Chiriqu√≠ that were not included in the original project, 
namely, David, Bugaba, Baru, and Dolega.  
 
Since SIICAR would be fully functional in the Property Registry and Cadastre under the 
original project, the proposed project would assist only with: (a) the integration into SIICAR of 
field information relating to the additional areas specifically covered by the AF operation; and 
(b) installation of, and training on, the SIICAR system in Panamaís Environment Authority 
(ANAM, responsible for protected areas) and participating municipalities.  
 
Component 3: Consolidation of Protected Areas and Indigenous Territories: Under the original 
project, this component aims at: (a) demarcation and consolidation of 25 existing protected areas 
and establishment of five new protected areas; and (b) demarcation of two already recognized 
and one new indigenous territory that needs to be established as an autonomous territory 
(comarcas Kuna and Ngobe Bugle, and the Naso territory respectively). It is a key objective of 
this component to achieve the legal recognition and demarcation of indigenous lands. The 
consolidation process of both indigenous lands and protected areas gives priority to the concept 
of ìconservation with participationî as well to public consultation with respect for traditional 
practices (especially with respect to indigenous peoples).  
 
Page  3
The proposed AF will cover some existing and proposed new protected areas in four specific 
zones: (a) Zone 1: Manglares de Chame Multiple Use Area; (b) Zone 2: Tapagra, Maje, and Isla 
del Rey hydrological reserves and Bahia de Panama Wetland of International Importance; (c) 
Zone 3: San Lorenzo Protection Forest and Protected Landscape and Donoso proposed protected 
area; and (d) Zone 4: Chagres National Park (inhabited by both indigenous and non-indigenous 
peoples). The nature and scope of activities relating to the demarcation and consolidation of 
protected areas will remain the same as in the parent project.  
 
The AF project also proposes to cover an additional three indigenous community groups: 
Embera (consisting of Maje Cordillera, Pirati and Ipeti), Wounaan (consisting of Chiman, Rio 
Hondo and Platanares), and Kuna (consisting of Madungandi, Wargandi and Kuna Yala 
comarcas). Following the methodology of the original project, the scope and nature of the 
activities relating to each community/territory will be decided in systematic consultation with the 
participating indigenous communities.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and M&E: The original project envisaged: (a) capacity 
building of land administration entities, including strengthening the entities to provide land 
administration services on a decentralized basis; (b) development of a land valuation and 
taxation system; (c) establishing the Project Management unit; and (d) putting in place an M&E 
system.  
 
The AF operation proposes to: (a) continue with the institutional strengthening initiative, 
particularly relating to decentralization of land administration service provision in the new 
provinces; and (b) support the continued functioning of the Project Management Unit and M&E 
system during the extended project period, up to December 31, 2012.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Government now proposes to expand the scope of the parent project to cover: (a) provinces 
of Panama and Colon for the rural and urban lands; (b) some additional urban lands in the 
province of Chiriqu√≠; (c) some additional protected areas in Panama and Colon which were 
outside the scope of the parent project; and (d) three additional indigenous territories (Maje 
Cordillera, Pirat√≠ and Ipeti for the Emberas; Chiman, Rio Hondo and Platanares for the 
Wounaan; and Madungandi, Wargandi and Kuna Yala comarcas for the Kunas).   
 
E.  Borrowerís Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is categorized ìBî from the environmental viewpoint, and has an environmental 
management plan which is being satisfactorily implemented. The other three safeguard policies 
triggered by the project relate to: Natural Habitats, Involuntary Resettlement, and Indigenous 
Peoples. No project activity has supported involuntary resettlement; this policy therefore has not 
been invoked. Compliance with the other two policies is satisfactory. In particular, the PRONAT 
team has carried out consultations in a systematic way and accumulated considerable experience 
in implementing conflict resolution mechanisms, including through the establishment of 
roundtables. In addition, the team has demonstrated responsiveness in addressing a series of 
complainants expressed by two indigenous groups.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Even though the parent project's Environmental Analysis (EA, including the Environmental 
Management Plan, EMP) is considered adequate, the Borrower has prepared a new EA that takes 
into account the new geographic areas to be covered under the AF (including some urban areas), 
as well as the key lessons learned during implementation of the parent project. This report 
indicates that (i) the net environmental impacts observed under the parent project have been 
highly positive, particularly in view of the demarcation and consolidation of a significant number 
of protected areas; (ii) comparable, highly positive environmental impacts are also expected in 
the new geographic areas to be covered under the AF; (iii) the most notable change in project 
implementation in response to environmental concerns has been for ANAM (Panamaís 
environmental agency) to review systematically all private land titling requests within forested 
areas and require the preparation of adequate Land Use Plans for the larger forested parcels, prior 
to their being titled; and (iv) various specific lessons learned on how to improve cadastre and 
demarcation practices will be reflected in forthcoming modifications to PRONATís Operational 
Manual (particularly the volumes on Protected Areas and on Rural Lands). The new EA 
summarizes the (mostly highly supportive) comments received on the environmental aspects of 
the PRONAT-AF from recently-held stakeholder consultations (particularly a well-attended 
workshop in Panama City on September 2, 2008). Prior to AF appraisal, the new EA report will 
be publicly disclosed at the World Bank's InfoShop in Washington, as well as within Panama 
(including on PRONAT's Web site).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
As with the parent project, the impacts of the AF on Panama's forests, wetlands, and other 
natural habitats is expected to be on balance very positive, particularly because of the protected 
area demarcation and consolidation activities under Component 3. In addition, any forested lands 
outside of protected areas will be reviewed by ANAM prior to being eligible for individual land 
titling (as is already being done under the ongoing parent project).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Since this AF would not finance forestry activities, the requirements for compliance under 
the revised Forests OP 4.36 (which took effect in 2002, after the parent PRONAT project was 
approved) are identical to those for OP 4.04.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The safeguard policy on Physical Cultural Resources is being satisfactorily complied with 
under the parent project. Sites of archaeological or historical interest are receiving special 
attention under the parent project, through a framework approach that will continue to be applied 
to the AF operation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
In accordance with the Indigenous Peoples Policy, the Borrower is currently carrying out 
free, prior and informed consultations to prepare the Social Assessment, the IPDP and the 
Process Framework. A consultation plan to be executed during the AF implementation phase is 
also being prepared to ensure that Project beneficiaries 
ñ
indigenous and non
-
indigen
ous and 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
other minorities of both genders 
ñ
are properly included during Project execution. These outputs 
(SA, IPDP and PF) will be ready before appraisal and the resulting recommendations will be 
included in the AF design.  
 
The Consolidation of Indigenous Territories Subcomponent and related safeguards issues 
will continue to be sensitive. Therefore, the program would continue to pay special attention to 
this component, including building up on continuous consultations and implementation of the 
conflict resolution mechanisms that have been implemented during the execution of the parent 
project, some of which have been very effective such as, for example, the roundtables and the 
development of specific action plans to resolve and mediate specific conflicts. The AF will 
include during its execution the positive and negative lessons learned identified during the 
implementation of the parent project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As has been the case to date under the parent project, there will be no involuntary physical 
displacement under the Additional Financing. In the cases of people who live within the 
boundaries of a protected area or use its natural resources, or of non-indigenous people who live 
within the boundaries of an indigenous reserve or enter to use its natural resources, a Process 
Framework is in effect under the parent project. This framework (to be modified as needed, in 
accordance with stakeholder consultations) will also apply to any such cases under the AF; it 
outlines the participatory process by which specific livelihood-related issues are to be identified 
during project implementation, and then addressed as needed, with appropriate monitoring of 
results.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/22/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
The Environmental Assessment has been completed and integrates all the Bank's comments. 
The team has sent its comments to the draft Social Assessment, IPDP and Resettlement 
Framework, which should be finalized.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frederic de Dinechin 
11/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
11/12/2008 
Comments:   
