Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3534 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Papua New Guinea 
Project ID: P107782 
Project Name: Rural Telecommunications Project 
Task Team Leader: Natasha Beschorner 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2010 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Rural policies and institutions 
(40%);Regulation and competition policy (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to facilitate improved access to affordable and reliable 
telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote areas of Papua New Guinea 
through a sustainable and transparent public-private funding mechanism. The project will 
provide access to telecommunications to over 500,000 rural Papua New Guineans, and facilitate 
Internet access in at least twenty district centers. In addition, the project will demonstrate the 
practical operational procedures and financing mechanisms for the Rural Connectivity Fund to 
be replicated for future Universal Access projects once the RCF is fully operational, and once it 
starts to collect industry levies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed components are as follows:  
 
Component 1. Technical assistance for the RCF secretariat in the ICT Regulator (US$1.2 
million). This component will help the RCF secretariat manage the implementation of Target 2 
Page  2
objectives and establish appropriate operational procedures for Target 3 projects. This 
component includes the following subcomponents:  
 
(a) 
Advisory assistance and on-the-job training and mentoring to the staff of the regulator on: 
(i) project appraisal, (ii) procurement, (iii) monitoring and evaluation, (iv) universal service 
regulations and best practices, and (v) establishment of a management information system.  
 
(b) 
Financial management support. The project will finance the services of an independent 
financial agent with responsibility for establishment of accounting and reporting procedures for 
the RCF, including monitoring of funds disbursements relative to project performance.  
 
(c) 
General regulatory advisory assistance. This sub-component will finance expert advise to 
the ICT regulator, including but not limited to: (i) international advise on specific matters such as 
spectrum management, licensing and convergence; and (ii) study tours to other developing 
countries.  
 
Component 2. Rural Connectivity Fund ($13.5 million) This component will finance the first 
three Target 2 projects to be funded by the RCF and hence demonstrate the proposed “least cost” 
subsidy mechanism.  These demonstration projects will also test the outsourcing of the funds 
management aspects as well as the governance, selection, approval and monitoring and 
evaluation systems. Two demonstration projects for telecommunications services are 
recommended in two geographically distinct locations, namely Chimbu and East Sepik. Lists of 
all locations (census areas, geo-referenced locations and estimated population) in these provinces 
have been prepared. The proposed three sub-components are:  
 
(a) 
RCF Tender in Chimbu Province. The tender in Chimbu province would benefit up to 
247,693. This includes approximately 156,790 inhabitants that could be covered by private 
operators without the need for subsidy , but that could be included in the tenders to speed up 
service delivery in some of these areas. It is estimated that at least 90,903 people included in the 
tender would not receive service without the one-time subsidy.  
 
(b) 
RCF Tender in East Sepik Province. The tender in East Sepik, on the other side, would 
benefit up to 272,749, including 94,985 inhabitants that could be covered by private operators 
without the need for subsidy. The remaining 177,764 people live in locations that would not be 
attractive enough for private operators to go without the one-time subsidy expected to be 
allocated through the RCF.  
 
(c) 
RCF Tender for Internet service in district centers. This component will provide a capital 
subsidy to prospective bidders to establish Internet points of presence, and sub-contract with 
local entrepreneurs to operate Internet cafes on a commercial basis.  
 
Component 3. Project Management (US$0.3 million). This component will support the 
Department of Communication and Information for project implementation, including financing 
for a project manager, financial management specialist, incremental operating costs (e.g. of 
computer and basic office equipment, travel to project sites), and external audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The first two tenders supported by the project will be held in rural areas of the provinces of 
Chimbu and East Sepik. Rural areas in other provinces might be affected through additional 
tenders.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Given that the project might involve the installation of small sites for mobile towers, the project 
is proposed to be rated as category "B" for environmental purposes. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the Government and will be applied 
on all relevant deployments financed through the Project, together with land acquisition 
protocols that will be established. There is no resettlement involved in this project nor is there 
any requirement for a resettlement plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The client will prepare an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to 
address both environmental and social issues.  The majority of the potential environmental 
impacts will be related to the construction of cell towers  and  small roads to transport 
construction materials to the cell tower sites. The TT indicated that in the past helicopters have 
been used to drop construction materials in order to reduce the impact on the environment. Land 
rights rental agreements, leases or sales will be acquired through negotiations with land owners.   
Consultants who are familiar with local languages and customs will be employed to conduct the 
negotiations.  
 
The TT further indicated that the ESMF will incorporate the lessons learned from other 
Bank projects with similar characteristics The obligations of contractors under the ESMF will be 
included in the tender agreements where appropriate.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Subprojects will not significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or 
degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not procure any pesticides, nor will an increased use of pesticides result from 
the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, 
religious, or unique natural values. Appropriate clauses will be included in all construction 
contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in the event of #chance finds# of culturally 
significant artifacts or sites.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project will not have adverse effects on Indigenous Peoples as defined in the policy, and 
project activities will not limit or prevent access to natural resources vital to the
sustainability of 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
their culture and livelihoods. The proposed project provides incentives for the private provision 
of telecommunication services in unserved or under-served areas, which could include areas 
where IP are present.  However, communication services will be offered at the request of 
individuals; the provision of such services does not require any interventions on communities of 
indigenous peoples.  The sites of the cell towers will normally be acquired though agreements 
with individual landowners.  Land or buildings that belong to communities (as opposed to 
individuals) could also be rented, leased or purchased by private operators, but only with the 
consent of the community.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project does not involve involuntary resettlement, as defined in the policy.  All the areas 
required for the construction of cell towers will be obtained through voluntary agreements with 
individual landowners or communities.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any large dams as defined under 
this policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined under 
the policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/31/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Government will carry out an Environmental and Social Management Framework before 
appraisal (ESMF). The ESMF will be disclosed in a form, language, and manner 
understandable to the affected people locally and in the InfoShop prior to departure of the 
appraisal mission.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Natasha Beschorner 
05/12/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
06/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
05/21/2009 
Comments:   
