Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3922 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Papua New Guinea 
Project ID: P114042 
Project Name: Urban Youth Employment Project 
Task Team Leader: Ingo Wiederhofer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Adult literacy/non-formal education (30%);Other social services (30%);Roads 
and highways (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Social risk mitigation (29%);Participation and civic engagement 
(29%);Education for all (14%);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction 
(14%);Social analysis and monitoring (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
13.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives are to provide socially and economically disadvantaged urban youth 
short term employment opportunities utilizing labor-intensive methods; and to expand programs 
that provide the knowledge and skills for employment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project would be financed as a Specific Investment Loan of up to $15M and implemented 
over a period of five years, from 2010#2015.  The Project would focus on disadvantaged urban 
youth between the ages of 15 and 29 that neither work nor study and whom have limited social 
and economic opportunities, including inter alia: a) those that have never accessed or not 
completed the formal school system; and b) those that may have completed their formal 
education but have still not been integrated into the labor market.  Given that each of these 
segments would have different initial conditions and needs, the Project design would 
differentiate between these groups to ensure that activities are tailored to each segment.  
Page  2
The Project would build entry points for these groups along three complementary tracks: i) 
providing short-term employment opportunities and life-skills training in the public and private 
sectors; ii) supporting their labor market integration by providing them with occupational skills 
and life skills that are valued by employers in the public and private sectors as well as improved 
opportunities for self-employment; and iii) socializing youth activities and strengthening the 
capacity of the NCDC and selected public, private and civil society service providers to plan, 
supervise, monitor and evaluate labor market insertion and public works projects; in order to 
sustain employment generation further downstream.  
 
The Project will consist of three components:  
 
Component 1#Youth Job Corps (YJC): The YJC would finance labor-intensive, short-term 
employment combined with life skills training. Employment activities would focus on 
maintaining and improving public goods through simple infrastructure rehabilitation (e.g., 
repairing defunct facilities at schools, hospitals, local informal markets, road repairs, and public 
environmental improvement projects, etc.,) cleaning of public spaces; and the delivery of social 
services that would have an positive impact on the community (e.g., teacher aids and social care 
workers).  
 
Targeting/screening mechanisms will ensure that resources disproportionately benefit the urban 
poor: by focusing public goods in geographic regions/areas of relative prevalence and intensity 
of poverty and unemployment; consulting communities and youth in the identification of 
subprojects to ensure that they are demand-driven; and promoting gender equity.  
 
Component 2#Skills Development and Employment Scheme (SDES): The objectives are to 
support the labor market integration of economically and socially disadvantaged urban youth by 
providing them with knowledge and occupational and life skills alued by employers in the public 
and private sectors; and providing improved livelihoods and opportunities for self-employment. 
The SDES would support initiatives that allow access to market-oriented skills training.  It would 
engage urban youth in activities that are designed to build knowledge and skills leading to job 
readiness and gainful employment.  
 
Each participant would receive pre-employment orientation and training (not to exceed 540 
instructional hours) coupled with six months of on-the-job skills training.  Depending on the 
trainee#s previously acquired knowledge and skills the program may include instructional 
elements on: a) literacy; b) numeracy; c) supervisory relations; d) health; e) work safety; f) work 
ethics and attitude; g) and other work related life skills (i.e. timeliness, dress and personal 
hygiene on the job, interaction with fellow workers, etc.)  Successful completion of this program 
would be a prerequisite to enrollment in the on-the-job training provided by the employers.  
 
Building on the pre-employment orientation and training, the SDES would include six months 
of on-the-job training in an agreed upon occupational area. The employer would agree to provide 
significant training opportunities to the participants and that skill attainment would be recognized 
by an increase in work responsibilities and promotion as the situation allows.  The employers 
would receive funding for trainee salaries and travel. Trainees would be paid a minimum wage 
during both the pre-employment orientation and training and, industry-based, on-the-job training 
program, plus travel costs to and from training locations as required. At the end of the training 
period, employers would have the option of retaining participants and engaging them in full 
and/or part-time work.  
 
Component 3#Socialization and Capacity Building:  The objectives are to strengthen the 
capacity of the NCDC and subcontractors to develop pro-poor youth policies and plan for public 
Page  3
employment programs as well as more market-oriented and demand-driven labor market 
insertion programs that are targeted towards vulnerable urban youth; socialize youth programs; 
and monitor and evaluate project implementation.  
 
The Project would support a number of specific activities designed to assist in the socialization 
and expand community awareness of the Project.  Youth job fairs, information seminars and 
grievance and complaints handling mechanisms would be put into place. Youth facilitators 
would work in the field to support Components 1 and 2.  Their primary function would be to 
follow-up with all employers on a regular basis to a) check on the progress of employed youth; 
and b) provide early identification of program issues and worker/employee conflicts.  In 
addition, the Project would support community consultations involving subproject selections 
under Component 1.  
 
In addition, the Project would establish and strengthen the capacity of the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) and subcontractors to: i) develop pro-poor youth policies and plan for public 
employment programs as well as more market-oriented and demand-driven labor market 
insertion programs, ii) monitor and evaluate their implementation, and iii) inform and advise 
education and training systems on emerging labor market trends.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will focus its activities in the National Capital District (Port Moresby) of PNG. 
Possibilities for geographic expansion of the Project to other urban settings would be assessed in 
the course of the mid-term Project review.  An Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework 
will be prepared during the course of Project preparation.  Sub-project activities would not 
involve land acquisition or resettlement.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has had some experience in applying Bank safeguard policies.  Nonetheless, 
guidance will be provided by the task team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Bhatt (EASER) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASER) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Component 1 will finance labor based civil works (road rehabilitation, pavement works, 
public markets, etc)  that will have some adverse environmental impacts that would need to be 
effectively managed. The activities and civil works packages will be indentified during project 
implementation and will only be carried out in Port Moresby.  
 
Therefore, the National Capital District Commission (NCDC), which will implement this 
project, is preparing an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which will 
set out screening procedures for each activity and provide guidance on next steps in terms of 
whether or not additional sub project EA#s are required and if so how they will be prepared, 
reviewed and cleared. For those sub projects that do not require additional EA#s, the ESMF will 
provide adequate guidance for effective mitigation and management. The ESMF will also 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
provide guidance for preparing sub project EMPs.  The TT and NCDC have agreed on the ToRs 
for the ESMF.  
 
With regards to Component 2: The TT and NCDC will provide clear requirements for a due 
diligence review or participating private sector companies and follow up actions when required, 
as this component will support efforts to provide youth employment opportunities in the private 
sector.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The Motu Koita peoples, numbering about 30,000 of the 250,000 total population of Port 
Moresby, are considered as Indigenous Peoples according to the Motu Koita Assembly Act, 
which was developed in 2007 to address their specific needs. However, the Policy is rated as 
TBD because the proposed project targets urban population exclusively and due to the fact that 
the Policy is normally not applied to Indigenous Peoples living in urban settings. During 
preparation, the TT will make a determination on the applicability of OP 4.10 based on the 
technical judgement of a qualified social scientist and the results of the ongoing Social 
Assessment exercise. This will include an assessment whether the Motu Koita peoples living in 
Port Moresby meet the characteristics described in the Policy, specifically the one on "collective 
attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in the project area and to the 
natural resources in these habitats and territories".  
 
Irrespective of whether OP 4.10 is triggered or not, the Social Assessment will include 
extensive community consultations and an evaluation of the project's potential positive and 
adverse impacts on the Motu Koita peoples and other vulnerable communities living in the 
project area.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not finance land acquisition or involuntary resettlement as defined under the 
policy therefore no action is required under this policy. C1 which finances labor based civil 
works will not entail new land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/10/2009 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/10/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Asssessment will be completed by appraisal. A social assessment will also 
be completed by appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ingo Wiederhofer 
07/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/01/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
08/31/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
