Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3303
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Papua New Guinea 
Project ID:  P102396 
Project Name:  PG Mining Sector Inst Strengthening TA 2 
Task Team Leader:  Graeme Eric Hancock 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 21, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Gender (P);Other environment and natural 
resources management (S);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.70
1.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the benefits from Extractive Industries 
(EI) to the national budget and to mining affected communities and to mitigate mining’s 
health and safety risks for ASM miners. This will be achieved through improving 
effectiveness of key EI sector institutions, supporting EI communities to be better able to 
monitor the delivery of community programs and services, empowering disadvantaged 
groups including women and youth in extractive industries affected areas, and improving 
accountability of the sector and for management and use of mining-related revenues. The 
primary target groups are the institutions involved in the mining sector, the communities 
in the vicinity of both large-scale and artisanal/small scale mining operations and the 
recipients and managers of mining benefits streams.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of five components: (a) strengthening the policy and regulatory 
frameworks for the mining sector; (b) strengthening mining sector governance, 
regulation, and sustainable development outcomes;  (c) improving revenue collection and 
Page  2
audits of the sector; (d) strengthening the foundations for a conflict-free mining sector in 
Bougainville; and (e) Project management.  
 
1. 
Component 1: Strengthening the Policy and Regulatory Frameworks for the 
Mining Sector. (Estimated Total Cost: US$2.09 million; IDA: US$1.90 million).  The 
principal target group for this component is DoMPGM staff, who will be supported to 
establish and implement an effective policy development forum process for coordination 
and cooperation with other agencies.  Key Outputs will include the completion of several 
key policies and legislative Acts including a Sustainable Mining Development Policy, 
with mine closure and resettlement guidelines, and an Offshore Mining Policy and 
associated legislation; a Small-Scale Mining Occupational Health and Safety Act; a new 
Mining Safety Act; and a review of and amendments to the Mining Act 1992.  
 
2. 
Component 2: Strengthening Mining Sector Governance, Regulation, and 
Sustainable Development Outcomes (Estimated Total Cost: US$9.01 million; IDA: 
US$8.19 million). The principal target group for this component is MRA staff, who will 
be given suppor
t
to strengthen MRA’s ability to undertake its mandated role in 
thefollowing areas:  
 
•
Strengthen Governance and Accountability in Mining Sector Institutions.  
Activities in this sub-component strengthen institutional accountability by supporting the 
development, implementation and monitoring of an Anti-Corruption Action Plan for 
MRA and by putting in place mechanisms to monitor compliance with and outcomes of 
the policies and regulations developed by DoMPGM, especially regarding impacts on the 
most vulnerable groups in mining communities. The sub-component will also support 
establishment of internal systems for financial management and transparency.  To address 
broader sector governance and accountability, the ongoing dialogue on EITI will be 
supported through activities in other sub-components in relation to community 
participation, transparency of benefits management, and use of MRA’s web site.  
 
•
Promote, License, Control, and Monitor Mining Sector Development. This sub-
component focuses on building MRA’s capacity to carry out its technical role in 
promoting PNG’s mining sector, licensing, controlling, and monitoring the industry.  
Activities will support several MRA units, with the objective of establishing a cohesive 
and functioning institution capable of sustaining its role beyond the Project, and include:  
 
o
Strengthening Mineral Tenements Management,  
 
o
Improving the Quality and Availability of Geological Information,  
 
o
Strengthening Information Management and Marketing  
 
o
Implementing an Information and Communications Program to keep stakeholders 
informed, especially on Bougainville, of MRA and MSISTAP II project activities  
 
•
Improving Sustainable Development Outcomes from the Mining Sector.  
Activities in this sub-component include  
 
Page  3
o
Establishing High Standards for Mitigating Negative Environmental and Social 
Impacts of Mining.  
 
o
Improving the Health, Safety, and Effectiveness of Small-Scale Miners.  
 
o
Coordinating and Improving the Management of Mining Benefits including 
recruitment of  community facilitators by MRA at each of the mine sites  
 
o
Monitoring Social and Environmental Outcomes from Mining Activities 
including preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)  
 
o
Keeping all stakeholders and especially Bougainville communities informed, so 
that they understand both MRA’s role and project objectives and activities  
 
Key Outputs will include internal systems for MRA, an MRA Anti-Corruption Plan, an 
MRA e-commerce system, a fully computerized mineral tenements management system, 
reduced time for issuing mining and exploration licenses, a national Geological 
Information System (GIS), an ASM data base, an ASM registration and identity card 
system, safer and more environmentally friendly ASM mining practices, environmental 
and social guidelines including resettlement and community consultation, a Measurement 
and Evaluation (M&E) Framework for EI community-related services, EI community 
participatory planning procedures, Local Level Mining Community Development Plans, 
Benefits Streams Reports for mining communities, a national Women in Mining (WIM) 
Action Plan, a youth internship program to be implemented by MRA, a review of all 
mining Memoranda of Association (MoAs), publication of EI-related payments by 
companies to government, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and 
an information dissemination and communications program.  
 
3. 
Component 3: Improving revenue collection and audits of the sector (Estimated 
Total Cost: US$4.65 million; IDA: US$4.22 million).  The principal target group for this 
component is IRC’s Resources Monitoring Division staff, who will be supported to 
review and draft mineral tax legislative amendments, conduct revenue risk assessments, 
and carry out mining and petroleum project audits.  The component will support the 
establishment of four EI tax audit teams, two with a main focus on high priority, complex 
audits and two for less complex audits with a strong focus on staff training.  Key Outputs 
will include for the EI sector tax legislation amendments, tax-related risk assessments, tax 
audit reports, tax assessments and tax collections.  
 
4. 
Component 4: Strengthening the foundations for a conflict-free mining sector in 
Bougainville (Estimated Total Cost: US$2.21 million; IDA: US$2.01 million). The 
principal target group for this component is ABG’s future DoM staff, who will be 
supported to establish the organizational framework for the department and implement an 
effective policy and regulatory environment for mineral exploration and development in 
Bougainville. Key outputs include transitional arrangements (to facilitate granting of 
exploration and mining licenses until mining powers are transferred to ABG), issuance of 
exploration and mining licenses for Bougainville, a Bougainville Sustainable Mining 
Policy, operation of a functioning ABG Department of Mining, a Bougainville Mining 
Act, a Bougainville Mining Safety Act and enabling regulations, hiring of professional 
staff for the ABG Mining Department, twinning of ABG Mining Department staff into 
Page  4
MRA and DoMPGM or other appropriate organizations, and development of ASM 
support services and outreach on Bougainville.  
 
5. 
Component 5: Project Management (Estimated Total Cost: US$0.74 million; 
IDA: US$0.67 million).  The principal target group for this component is MRA’s Special 
Projects Unit (SPU) staff, who will be supported to monitor, supervise, and provide 
technical and administrative management control of the Project.  Key outputs will be 
project procurement documents, financial accounts, and project-related reports.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is a Technical assistance project and will be locatated and implemented 
mainly in Port Moresby.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gillian M. Brown (EASSO) 
Ms Adriana Maria Eftimie (COCPO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated as category B for environmental purposes. The project is a Technical 
Assistance project and will not involve direct investment in mining activities but through 
its policy and regulatory strengthening it could have indirect environmental impacts by 
encouraging increased commercial scale mining and ASM activities in the future.  
 
The project will support a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment of the mining 
sector in order to identify policy and regulatory gaps which may need to be addressed in 
consultation with the Government.  
 
During project implementation, procedures will be developed for on-going consultation 
processes that involve NGOs, landowners, and industry representatives in dialogue on 
Page  5
mining sector environmental and social issues. Under the sustainable development 
subcomponent, an Education, Information and Communication (EIC) strategy will be 
prepared, including preparation of information materials, booklets, etc for promoting 
community development and good governance of mining benefits in mining impacted 
communities and integrating gender into the activities and materials of MRA. In parallel, 
a
communication strategy for the project will be developed.  
 
The diverse ethnic make up in PNG, and the importance of the clan allegiances, often 
results in conflicts between clans.  There is no majority group and several hundred 
different minority groups.  In this context, the implementation of t
he
Indigenous People’s 
safeguard policy could be said to revolve around “prior andinformed consultation” and 
having adequate systems in place for dispute resolution.   The laws in PNG dictate that 
prior and informed consent are given prior to project approval which is a higher bar than 
the Bank’s OP.   Powerful landownerassociations ensure that this law is implemented and 
PNGs history of mine disturbances (including the Ok Tedi environment disaster, and the 
conflict resulting from Bougainville) has raised awareness and ensures that people’s 
rights are upheld.   Mine Wardens are charged with resolving mining license related 
disputes.  
 
There will be no construction in the project and hence no resettlement or acquisition of 
land or assets will take place. Hence the resettlement policy is not triggered. However, 
the project will include activities to set a process in place to develop standard 
resettlement guidelines for implementation in mine affected areas.  
 
No other safeguards policies are triggered by the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As a technical assistance initiative, the project will not finance any direct exploration or 
exploitation of mineral resources. However, the project is being implemented in a sector 
which is known to be controversial with respect to environmental and social issues. The 
environmental problems associated with mining in PNG relate to river and ocean based 
mining waste and tailings disposal and pollution resulting from mineral processing. An 
update review of environment issues in the mining sector was prepared by the 
government and was submitted to the Bank.  
 
The PNG mining sector regulatory framework for Environmental Safeguards is well 
developed.  Implementation capacity problems remain. The project will provide training 
Page  6
and capacity building activities to strengthen enforcement of evironmental legislation 
requirements, to both MRA and DEC.  
 
Environmental legislation was reviewed and updated in accordance with international 
good practice in 2000 and subsequent regulations prepared and approved in 2002. The 
environmental legislation recognizes the mining sector of as one of the main sectors with 
impact on the environment. The mining sector is categorize into three different impact 
levels (with Level 1 low impact and Level 3 high impact) based on the size of production 
and activities carried out. There is a legal requirement to prepare an EIA for mining 
projects that are categorized into level 2 or 3 activities. In the approval process for the 
EIA, public reviews are routinely carried over. The Environmental Act also provides 
grievance mechanisms which are accessible to interested parties. There is still a need to 
strengthen the DoEC capacity to coordinate and ensure that environmental legislation is 
implemented properly.  
 
During discussions with DoEC, cooperation between environmental specialists of DoEC 
and MRA was highlighted as a priority.  The project will help provide additional 
institutional strengthening which is expected to have a positive impact on the 
environment. This includes project support for workshops with major stakeholders and 
professional development training for MRA staff. These activities will improve skills and 
capabilities of MRA staff to conduct field audits of mining projects, to investigate mine 
safety and environmental compliance, and to work with mining companies to improve the 
environmental and social sustainability of the operations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During project implementation further consultation will take place with NGOs, 
landowners, and industry representatives regarding mining sector environmental issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Graeme Eric Hancock 
12/05/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Adriana Maria Eftimie 
03/11/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Gillian M. Brown 
12/07/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
03/11/2008 
Comments:   
