Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4437 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/18/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Papua New Guinea 
Project ID: P116521 
Project Name: PNG Second Chance Education Project 
Task Team Leader: James A. Stevens 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Adult literacy/non-formal education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1.  The development objective of this intervention is to increase the number of youth who 
complete recognized secondary degree programs.  The principal performance indicators would 
be the absolute numbers of youth who complete certificate courses and who ultimately acquire a 
secondary degree through FODE.  Currently, less than one percent of youth enrolled in PNG's 
secondary equivalency programs successfully complete certificates annually, and almost no 
students pass the secondary degree exam.  Specific targets will be established for these 
performance rates.  
 
2.  A second performance indicator will be a reduction in the time it takes for youth to complete 
certificate courses in FODE. Increasing the student flow efficiency will lead to economies in 
service delivery and contribute to increasing the numbers of youth who successfully complete 
programs.  Currently, students complete certificate courses in about 14 months on average.  A 
specific target for reducing this time on task will be established.  
 
3.  In the early years of the program, intermediate objectives would be to improve the quality of 
the equivalency curriculum, to improve the quality of assessing student performance, to increase 
Page  2
tutor-student contact hours, and to introduce new technologies (computer-based modules, 
communication technologies, etc.) aimed at improving efficiencies and reducing costs.  
 
4.  Secondary objectives would include (a) contributing to labor productivity by increasing the 
stock of job seekers with recognized secondary degrees and proven basic skills (reading and 
numeracy), (b) contributing to social and cultural development by increasing the number of 
youth who have secondary level training, (c) providing opportunities for disaffected youth, 
which is an urgent problem in PNG, and (d) contributing to the development of standards-based 
curricula, teacher training improvements and standards-based assessment in the formal education 
system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
5.  Institutional Focus.  The proposed PNG Second Chance Education Project is aimed at helping 
an existing institution, FODE, to improve its service delivery, increase its efficiency and, 
eventually, to expand its programs.  The investment does not require major systemic reforms or 
difficult policy changes.  Nor does the investment require a fundamental shift in FODE's basic 
operational approach which entails registering out-of-school youth, testing their skill levels, 
delivering a prescribed curriculum and testing advancement against that curriculum.  FODE 
currently carries out many of its functions poorly - as measured by low certification rates.  The 
simple aim of project implementation is to support FODE to improve its service delivery.  
 
6.  Capacity.  The existing institutional review of FODE, together with initial interactions with 
FODE management and staff, provide evidence that increased operational and investment 
resources, combined with some external technical assistance -- which is a need recognized by 
FODE management -- will allow FODE to improve its performance measurably during the 
project period (about 4 years). It is a priority for the Bank team to identify operational and 
investment resources which can be effectively managed by existing FODE management and 
staff, with minimal resort to local and external technical assistance.  The resource needs 
description below provides ideas for improving FODE's service delivery within a reasonable 
expectation of gradually improving institutional capacity.  
 
7.  Funding Flows.  FODE currently manages its own financing and procurement.  In addition 
to its own revenue (mostly fees), it receives its funding from NDoE (about [2.2] million kina or 
about [$1.1] million) in the form of an operating grant.  The Bank will have to undertake 
procurement and financial management capacity assessments, which may call for specific 
support for improving capacity in these areas, as well as potential prior review of contracts to be 
let above a ceiling to be determined.  But there is no justification for the Bank or any other donor 
not to fund FODE through use of the NDoE#s current budget grant mechanism.  The flow of 
funds through NDoE to FODE will be mapped at appraisal.  
 
8.  FODE Resource Needs.  FODE requires a number of key investments and an expansion of 
its operating budget in order to improve its performance.  The Bank will appraise FODE's overall 
budget request for 2010 and agree with FODE on specific investment needs, to be funded.  
Following is a list of current priorities, to be confirmed at appraisal.  
 
Page  3
9.  Improving the quality of curriculum.  FODE is in the process of updating its curricula to 
reflect new subjects, topics and methodologies currently being introduced in the formal 
secondary education system in PNG.  Its current curricula are modular and, for the most, 
competency based.  But a thorough professional review of the various courses will be required at 
appraisal.  FODE staff and management are open to advice aimed at improving course content.  
FODE will include funding in its budgets during the investment period for subject-based 
consultancies and for external peer review of its programs.  It is important to note that 
modernizing FODE's methodology in terms of interaction with its beneficiaries will be equally as 
important, if not more important to improving quality and subsequent success rates, as improving 
course content.  
 
10.  Increasing face-to-face contact with tutors.  FODE currently delivers a paper-based 
correspondence course.  The most important innovation aimed at improving success rates is to 
complement this approach with periodic classroom-based tutorial instruction.  The idea is to 
select existing secondary-level teachers, train them to provide after-hours instruction, and pay 
them overtime rates to work with students in the FODE program.  Engaging teachers for 
overtime work is likely to represent the largest single increase in FODE's future budgets.  This 
innovation, which will require an upfront training program, is also likely to be the most 
ambitious aspect of FODE's short-term program aimed at improving quality and success rates.  
This innovation also entails one policy decision which could become problematic.  In order to 
allow teachers to provide after hours instruction, formal secondary or primary school facilities 
will have to be opened to the FODE program (PNG should not invest in separate FODE 
infrastructure providing existing facilities have free capacity).  Coming to agreement with NDoE 
on this issue will be a major area of discussion at appraisal.  
 
11.  Improving the quality of testing. An initial review of FODE's diagnostic and achievement 
testing shows that FODE has adopted a reasonably up-to-date- competency-based approach.  
FODE will include testing experts in its budget provision to support the adaption of its testing 
instruments to its newly defined curriculum.  Funding could also be provided to help 
computerize testing over time, where feasible.  
 
12.  Improving service delivery technology. At appraisal, the Bank will agree with FODE on a 
program for gradually computerizing its programs and testing, as well as potentially 
experimenting with traditional radio or television delivery of courses and training. Funding 
would be provided for hardware and for training.  It is important to note, however, that this 
project will support FODE's traditional delivery methods and will not rely on adopting new 
technologies for achieving results.  
 
13.  Printing.  A large block of FODE's current budget - nearly a third - is used for printing 
curriculum materials.  During appraisal, the Bank and FODE will agree on strategies for 
gradually reducing reliance on printing (see delivery technologies above) and for outsourcing 
printing competitive contracting where possible.  It is important to note that during the life of this 
investment, the majority of FODE's programs will continue to be print based.  
 
14.  Improving management and information technology.  FODE will include funding in its 
budget request for a management advisor and for an information technology advisor.  The Bank 
Page  4
will provide assistance with defining the terms of reference and determining the needed duration.  
It is also likely that an investment will be made in computer hardware, software and related 
technology training in order to improve FODE management and communications with its 
provincial centers.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented by FODE headquarters, located in Port Moresby, and by each 
of FODE's 20 provincial training centers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be assessed, as needed, during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (EASER) 
Ms Michelle Nayahamui Rooney (EASHH) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/01/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
to be determined   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr James A. Stevens 
08/18/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
08/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
08/18/2009 
Comments:   
