Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4183
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Paraguay 
Project ID:  P095235 
Project Name:  Paraguay  Water & Sanitation Sector Modernization 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 27, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
64.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
19.50
19.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the efficiency, coverage, and 
sustainability of water supply and sanitation services in Paraguay by (a) improving the 
governance of the sector, (b) improving water services and increasing access to sewerage 
services in the Asuncion metropolitan area, and (c) increasing access to sustainable water 
and sanitation services in rural areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Support to the modernization of the sector governance and institutional 
strengthening (US$4 million financed by the Bank loan):  
 
This component is designed to institutionally consolidate the water and sanitation sector 
through the following actions: (a) support the Ministry of Public Works in the 
strengthening of the recently created Water and Sewerage Services Unit, which will 
perform the functions related to the Lead Sector Agency (Titular del Servicio) as per Law 
1614/00, assist it in the preparation of a financial policy for the sector, in the oversight 
and implementation of the Sector Governance Framework, and in the implementation of 
a
sector information system; (b) strengthen the Sanitary Services Regulation Agency 
Page  2
(Ente Regulador de Servicios Sanitarios, ERSSAN) and restructure its functions to 
effectively regulate the sector; and (c) support the Environmental Secretariat (SecretarÃ­a 
del Ambiente, SEAM) bystrengthening the Water Resources and Environmental 
Licensing Directorates, classifying the different basins by discharge standards, and 
improving the environmental licensing process for investments in the water and 
sanitation sector.  
 
Component 2: Urban water supply and sanitation and institutional strengthening of 
ESSAP (US$65.5 million, of which US$50.5 million will be financed by the Bank loan):  
 
This component focuses both on the modernization of ESSAP and the financing of 
urgently needed WSS investments through two sub-components: i. Institutional 
strengthening and corporate governance of ESSAP by: (a) implementing corporate 
governance activities related to ESSAP SA, such as the establishment of a Board of 
Directors, the implementation of the Good Governance Strategy related to ESSAP, 
including social accountability activities, and strengthening of inter alia the internal 
control, auditing, and procurement units; (b) restructuring ESSAP through the design and 
implementation of service units and enhancing their operational and commercial 
performance; (c) strengthening ESSAP’s environmental and social unit, ensuring 
adherence to safeguards and adequate implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF); (d) supporting the communication strategy of ESSAP, 
including activities foreseen in the Good Governance Strategy and the ESMF; and ii. 
Priority water and sanitation infrastructure investments including: (a) urgent investments 
targeting the reduction of non-revenue water and increasing efficiency; (b) rehabilitation 
of existing water and sewerage infrastructure; and (c) prioritized expansion of water and 
sewerage systems in the Asuncion metropolitan area and the interior. All works will 
follow the methodology detailed in the ESMF of the project. Minor works described in 
(a) and (b) will have their specific environmental and social assessment as detailed in the 
ESMF. Major sewerage infrastructure works will be carried out after updating the 
Sewerage Master Plan for Asuncion’s metropolitan area, which will fully integrate 
environmental and social baseline information and assessment criteria into the overall 
planning methodology. This study will provide ESSAP with an analysis of alternatives on 
which to base the investment decisions in Asuncion’s metropolitanarea. This component 
will also finance the final designs of all works and site specific Environmental Impact 
Assessments of major works.  
 
Component 3: Rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene education and institutional 
strengthening of SENASA (US$14 million, of which US$9.5 million will be financed by 
the Bank loan):  
 
This component will scale-up the experience of previous rural water supply and 
sanitation projects to increase service coverage and quality, by: (a) strengthening the 
National Service of Environmental Sanitation (Servicio Nacional de Saneamiento 
Ambiental, SENASA) by supporting its decentralization process, equipment, and 
strengthening of its environmental and social management units following the ESMF 
provisions; (b) supporting SENASA’s corporate governance, including itscommunication 
strategy, social accountability mechanisms foreseen in the Good Governance Strategy 
and activities under the ESMF; (c) strengthening existing juntas, through the Associations 
Page  3
of Juntas; (d) implementing a hand-washing campaign to increase the health impact of 
the interventions (e) increasing coverage of WSS for indigenous communities; and (f) 
increasing coverage of WSS in other rural areas. Rural communities to be served will be 
prioritized using social indexes that will be used in the consultation process of the 
specific subprojects   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance urban and rural water supply, sanitation infrastructure and 
institutional capacity initiatives in selected areas of Paraguay. The main infrastructure 
civil works under the urban component will take place in the Asuncion metropolitan area. 
Rural works will be developed in priority areas identified through a consultative and 
participatory community process, based on an overall framework and specific guidelines 
developed during project preparation.  While the types of likely investments and works 
have been determined their exact locations are not known at the time of project appraisal.  
Siting of works will be done through the Master Plan process for Asuncion, and through a 
community planning process in rural areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project works that can potentially cause adverse environmental impacts are related to 
the expansion and rehabilitation of the water and sanitation systems, the construction of 
wastewater treatment plants including a possible river sewage outfall in Asuncion, and 
construction of small water systems for the rural areas.  
 
While implementation of most of the works planned with the Project’s resources is not 
expected to lead to significant environmental impacts, larger civil works such as the 
Page  4
urban sewerage works in Asuncion and the construction of new wastewater treatment 
plants and associated river outfall can jeopardize the natural and social environment 
where the works will be executed. In accordance with the Bank’s Environmental 
Assessment Policy [OP 4.01], the Project has therefore beenclassified as “Category A”, 
and project preparations have taken place based on therequirements for Category “A” 
projects, including public consultations and disclosure of key documents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental baseline conditions. Paraguay’s water and sanitation sector requires 
measures to address current environmental problems. Low sewerage coverage is a critical 
problem in AsunciÃƒÂ³n and its metropolitan area, where only 33 percent of the 
population  is connected to the system. The rest of the wastewater is discharged into 
shallow aquifers (which in turn are used as a source of water supply) or directly into the 
streets, creating serious public health and environmental pollution concerns. Both the 
public utility ESSAP which provides water and sanitation in urban areas and SENASA, 
the public entity of technical assistance provider for rural areas has an inventory of 
prioritized works to be financed through the loan.  This constitutes a “long list” of 
alternative works and locations. Specific works and locations will be determined based 
on a master plan, which will be developed incorporating environmental and social 
selection criteria as described in the ESMF and related guidelines.  
 
Rural works. Include construction or expansion of water supply systems, and communal 
sewerage. The environmental and social impacts associated with these works are 
considered low and no significant and irreversible environmental damage is expected. For 
these construction works, minor environmental impacts are likely to consist mostly of 
nuisances such as disposal of low levels of construction waste, dust and noise, and 
erosion control. The protection of spring catchments in rural areas will be addressed by 
appropriate guidelines that will be incorporated into the technical specifications of 
construction contracts. Environmental and social screening criteria (previously agreed for 
water and sanitation sub-projects for the BIRF IV loan and applied since 1997) have been 
updated based on lessons learned in earlier projects and on consultations with key 
stakeholders, and presented in the Environment and Social Management Framework.  
 
Urban works: The sewerage and wastewater treatment works being considered under the 
project have the potential for significant adverse environmental impacts if not properly 
planned and implemented. Potential environmental impacts of eligible sub-projects could 
arise during both the construction and operational phases of the sub-projects.  During the 
construction phase likely impacts include those commonly associated with civil works 
construction projects. Among other concerns these typically include dust and noise 
control, traffic congestion, management of construction and demolition waste materials, 
loss of local habitats through land clearing, management and disposal of hazardous 
construction materials such as fuels, lubricants. During the operational phase of sub-
projects potential environmental impacts are mainly related to the operation of large 
wastewater treatment facilities. Possible impacts include reduction in water quality in the 
receiving waters of the Rio Paraguay and the resultant impacts on local and regional 
Page  5
human and ecological health; odor and noise from plant operations; disposal and 
management of sludge (bio-solids) generated from plant operations; loss of access to the 
site.  
 
Potential adverse impacts are therefore likely to be relatively minor, and many are 
temporary in nature.  The most significant potential impacts are those associated with the 
proposed river outfall which would dispose of sewage from a proposed treatment plan in 
Asuncion.  Careful screening and integration into project planning and execution will 
ensure that alternatives are considered, and that unavoidable adverse impacts are 
mitigated.  The overall impact of the project is expected to be strongly positive, also from 
an environmental and social perspective.  Positive impacts include: (i) consolidating and 
improving water resources management in the country; (ii) connecting people to sewage 
collectio
n
and treatment systems in Asuncion’s metropolitan area and other urban 
centers, thereby protecting water sources and urban streams; (iii) increasing the efficiency 
of the water supply services; (iv) improvement in human and environmental health by 
reduction of exposure to contaminants in polluted local streams.  
 
Expected Social Impacts and Benefits Potential social impacts during the construction 
phase of sub-projects include loss of land or structures; loss or reduction in earnings and 
livelihood support as a result of loss of assets or restricted access; and noise and other 
nuisance disruptions at sensitive receptors such as schools. Site selection for major 
facilities such as the waste water treatment plant can be expected to be locally 
controversial among directly affected people and other stakeholders. As with the overall 
environmental impact, direct project benefits to people, in particular poor rural and urban 
groups, are expected to be considerable. For example, lack of water represents a 
tremendous problem for many rural and indigenous communities in Paraguay, 
particularly in the Chaco region. The project benefits are expected to represents major 
improvements in health and well being, particularly for women and children.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives analysis is built into the screening, selection and design process for the 
various sub-projects, and will be incorporated at various stages of the project 
implementation. First, during the revision to the Asuncion sewerage master plan when 
various alternatives, strategies, and design options will be finalized. Second, since the 
project is essentially demand driven and participatory in nature, specific alternatives will 
be discussed in the context of community planning and identification of sub-project 
proposals. The planning methodologies proposed for the project are highly participatory 
in nature, and will provide numerous opportunities for beneficiaries, affected groups, and 
other stakeholders to have input to the decision process. Third, for sub-projects requiring 
site specific EIA such as large infrastructure works associated with sewerage, wastewater 
treatment, and river outfall construction, alternatives will be addressed at two levels: 
through the master planning level and through the specific project technical design. 
Terms of Reference for the EIA includes specific requirements for alternatives analysis. 
In addition, the project will support overall system planning including evaluation of 
strategic options   
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process since the Asuncion Sanitation Master 
Plan (ASMP) is programmatic in nature specific investments are not known in advance.  
Conventional, site-specific EIA can therefore not be developed prior to project approval, 
but will be developed once works and investments have been determined.  As noted 
above, a “long list” of potential investments has been prepared.  The exact sequencing, 
scope, and preferred technological alternatives of the final list of investments is still 
unknown.  Environmental and social issues based on more detailed studies and public 
consultations will be addressed in developing designs for specific works under the 
project, based on the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). This 
will guide the implementation of the project.  It provides an analysis of the project setting 
and baseline conditions and a set of technical guidelines describing procedures and 
institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the potential environmental and 
social risks and impacts that could be faced throughout the project cycle.  
 
The ESMF supports three essential goals of the project: (a) to ensure the social and 
environmental sustainability of the subprojects, (b) to comply with national 
environmental legislation, and (c) to comply with the Bank’s Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Policies. It comprises an EIA of likely project works, model EIA TORs for 
proposed large-scale civil works to be identified during project implementation, a 
methodology for subproject screening, a Resettlement Framework (RF), an Indigenous 
Peoples Management Framework (IPMF), and specific guidance on public consultation 
and disclosure procedures.  
 
The ESMF is intended for use and application by the agencies charged with the 
execution of the investment subprojects under each component. These agencies are the 
Sanitary Services Company of Paraguay (ESSAP), the national urban water and 
sanitation utility, and the National Service of Environmental Sanitation (SENASA), the 
public entity responsible for provision of technical assistance in rural areas. The other 
national agencies of the sector involved in the Water Supply and Sanitation Master Plan 
(WSSMP) preparation are the Sanitary Services Regulation Agency (Ente Regulador de 
Servicios Sanitarios, ERSSAN) and the Environment Secretariat (SEAM).  
 
The ESMF includes a review of the institutional and legal context of the water and 
sanitation sector in the country from an environmental and social perspective, the existing 
national requirements for the EIAs, and identified environmental and social issues related 
to the proposed investments that would be financed by the Project. Specific procedures 
included in the ESMF include (a) environmental and social screening of activities, and 
the construction manuals; (b) public consultation and design concerns; (c) mitigation 
measures required during and after works implementation; and (d) project monitoring. 
The ESMF was developed in a participatory manner by promoting ample intersectoral 
participation in which the SEAM was an active partner. This consultation process has 
resulted in clarity and agreement among the agencies involved on institutional roles and 
coordination aspects related to environmental and social issues.  
Page  7
Measures incorporated into the Project to address key issues. A detailed environmental 
assessment methodology has been developed and documented within the ESMF for the 
assessment of subprojects. Both the public utility ESSAP, which provides water and 
sanitation in urban areas, and SENASA, the public entity technical assistance provider for 
rural areas, have an inventory of prioritized works to be financed through the loan. Rural 
works considered in this project include construction or expansion of water systems and 
on-site individual sanitation solutions. The environmental and social impacts associated 
with these works are considered low since no significant or irreversible environmental 
damage is expected.  
 
For these construction works, minor environmental impacts, mostly nuisances (disposal 
of construction waste, dust and noise, erosion control, protection of spring catchments in 
rural areas, and so forth) will be addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be 
incorporated into the technical specifications of construction contracts. Appropriate 
environmental and social screening criteria (previously agreed for water and sanitation 
subprojects for the Fourth Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project and applied since 
1997) have been updated for this proposed project in the ESMF and will be fully 
incorporated into the project Operations Manual.  
 
While environmental and social impacts of sewerage works have the potential to have 
significant adverse impacts if not carefully planned and managed, project support for the 
urban areas is expected to have a positive environmental impact overall. This will be 
achieved by (a) consolidating and improving water resources management in the country; 
(b) connecting people to sewage collection and treatment systems in Asuncion’s 
metropolitan area and other urban centers, thereby protecting water sources; and (c) 
increasing the efficiency of the water supply services.  
 
Institutional Capacity Building. The ESMF describes a number of weaknesses and 
opportunities for improving and strengthening of the social and environmental 
management capacity at the sector level. The institutional capacity-building plan 
proposes specific actions of management, training, and equipment. A specific budget has 
been allocated and will be executed during Project implementation. There is full 
agreement with the Borrower on the actions required to strengthen institutional capacity, 
and staff with expertise in these areas have already been hired prior to project approval, 
indicating commitment on the part of the Borrower to address these issues in an 
integrated manner. This is also reflected in the organizational structure, where 
environmental and social management is integrated with planning units rather than 
working in isolation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public Consultation and Disclosure:  Consultation, participation and disclosure take place 
at two levels for the project. During project preparation multiple stakeholder groups were 
involved in defining the overall project scope and the framework for environmental and 
social management, as defined in the ESMF. Disclosure and consultation of the ESMF 
Page  8
started with a presentation of the document carried out on April 10th, 2008. Following 
the presentation, the document was published in the web sites of ESSAP, SENASA, 
ERSSAN, and SEAM on April 14th, 2008, and via the Bank’s Infoshop on April 21st, 
2008. The ESMF was later updated incorporating the comments received and a new 
version was published in the institution’s sites and via the Bank’s Infoshop on June 2nd, 
2008.  
 
The ESMF provides guidelines and procedures for further consultations during project 
implementation, in particular in defining and designing sub-projects and specific works.  
This consultation framework provides systematic guidance to address potential risks as 
well as to enhance quality, targeting and benefits to the population.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/16/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/21/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/03/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/03/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  10
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
01/26/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
01/26/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez 
01/26/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/26/2009 
Comments:  The team is to be congratulated on having worked systematically and well with the 
Borrower to address environmental and social issues. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
01/26/2009 
Comments:   
