Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1934 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Paraguay 
Project ID: P095235 
Project Name: PY Water & Sanitation Sector Modernization 
Task Team Leader: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Program Objective. The overarching medium-term development objective of the proposed 
program is to contribute to improve the quality of life of the population and public health in the 
country, measured through a set of indicators specifically designed for that purpose. The specific 
medium-term outcomes are: (i) to substantially increase access to sustainable water and 
sanitation services; (ii) to improve quality and efficiency of water and sanitation services; (iii) to 
improve the hygiene of the population; and (iv) to improve transparency, governance and 
sustainability in the provision of water and sanitation services. The achievement of the medium 
term development objective will be measured at the end of the Program through a comprehensive 
impact evaluation that is being designed for that purpose. Progress will be measured though the 
monitoring of specific output and outcome indicators using a monitoring system that is being 
established.  
 
Project Development Objective (APL 1): The specific objectives are: (i) to improve 
transparency, governance and sustainability in the provision of water and sanitation services; (ii) 
to increase access to sewerage services in Asuncion Metropolitan region and to sustainable water 
and sanitation services in rural areas; (iii) to improve quality and efficiency of water and 
Page  2
sanitation service delivery in urban and rural areas; and (iv) to improve hygiene of the 
population. The achievement of these outcomes will be closely monitored and assessed through 
an impact evaluation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Support to the Modernization of the Sector (US$ 5 million): This component 
would support the following actions: (i) design and creation of new business units for ESSAP; 
(ii) strengthening of ERSSAN; (iii) modernization of SENASA; (iv) development of a financial 
policy for the sector, including social considerations to promote services to the poor; (v) 
implementation of a Corporate Governance strategy to improve governance and transparency in 
the sector, and (vi) implementation of the recommendations from a strategic environmental 
assessment to improve the environmental regulations affecting water and sanitation services. 
Under this component, the project would also finance a communications campaign and other 
social and strategic communications activities, technical assistance and capacity-building 
activities.  
 
Component 2: Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 30 million). This component would 
finance urgent investments for the extension of water supply and sewerage systems, 
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, operational and commercial strengthening of the new 
business units of ESSAP, including its equipment. Given the existing low coverage of sewerage 
in Asunci?n and its metropolitan region, which clearly impacts the poor, a significant amount of 
this component is likely to be devoted to building sewerage infrastructure in the Asunci?n 
Metropolitan Area.  
 
Component 3: Sustainable water and sanitation services and hygiene education for rural areas 
(US$ 22 million). This component would scale up the experience of the IV Rural W&S Project 
by: (i) using Output Based Aid for the construction and expansion of services through minimum 
subsidy concessions in larger communities; (ii) increasing coverage of WSS for indigenous 
communities ; the communities to be served will be prioritized using social indexes, including 
poverty criteria, that are being developed as part of the Indigenous Peoples Plan; (iii) increasing 
coverage of WSS in poor, recently settled and smaller communities (asentamientos campesinos); 
(iv) strengthening existing Juntas, through Associations of Juntas, to provide technical assistance 
in partnership with the private sector; and (v) implementing a hand-washing campaign to 
increase the health impact of the interventions.  
 
Component 4: Project management (US$ 3 million). This component would ensure adequate 
levels of funding to support project execution activities; to ensure adherence to safeguards; to 
implement a monitoring and evaluation system, including software and data collection and 
analysis; to conduct an impact evaluation at the end of APL 1. This component will also finance 
feasibility studies for investments to be financed under the horizontal APL.  
 
The approach will seek to promote, as a guiding theme in all components: (i) transparency, 
through planning and programming all interventions based on objective and quantifiable criteria; 
(ii) performance, through the identification of targets for each intervention, to be monitored and 
whose attainment will be the indication of success; (iii) accountability, through the participation, 
publication and presentation of the programmed activities to the stakeholders, and the results 
obtained.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
Not yet defined   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower?s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is already well-developed as the 
urban water utility has already implemented other World Bank and Inter-American Development 
Bank projects with international financing. There were no problems with the safeguards for the 
WB projects.  The rural utilities have a satisfactory implementation record with similar 
investments.  The Environmental and Social Management Framework, Indigenous People?s 
Planning Framework and Indigenous People?s Plans from the Paraguay 4th Rural Water Supply 
and Sanitation project are already under ex poste evaluation.  Lessons from this evaluation will 
be incorporated in the design of this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez (LCSSO) 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No major irreversible environmental issues are expected in the small-scale construction of 
water supply and sanitation (WSS) systems for rural areas. Urban investments in sanitation will 
be limited to tertiary and secondary sewerage networks which will connect to existing trunk 
network infrastructure.  
 
For construction works, minor environmental impacts, mostly nuisances (disposal of 
construction waste, dust and noise, erosion control, protection of spring catchments in rural 
areas, etc.) will be addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be incorporated into the 
technical specifications of construction contracts. Appropriate environmental screening criteria 
(previously agreed for water and sanitation sub-projects for the BIRF IV loan and applied since 
1997) will be updated for APL-1 in the project Operation Manual and expanded to consider 
urban works. The screening criteria will be used by SENASA and ESSAP to evaluate the 
technical, social, environmental, financial and economic feasibility of WSS investments prepared 
by local consultants. SENASA and ESSAP will provide training and technical assistance to 
consultants to support effective use of the screening criteria. Rapid environmental assessments 
for individual water, sewerage and investments in urban areas will be conducted during project 
implementation once eligible municipalities have qualified for financial support from the project. 
A
Sectoral Environmental Evaluation (SEE) will be carried out during project preparation. 
The evaluation, under the guidance of a Bank?s environmental specialist will contain specific 
studies and recommendations on how to create the environmental management framework for 
wastewater discharges, promote water efficiency and support health issues related to the water 
sector. This evaluation will be carried out in a participatory manner with a launching and closing 
workshop so as to promote an ample intersectorial participation.  The SEE will concentrate on 
the analysis of the legal and regulatory framework for wastewater treatment and disposal, and the 
existing national requirements for the Environmental Impact Assessments. Results from the SEE 
will be included in the project design as warranted. The SEE will complement the framework for 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
screening of projects and the construction manuals described above.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Given the presence of indigenous peoples in the project area (number to be determined from 
a
total of 1.7 % of indigenous population of the country: less than 100.000 inhabitants, once the 
areas of intervention are defined), the Bank?s Indigenous People?s Policy (OP/BP 4.10) may be 
triggered. An Integrated Assessment is being carried out as part of project preparation. The final 
products will consist in a) an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), and b) an Operational Manual. The 
assessment includes various methods such as review of legal framework of the country, ruled 
mainly by the Instituto Nacional del Ind?gena (INDI); institutional capabilities of project 
implementers; quantitative and qualitative data including socio-economic, cultural and political 
context The results of these studies will serve as basis for the informed consultations with 
stakeholders, including beneficiaries, those that have already been benefited by BIRF IV (ex post 
evaluation) as well as the new ones for the proposed project. Assessment objectives include to 
refine i) eligibility criteria to prioritize areas of interventions and groups to beneficiate; ii) 
participation strategies and delivery modes with positive discrimination of most vulnerable 
groups, including gender perspective; iii) mechanisms to coordinate the supply and demand of 
water and sanitation investment in indigenous communities; iv) address training needs if it is the 
case, among other aspects that will fully include the main lessons of  BIRF IV ex post 
evaluation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Given that minor urban works related to the construction of secondary and tertiary sewerage 
networks contemplated under the project, the likelihood of displacement of population is 
minimal. However, a resettlement framework, based on abbreviated resettlement plans, will be 
prepared by appraisal. Once the location of the works is known during project implementation, 
individual resettlements plan will be prepared for each urban center if necessary, but at this stage 
no expropriation or taking of land is envisaged. If Individual Resettlement Plans are necessary, 
they will be approved by the Bank before being implemented.  
 
Since the location of works with potential implication for resettlements are in urban areas, 
ESSAP will be in charge of formulation and implementing both the resettlement framework, and 
if necessary the resettlement plans.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/23/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Conceptual Framework for Environmental and Social Management and the Indigenous 
People?s Planning Framework are currently being developed and are expected to be 
completed in March of 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo 
12/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
