Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3420 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/09/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Paraguay 
Project ID: P106433 
Project Name: Pilot Community Development Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSSO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(20%);Central government administration (20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (40%);Rural non-farm income 
generation (40%);Participation and civic engagement (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.00 
 Local 
Communities 
1.50
3.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Additional Financing is unchanged from the original project, 
except for adding five new dapartments to the project area. The PDO of the Project is to improve 
the quality of life and social inclusion of poor communities in the Project Area, through: (a) 
supporting the implementation of Subprojects; and (b) building capacity of Participating 
Organizations to identify, design and implement Subprojects.The Pilot Community Development 
Project seeks to test a decentralized, participatory, bottom up development approach as a way to 
improve the quality of life and social inclusion of poor rural and marginal urban communities in 
eight departments in eastern and southern Paraguay.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed AF would support the costs associated with the scaling-up of activities to enhance 
the development impact of the Project.  No major changes are proposed to the ongoing Project. It 
will continue to support the initial three components:  
Page  2
(a)Community Development Sub-projects.  Grants for an additional 500 small-scale demand-
driven income generating sub-Projects (e.g. small enterprises, artisan workshops, agricultural 
diversification, etc.) prepared and submitted by groups of eligible beneficiaries.  
 
(b)Capacity-Building and In
stitutional Development.  Strengthen local communities’ capacity 
to design, implement and monitor community development activities and to facilitate their 
participation in overall Project implementation. Finance support services, training and 
organizational development, and the implementation of a participatory monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system.  
 
(c)Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.  Support to the Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) to coordinate the technical and administrative aspects, oversee implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of the Project, and to carry out specialized studies   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Poverty and social exclusion in Paraguay continues to prevail, with the overall poverty rate 
having increased from 30 percent to 38 percent between 1995 and 2005.  Inequality as measured 
by the Gini index is also very high (0.506), and between 1999 and 2005 it has been increasing in 
urban areas (from 0.470 to 0.485) although it has fallen somewhat in rural areas (from 0.567 to 
0.513). Institutional weakness of the state and civil society are key constraints to economic 
growth and poverty reduction.  
 
The number of Departments will be increased from the three original Departments of Itapua, 
Misiones, and Ñeembucu, where the project is currently operating, by expanding the project area 
to include an additional five Departments of Caaguazú, Caazapá, Canindeyú, Central,and San 
Pedro.  These new Departments share similar ecosystem characteristics as those involved in the 
original project including Alto Parana Atlantic Forest, Misiones Grasslands, and Humid Chaco 
ecosystems.  Caaguazu, Itapua and Misiones are the most important based on presence of critical 
ecosystems and endangered species.  
 
Indigenous Peoples also exist in the new Departments, especially in Caaguazú and Central. In 
Caaguazú there are about 6,900 individuals of indigenous descent (or approximately 1.6% of the 
total population in Caaguazú), from three different ethnic groups, a majority of which belong to 
the Guarani­ ethno-linguistic family. In Central the overall indigenous population amounts to just 
over 1,000 people from 6 different ethnic groups, and make up just 0.1% of the total population 
in the Department.  In Guaira¡ there about 1,000 indigenous peoples, less that 0.6% of the total 
population, distributed in 8 communities (from the Mbya family). Itapuaºa has an indigenous 
population of about 2,000 individuals, distributed in 32communities (Mbya and MakÃ), which in 
total represent less than 0.5% of the total population in the Department   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Supervision reports, the assessments conducted by environmental and social specialists from the 
Bank, as well as QAG reports indicate that supervision of environmental issues and the capacity 
of the implementing agency to deal with social and environmental safeguards in the project have 
been satisfactory.  The existing institutional arrangements and existing procedures for screening , 
monitoring and supporting subprojects addressing social and environmental issues have been 
adequate.  In the preparation of the Additional Financing and the discussion of the restructuring 
Page  3
with the counterparts, these procedures were validated and revised to take into account the 
recommendations provided by the Bank in order to improve the existing good performance.  
 
The Operational Manual has been updated to reflect the suggestions made regarding the PMP, 
and the screening procedures to ensure that no activities would take place in areas declared 
Natural Habitats.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario (LCSSO) 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Based on the evidence gathered during the supervision of ongoing subprojects, most 
activities are likely to have no negative environmental impacts. Some sub-projects (agricultural 
productivity and small cottage industries) may pose minor environmental risks.  To avoid this 
risks, appropriate environmental screening criteria and procedures ("Procedimientos Ambientales 
para Determinar los Impactos Ambientales", in project files) for all subprojects have been 
developed during the ongoing project and found satisfactory to the Bank.  Based on project 
supervision inputs and advice provided by the environmental specialist, the Environmental 
Screening procedures in the Operational Manual have been revised to improve and make more 
agile the screening, as well as to facilitate supervision.  In this regard, the Additional Financing 
will also monitor the potential aggregate impacts of the subprojects to ensure that the sum of the 
individual investments has no negative environmental impacts.  
 
An Environmental Screening and Monitoring process, based on the current experience of 
the Pilot, has been designed and incorporated into the Operational Manual of the project to 
ensure prior screening of sub-projects and proper monitoring during implementation, with active 
participation of the beneficiaries in design and management of environmental aspects.  The 
Operational Manual has been updated periodically and for the AF phase, it has incorporated 
revisions based on project experience and most recent safeguard policies to ensure quality and 
facilitate compliance.  
 
All subprojects currently supported by the project correspond to the B or C type, which 
require an environmental screening to identify potential impacts and the actions to mitigate them. 
Each subproject has an Environmental Impact Assessment Form, which is filled out by a person 
who is qualified and trained in handling it and in interpreting results. The form contains basic 
points that are completed during a mandatory visit to the site where the subproject will be carried 
out, prior to approval.  Additionally, the subproject form offers an environmental assessment list 
that should be completed by the responsible SAS Technical Officer, and considers different types 
of impacts and mitigation measures for each. Moreover, the institutional arrangements already in 
place guarantee the participation of local and municipal environmental offices in the screening of 
all sub-projects, thus ensuring further local capacity building.  
 
During the additional financing phase, these screening and subproject approval procedures 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
will be maintained, upgraded, and further decentralized to the extent possible.  Monitoring and 
Evaluation processes (component 3) will strengthen specific reference and review of the 
environmental aspects of the project including lessons-learned.  
 
Training of the technical assistance providers (ATs) and Community Development Agents 
(ADCs) in the preparation of Environmental Assessments of the sub-projects will be maintained 
and continued through the life of the project, with special emphasis on pesticide use and health 
and safety issues.  Efforts to allow sustainability and mainstreaming of the EA process in the 
context of small-farmer/community-based productive endeavors will also be included in 
Component 2 activities, given the high costs to renew SEAM environmental licenses once the 
projects are concluded.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project is broad in terms of its geographic scope however the scale of individual projects 
is small and generally at some distance from one another with little potential for aggregate 
impacts.  Projects may be located in areas close to critical natural habitat. Specific measures have 
been defined in the Operational Manual to screen these activities and to ensure that no impact on 
natural habits occur.  None of the activities contemplated imply significantly degrading or 
converting natural habitat and many are environmentally beneficial in that context given that 
many are organic or natural production projects.  The EMF also incorporates a negative list of 
activities and requires previous review of projects to contemplate potential impacts on native 
habitat.   Some specific reference and guidelines to those projects in buffer-zones of protected 
areas have been incorporated into the Operational Manual.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Following current Bank best practice, the Forests and Natural Habitats Safeguard Policies 
(OP 4.36 and OP 4.04) are also being triggered.  However, no commercial harvesting of native 
forests or large-scale plantation forestry is contemplated under the AF project, nor has been 
financed in the first phase of implementation.  The original project negative list has included 
charcoal production among projects not eligible to be financed and the negative list will be 
maintained in the AF phase.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Based on supervision during the ongoing Project, as well as on the Environmental Appraisal 
for the Additional Financing, the Pest Management Operational Policy 4.09 has been triggered. 
Pesticide use is prevalent in the context of small-farmer production in Paraguay, therefore there 
is potential for utilization of harmful products, misuse, improper handling, application and 
disposal of these products during agricultural production.  Agricultural projects are a minority of 
the sub-projects, however to diminish risks associated with this type of production, PRODECO 
has incorporated policies and training programs into its design and operational manuals.  
 
Only low-toxicity products were allowed to be procured under the first phase; however 
more explicit reference to IPM and the products permitted will be incorporated in the AF phase.  
A
Pest Management Plan has been prepared and incorporated into the Operational 
Manual/Environmental Management Framework of the Additional Financing project.  A list of 
pesticides eligible to be procured with Bank funds has been included in the Operational Manual 
by the proponent.  The Pest Management Plan and list of eligible pesticides will be distributed to 
all technical assistance providers and beneficiaries submitting sub
-
projects that might involve 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
use of pesticides prior to the outset of the activities.  Training activities have been ongoing with 
respect to the Environmental Management Framework and will continue throughout the life of 
the project, especially issues pertaining to IPM.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
1.  The design of the original project, as well as the additional financing, is fully consistent 
with the requirements of OP4.10, which in order to ensure consistency with Bank best practices, 
is now formally triggered by the Additional Financing.  The design of the original project was 
based on a comprehensive social assessment carried out during preparation, with a particular 
emphasis on indigenous peoples as a beneficiary target group of the project.  Supervision reports 
highlight the highly satisfactory treatment of indigenous issues during implementation. During 
the implementation of the Pilot project, extensive consultations with different stakeholders and in 
particular with potential beneficiary communities and indigenous representatives were held to 
assess their particular priorities and needs. This process, enhanced with several instances of 
participation and training, ensured that free prior informed consultations with IP communities 
were carried out, and indicated broad IP community support for the original project.  To comply 
with OP 4.10, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been agreed with the 
borrower. . The final framework was consulted on January 10, 2007, with representatives from 
indigenous organizations from the corresponding departments, authorities from INDI as well as 
representatives from civil society organizations working with indigenous communities. 
Consultations with indigenous representatives will continue and in due course will provide the 
basis for the preparation of the specific sub-projects in IP communities.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
As expected under the original project design, the ongoing original project has not created 
any situation of involuntary resettlement, and therefore has not triggered OP/BP 4.12.  The 
implementation record of the current project shows that community subprojects secure land use 
through one or more of the following three procedures: i) Easement from one beneficiary who 
leases use of land for a period up to 10 years; ii) Beneficiaries use lands under municipal 
property that is legally transferred to them by the due authority; and iii) project activities take 
place in a plot that is property of one of the beneficiaries but does not involve any infrastructure 
development that can cause involuntary resettlement.   Since the additional financing will 
continue supporting the same type of community projects, which now hope to benefit from the 
accumulated experience and lessons learned of the ongoing subprojects, the same methods of 
land acquisition are expected to remain in use, and to be encouraged by the project authorities.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/09/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Estanislao Gacitua-Mario 
06/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
06/09/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
