Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4428 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Peru 
Project ID: P116929 
Project Name: Peru Safe and Sustainable Transport SWAp 
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 28, 2010 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (50%);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (25%);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
630.00 
 Inter-American 
Development 
Bank 
150.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
70.00
850.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to increase the quality of national road corridors 
that are essential to Peru#s competitiveness and to promote safer transport conditions, as part of 
the Government#s stimulus package designed in response to the global crisis. Specific objectives 
include: (i) improving the quality of selected national roads, through a scaling up of effective 
maintenance and the use of low-cost paving technologies; (ii) generating employment 
opportunities, particularly for the rural poor; (iii) supporting the reduction of road traffic 
fatalities and injuries (and resulting economic losses), on selected national roads, through the 
development of #safe corridors#; and (iv) strengthening MTC#s institutional framework with a 
view to improve the effectiveness of the Government#s stimulus package.  
 
Key performance indicators would include the following:  
 
OUTPUTS:  
 
#
Proportion of the national road network receiving permanent and efficient road 
maintenance  
Page  2
#
Number of km of national roads rehabilitated and maintained under output performance-
based contracts  
 
#
Number of km of national roads upgraded using low-cost paving technologies  
 
#
Annualized employment opportunities created by the rehabilitation works  
 
#
Permanent employment opportunities created by the routine maintenance works  
 
#
Number of km of #safe corridors#  
 
#
Number of km of national roads assessed using the iRAP methodology  
 
#
Establishment of an effective and functioning road safety agency  
 
OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS  
 
#
Proportion of the national road network in good conditions  
 
#
Proportion of the national road network that is paved  
 
#
Reduction of road crashes on #safe corridors#  
 
#
Improved planning for logistics, including though the updating of the national roads and 
bridges# inventories and the development of a GIS  
 
#
Improved management of social and environmental safeguards in MTC   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The MTC will prepare and endorse a Transport Policy Letter describing the short, mid and long-
term objectives of the reform program in the transport sector, in the context of the Government#s 
response to the global crisis. The Transport Policy Letter will present the Ministry#s strategy to 
reduce Peru#s infrastructure gap and improve the global performance of the transport sector and 
its contribution to the country#s competitiveness and growth objectives. This document will in 
particular emphasize the importance of road asset management and of improving Peru#s current 
road safety situation. It will describe the objectives and content of the transport investment 
program to be implemented as part of the stimulus package and it will explain the institutional 
reforms that will be developed in parallel in order to maximize the benefits from this investment 
program.  
 
The proposed project would include the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Performance-based Road rehabilitation and maintenance (estimated cost: 
US$880 million of which US$200 million would be financed by the Bank loan).  
 
According to MTC#s national road planning, 37 existing transport corridors have to be 
rehabilitated during the period 2009-2012. An acceleration of this investment program is 
expected, as a consequence of Peru#s stimulus package and Provias Nacional is currently 
looking at ways to frontload the execution of these investments. This component would finance 
this rehabilitation program, including design studies, actual works and supervision and also 
possible monitoring and evaluation arrangements. In order to focus Bank#s intervention on 
activities with the most innovation and added-value, Bank financing would focus on the 
implementation of a CREMA pilot on one or two transport corridors. The CREMA pilot would 
involve the rehabilitation of a paved road section and the maintenance of that section for a period 
of 5 to 10 years. The exact location of the corridors on which the pilot would be implemented is 
still to be confirmed by Provias Nacional. Contracting arrangements would be made, based on 
the Bank experience with CREMAs in Brazil and Argentina. Employment generation would be 
monitored.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Road maintenance (estimated cost: US$150 million of which US$75 million 
would be financed by the Bank loan).  
 
This component would build on the successful experience of #Proyecto Peru#, a program 
implemented by Provias Nacional that has been testing low-cost paving technologies bundled 
together with a 5 year maintenance program. 3,000 km of roads have already been improved by 
#Proyecto Peru#. Routine maintenance activities are expected to be outsourced by private 
contractors to microenterprises constituted from poor men and women living aside from the 
rehabilitated roads. The proposed component would finance the improvement of up to 16,000 km 
of national roads. The proportion of roads receiving permanent and efficient maintenance could 
increase from 40 up to 80 percent of the non-concessioned national road network. Based on the 
current and past experience of microenterprises in Peru, it is estimated that the number of 
employment opportunities generated could reach 12,000 to 15,000. Contracting arrangements for 
#Proyecto Peru# are currently ad#hoc, thus limiting competition for private operators. MTC and 
IaDB have agreed to use Bank#s standard bidding documents for non-consultant services instead 
of national procurement documents. Bank#s added value would come from the design of the 
results-based contracting arrangement, the choice of the low-cost paving technological 
alternatives and the monitoring and evaluation system to be put in place (possibly outsourced to 
local academic institutions). The proposed component would finance designs, works, 
supervision, as well as the monitoring and evaluation arrangements.  
 
Component 3: Road safety, critical points and bridges (estimated cost: US$40 million of which 
US$20 million would be financed by the Bank loan).  
 
This component would finance road works to improve the road safety condition of selected 
national roads. In particular, the investments that have been prioritized by the iRAP assessment 
on 3,000 km of roads would be financed under this component unless they can be included under 
an existing contract. Other road safety improvements on critical points and bridges have already 
been identified by Provias Nacional and would also be eligible under this component. An 
extension of the iRAP assessment program to additional roads could also be financed under 
component 4. In parallel, Provias Nacional would further its dialogue with the National Road 
Safety Council in order to develop and label the concept of safe corridors (#corredores 
seguros#), building on the national roads whose infrastructure has been improved. The #safe 
corridor# concept implies working with other agencies and ministries in order to articulate a 
combination on road safety improvements (safer infrastructure but also more stringent 
enforcement, road safety education initiatives and more efficient emergency mechanisms) that 
could increase the impact to reduce road crashes. Such institutional coordination requires a 
strong road safety agency that is still missing today although some early progresses have been 
signaled within the National Road Safety Council. Resources would be earmarked under 
component 4 in order to support the institutional strengthening of the Peruvian agencies in 
charge of road safety. On the other hand, component 3 would finance design studies (including 
the updating of existing design studies or road rehabilitation standards), actual works, 
supervision activities, services like the iRAP assessment, as well as additional studies and 
consultancies linked to the monitoring and institutional strengthening of Provias Nacional#s road 
safety program.  
 
Component 4: Institutional support and transport regulation (estimated cost: US$10 million of 
which US$5 million would be financed by the Bank loan).  
Page  4
This component would finance a comprehensive technical assistance and institutional 
strengthening package for Provias Nacional (subcomponent 4.1) and other areas of the MTC 
(subcomponent 4.2). The objective is to improve the institutional performance of these agencies 
so that they can be the most efficient and effective in implementing the Government#s stimulus 
package. The eligible activities, to improve capacity for management, monitoring and evaluation, 
are grouped under four overall themes: (a) improvement of information management systems 
(such as, road and bridge asset management, emergency and incident management, contracts 
management); (b) support for planning systems (right of way, urban issues); (c) improvement of 
road safety management and transport regulation systems; and (d) capacity building for 
improved management of environmental and social safeguards. Under subcomponent 4.1, to be 
implemented by Provias Nacional, eligible activities may include updating of the national road 
inventory following the recent reclassification of Peruvian roads; the preparation of a strategy to 
address road design issues in urban and peri-urban area and slope stability studies among others. 
Subcomponent 4.2, is to be implemented by the Office of General Administration (OGA in 
Spanish), MTC entities to be supported would include, inter alia: the General Unit for Planning 
and Budget (OGPP in Spanish), the General Directorate for Social and Environmental 
Safeguards (DGASA in Spanish) and the National Road Safety Council (CNSV in Spanish). 
Under subcomponent 4.2, eligible activities may include, among others, the preparation of a 
logistics strategy; the design of information systems for inter-provincial passenger transport and; 
and the strengthening of the institutional cooperation arrangements between the various 
institutions involved in road safety, and particularly in the #safe corridors# program.  
 
Financing. The proposed program amount to US$1.1 billion of which US$300 million would be 
financed by the World Bank, US$150 million by the IaDB and US$630 million by the GoP. 
Disbursements are expected to be frontloaded in 2010-2011 in order to support the 
Government#s stimulus package in the most effective way. To do so, several investments to be 
implemented in CY09 would be retroactively eligible to the proposed project, subject to 
compliance with its objectives and operational procedures. In order to reduce the need for 
counterpart funds and match the US$300 million request from MEF, the IaDB is considering a 
second US$150 million operation to support this program, to be approved by late 2010, early 
2011.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented on road sections located all over Peru (national scope).  
 
The most significant works will be performed under component 1 (road rehabilitation). The 
World Bank will finance, on a pilot basis, the rehabilitation of a single road section, using 
#CREMA# long-term performance-based contracting arrangements. This road section is still be 
to determined by Provias Nacional but one of the selection criteria is that this work does not 
exceed the requirements for a #Category B# project.  
 
Other more minor works (maintenance, road safety improvements) will be performed on other 
road sections, located all over Peru. Most of the road safety improvements will be executed on 
road sections that belong to the 3,000 km that have been assessed using the road safety 
assessment methodology #iRAP#.   
 
Page  5
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed Project will be implemented by Provias Nacional, one of the highest performing 
agencies in the Peruvian administration. Provias Nacional is highly experienced in working with 
multilaterals, particularly with the IaDB with which it has been working for more than a decade. 
The experience with the IaDB on managing social and environmental issues for road projects is 
satisfactory to highly satisfactory. The last World Bank-financed project with Provias Nacional 
is a Transport Rehabilitation Project, approved in 1994 and closed in 2000.  
 
On safeguard issues, the DGASA (General Directorate for Social and Environmental Issues) in 
the Ministry of Transport and Communications will also be associated, depending on the nature 
of the work and the expected social and environmental impacts. The World Bank has been 
working with DGASA for many years, including through several Decentralized Rural Transport 
operations for which specific Social and Environmental Management Framework have been 
prepared. The performance of DGASA in participating to the implementation of these programs 
is generally satisfactory. However, despite many years of experience, DGASA still has a limited 
capacity.  
 
The proposed operation includes resources under component 4 to strengthen the institutional 
capacity of the MTC to manage social and environmental safeguards. A pilot on the management 
of the #right of way# will also be launched and is expected to contribute to improving the 
management of resettlement issues. During project preparation a safeguards capacity assessment 
will be carried out in order to determine specific areas where Borrower#s capacity to manage 
environmental and social aspects would be strengthened though the project. The project will 
promote greater integration of social and environmental safeguards issues in the planning process 
and instruments managed by the MTC. The potential implications for large scale investments 
prioritized as part of this process will be further assessed during the operation   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While project impacts are likely to warrant a #Category B# environmental classification. The 
team will meet with SAT to confirm the environment categorization prior to the QER when more 
information is available. The proposed project will exclusively finance the rehabilitation of 
existing roads. A brief review performed at pre-identification stage, of the 37 transport corridors 
scheduled to be rehabilitated by Provias National under component 1 has shown that all these 
works are expected to be rated #Category B#. The Bank will finance rehabilitation works for at 
least one road section for which innovative long-term and performance-based contracting 
arrangements will be applied (CREMAs). The road section will be selected with due attention to 
the fact that this is indeed a #category B# subproject. A Social and Environmental Management 
Framework will also be prepared, adapting the safeguards procedures already applied to existing 
national road projects financed by the IaDB. This framework will describe the environmental 
procedures applicable to the rehabilitation, maintenance and road safety works and will try to 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
streamline best engineering practices. It is important to note that the net contribution of road 
maintenance works to the environment is usually positive since a well maintained road requires 
less frequent heavy mechanized rehabilitation and since efficient maintenance helps save 
materials and protect slopes, thus limiting erosion. Operational procedures for the project, to be 
agreed with government and IaDB, would be consistent with Bank safeguard policies and all 
investments eligible for retroactive financing would have to comply with such procedures.  
 
The Social and Environmental management Framework will be disclosed both in the 
country and in the Infoshop.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Social and Environmental Management Framework will detail applicable procedures in 
case of the proposed works would be located in National Habitats areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Peru already has a sound legislation for the protection of physical cultural resources. 
Significant infrastructure works may for example excavate inca or pre-inca archeological 
remains. This risk is much less important in the case of rehabilitation or maintenance works on 
existing infrastructure but it can still happen. Peru#s national legislation requires for all road 
works that a Certificate of Inexistence of Archeological Remains (CIAR) be prepared. To 
mitigate possible damages to cultural heritage, chance-finding procedures will be included in the 
Social and Environmental Management Framework. Potential impacts on physical cultural 
resources from specific investments supported by the proposed project will be identified as part 
of the EA process and any adverse impacts will be addressed through mitigation measures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some of the proposed works may intervene in areas with Indigenous Peoples# presence. Peru 
has an important indigenous peoples# community, particularly in the Selva (jungle) macro-
region and the Sierra (highlands). Although the overall impact is expected to be highly positive, 
due to improved access and better transport conditions; there is potential for intrusion and 
adverse impacts during project construction. An Indigenous Peoples# Planning Framework will 
be prepared in order to identify potential adverse and positive project impacts, to define the 
process and principles by which the consultation process will be carried out, as well as the 
institutional responsibilities for the design and implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP). The preparation of the IPPF will include site visits within the list of potential rehabilitation 
works. A rapid social assessment, on a representative sample of potential road sections, will be 
carried out to identify indigenous groups, and mechanisms will be developed to ensure that 
educational and communication activities are delivered in a culturally appropriate manner.  
 
The Indigenous Peoples# Planning Framework will be disclosed both in the country and in 
the Infoshop.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project only involved the rehabilitation and maintenance of existing infrastructure and 
therefore no major resettlement is expected. The most significant works to be financed by the 
World Bank loan under the proposed SWAp will involve the rehabilitation of a specific road 
section, using the innovative #CREMA# contracting arrangements. These works will be selected 
by Provias Nacional to make sure that no significant resettlement is involved. Moreover, in order 
to address possible minor resettlements that may arise from the rehabilitation, maintenance and 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
road safety works, an already existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be updated 
and tailored to projects needs.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework will be disclosed both in the country and in the 
Infoshop.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  September 10, 2009  
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed:  
The government held an internal workshop in May, 2009, involving several groups within 
MTC, to determine the methodology for carrying out the EA. Subsequently, electronic 
disclosure was carried out by publishing the terms of reference for the EA on the MTC 
website and emails to internal and external stakeholders. A second workshop for 
consultations on the draft EA will be carried out in August 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
06/05/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/05/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
06/05/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
