Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3948 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/17/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P106885 
Project Name: Integrated POPs Management 
Task Team Leader: John Morton 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (50%);Crops (30%);Central government administration 
(10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (67%);Environmental policies 
and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.64 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.51
17.51 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to assist the Philippines meet its obligations under the 
Stockholm Convention by safely managing PCBs, demonstrating practices for dioxin and furan 
release reduction and demonstrating remediation of contaminated sites.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists of five components: (1) Strengthening the regulatory framework and 
capacity building for POPs monitoring; (2) PCDD/PCDF release reduction; (3) Sound PCB 
management; (4) Identification, prioritization, and pilot remediation of POPs contaminated sites; 
and (5) Project management support. These components are for phase I of the project.  
 
Component 1: Strengthen the regulatory and institutional framework for POPs management and 
capacity building for POPs monitoring. This component will build the co
untry’s institutional 
Page  2
capacity and policy framework required for implementation of the Stockholm Convention. The 
sub-activities will include:  
 
(1) Technical assistance for review, updating and development of laws, rules, regulations, 
guidelines and standards for management of PCDD/PCDF releases, PCBs and contaminated 
sites;  
 
(2) Training for enforcement;  
 
(3) Upgrading and establishing operational protocols of a laboratory to allow PCDD/PCDF 
monitoring and providing training for lab operation staff; and  
 
(4) Development and the demonstration of a POPs environment and health monitoring system.  
 
Component 2: Reduce PCDD/PCDF release.  This component will build the country’stechnical 
capacity for reduction of PCDD/PCDF release focusing on waste management. The sub-
activities will include:  
 
(1) Technical assistance for establishment of PCDD/PCDF emission factors for selected sources 
for the Philippines;  
 
(2) Technical assistance for updating of PCDD/PCDF inventory and verification with sampling 
and testing;  
 
(3) Investments for BAT/BEP demonstration in solid waste management.  Implementation of 
closure of dumpsites and other solid waste management investments that are found to reduce 
PCDD/PCDF releases (e.g, leachate treatment and reduction of open burning), monitoring of 
PCDD/PCDF releases, along with training and technical assistance to support the activities.  
 
(4) Technical Assistance for development and implementation of BAT/BEP adoption in solid 
waste management.  
 
(5) Technical assistance for identification of BAT/BEPs for other key PCDD/PCDF sources 
relevant to the Philippines;  
 
(6) Technical Assistance for development of a scale-up program for the BAT/BEP adoption in 
waste management.  
 
Component 3: Adopt Environmentally Sound Management (ESM) of PCBs.  The objective of 
this component is to strengthen the management of PCBs.  The sub-activities include:  
 
(1) 
Completion of National PCB inventory including updating of forms and guidelines for 
PCB owners; testing and labeling of on-line transformers; identification of non-registered users; 
testing of PCB transformer oil; updating the PCB database and development of plans for long 
term disposal options.  
 
(2) 
Training of inspectors, PCB owners and servicing facilities;  
 
(3) 
Safe management of PCBs including identification, packaging, handling and storage of 
PCB oils, equipment and wastes.  
 
(4) 
Demonstration of decontamination of PCB transformers.  This activity will rent or 
purchase facilities for decontamination of PCB transformer and demonstrate their 
decontamination.  
 
Component 4: Management of POPs from contaminated sites.  This component aims to remove 
information, technical, and financial barriers for remediation of contaminated sites. The sub-
activities include:  
 
(1) Technical Assistance for identification and prioritization of POPs contaminated sites 
nationally;  
Page  3
(2) Implementing site safeguarding and monitoring of highly-contaminated sites;  
 
(3) Remediation of three selected pilot sites, including site risk assessment, design and 
remediation; and  
 
(4) Technical Assistance for development of a long-term monitoring and site remediation 
strategy.  
 
Component 5: Project Management Support:  Will provide support to EMB/DENR to carry out 
their financial management, procurement, auditing, M and E, and dissemination of project 
results.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be national, with the specific works locations as follows:  the laboratory under 
component 1 is anticipated to be in Metro Manila; the locations of the PCB owners (component 
3) and the municipalities and cities where PCDD/PCDF reduction will be demonstrated 
(component 2) are anticipated to have a wide geographic coverage.  The initial sites identified 
under Component 4 are located in the province of Zambales (Subic Bay) and Pampanga (Clark 
Economic Zone) and Metro Manila.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The executing agency, the DENR is the primary government agency tasked to manage the 
natural resources and protect the environment of the Philippines. It is mandated to enforce the 
law controlling the use and disposal of toxic and hazardous substances in the country which 
includes the regulation of POPs. The Toxic and Hazardous Wastes section, under the Pollution 
Management Division of the EMB of DENR is in charge of regulating POPs in the country.  
 
The EMB has experience in Bank safeguards through World Bank projects they have executed.  
Furthermore they are very experienced at EA as they are responsible for the review of 
environmental assessments of development projects and monitors compliance of projects. They 
will have overall oversight of the safeguards under the project.  DENR will also need to 
coordinate closely with the implementing partners including Local Governments, Clark 
Development Corporation, National Power Corporation and Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority.  
All of the partners have offices that work on environmental and social issues but vary in their 
degree of experience with implementing World Bank policies and therefore will require 
oversight during preparation and implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Simon Peter Gregorio (EASPS) 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
See Safeguard Preparation Plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
See Safeguard Preparation Plan.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
TBD   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
See Safeguard Preparation Plan.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
See Safeguard Preparation Plan.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/01/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment:  
 
The project will result in substantial environmental improvement through better overall 
management of POPs, improved solid waste management practices and the reducing  the risk 
of contaminated sites.  In order to maximize these improvements and minimize risks 
associated with project activities (including laboratory establishment; investments in solid 
waste management; PCB management and decontamination activities; and site remediation) 
an environmental assessment will be undertaken to assess risks and impacts, prepare 
appropriate environmental management plans that will specify preventative or mitigatory 
measures to minimize the potential impacts and assign responsibility and budget to these 
tasks.  
 
During preparation an overall Environmental Social Assessment document will be produced 
that will include EAs and EMPs for first year activities and an environmental and social 
assessment framework for subsequent years activities that will proscribe the responsibilities 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
and guidelines for preparing documentation for these activities.  The particular content of the 
documentation for the different components are described below:  
 
Component 1: Dioxin/Furan Laboratory:  An EMP will be developed for this laboratory. It 
will consist of the following: 1) Laboratory waste management plan, 2) Laboratory personnel 
safety procedures, 3) Laboratory personnel training plan.  
 
Component 2: Demonstration of PCDD/PCDF release reduction:  The solid waste 
investments including dumpsite closure will develop an environmental management plan as 
part of project preparation which will also assess any social issues found at the sites. For each 
dumpsite/landfill closure (investment) subproject that will be implemented in Year 1 of the 
Project, an EA and  a site closure plan that will include an analysis of environmental impacts 
and mitigation measures. For those sites that will be implemented in subsequent years a 
framework and environmental guidelines will be developed to help scope and assess impacts 
and develop associated environmental management plans for each site.  
 
Component 3:  As part of the development of this component guidelines and procedures for 
the safe management of PCBs will be developed which will include environmental 
management issues and will form part of the overall environmental management plan. The 
PCB management under this project covers identification, handling, packaging, safe storage 
and as needed transport between sources and storage points. An EA/EMP, either as a stand 
alone document or as an integral part of the proposed PCB management plan, will be 
prepared to mitigate any potential adverse impacts from: (a) PCB handling, packaging, safe 
storage and  (as necessary) transport between storage facilities and PCB sources; and (b) the 
proposed demonstration of decontamination of PCB equipment, including an assessment of 
various options for decontamination technology, site selection and use of existing facilities or 
those under development such as the UNIDO facility.  
 
Component 4: Contaminated Site Cleanup and Safeguarding of potentially highly 
contaminated sites:  For each POPs site safeguarding or cleanup subproject that will be 
implemented in Year 1  of the Project, an EA as well as a safeguards or cleanup plan (that 
will include an EMP) prepared in accordance with Annexes B and C of OP 4.01. The Bank 
will clear each EA and each safeguards and cleanup plan.  
 
For all other subprojects (financed under all four components) that will be implemented 
after Year 1 of the Project, the client will prepare one umbrella EMF. This EMF will spell 
out the process for: screening each sub-project for its potential impacts, preparation of 
suitable mitigation measures, institutional arrangements to implement those measures, 
budget, monitoring arrangements etc.  
 
Social issues under the EA: Potentially adverse livelihood impacts on waste pickers from 
the proposed dump-site closure sub-projects would be addressed as part of EA and EMP and 
explore options of communications and livelihood restoration.  
 
Natural Habitats: Because of the nature of the activities under the project, triggering of this 
policy is unlikely.  This will be confirmed during preparation.  
Page  6
Resettlement  
 
A
resettlement policy framework will be developed to guide the development of more 
detailed resettlement action plans to address any project-induced land acquisition, loss of 
structures and other assets, loss of income and livelihood , and restriction of access to sources 
of livelihood.  
 
The following project activities may involve involuntary resettlement:  
 
1.
Closure of dumpsites and/or implementation of  interim measures to minimize or stop 
open burning.  
 
2.
Remediation of contaminated sites.  
 
3.
Acquisition or clearing of land for PCB storage  
 
4.
Acquisition or clearing of land for the dioxin/furan laboratory.  
 
5.
Acquisition of land for resettlement sites of persons displaced by project activities.  
 
Due diligence shall be undertaken on any taking of real property (land, structures and 
improvements) and relocation of the inhabitants done in connection with but prior to this  
project effectiveness.  
 
The Environmental and Social Assessment Framework that will be developed prior to 
project appraisal will include guidelines and procedures for crafting livelihood and income 
restoration measures for garbage pickers. The Site Closure Plans will have economic 
restoration components.  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  
 
Although not anticipated, some of the inhabitants living at or near contaminated sites, dump 
sites, and proposed sites for PCB storage may be indigenous peoples.  During preparation, 
the location of and the presence of IPs in the proposed sites for remediation, dump closure 
and for PCB storage will be determined.  
 
For first year’s activities during project preparation, a social assessment will be conducted 
to determine if indigenous peoples and ancestral domains would be affected. If distinct 
communities of indigenous peoples were found to be among the affected persons, an 
indigenous people’s development plan will be developed to mitigate adverse impacts and to 
enable them to share in the project’s benefits.  
 
If during preparation it is possible that projects in subsequent years will involve IPs, then an 
indigenous people’s policy framework will be prepared that will spell out in what situations 
the policy would be triggered; the steps to undertake when it is triggered; and institutional 
mechanisms for implementing the policy.   
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Morton 
04/29/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/17/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
04/30/2009 
Comments:   
