Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/18/2009 
Report No.:  49096
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P114119 
Project Name:  PH - Chiller Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
GEF Focal Area: Ozone 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASPS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (50%);District heating and energy efficiency services 
(50%) 
Theme:  Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.60 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
7.77 
 
Montreal Protocol Investment Fund 
1.02 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
42.50
51.29 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective (PDO)  is to reduce GHG emissions by replacing 
inefficient chillers including both old CFC-based chillers and non-CFC-based chillers.  
 
The global environmental objective of the project is to reduce the harmful emissions of 
greenhouse gases and ozone depleting substances (which are also potent greenhouse 
gases) directly through chiller replacement and management which will increase energy 
efficiency and eliminate the need for CFC use as refrigerant.  In turn, significant 
reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases will contribute to the reduction of hardships 
anticipated from increased climate variability and climate change.  
 
In achieving the project objectives and outcomes, the following outputs are expected:  
 
#
250 chillers replaced  
Page  2
#
Total emission reductions of approximately 1.5 million tons of CO2 equivalent 
(emissions abatement) through demonstrated and verifiable energy savings  
 
#
Approximately 22 MT of annual CFC recharge demand eliminated through non-
CFC using equipment replacement.  
 
The project meets the objective of GEF operational programs on SP #1 and 2 (energy 
efficiency in commercial buildings and promoting energy efficiency in the industrial 
sector) in that it will (a) replace older chillers with newer, EE ones; (b) support the 
development and transformation of the market for energy and facilitate a low-carbon 
growth path; (c)  increase market penetration of energy-efficient chillers in the residential 
and commercial building markets; (d) support a single market transformation to 
accelerate GHG emissions reduction by making use of carbon finance; and, (e) deploy 
and diffuse energy-efficient chillers in industrial production and manufacturing 
processes.  
 
The additional chillers replaced with financing by CDM resources is equivalent to a 
replicaton strategy, which is consistent with the goal of ensuring consistency between the 
GEF and CDM initiatives while avoiding duplication of efforts and funding between the 
two.  The project will also support the Philippines to meet its MP ODS phaseout 
obligations, with minimum disruption to industry and the economy.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will facilitate the replacement of 250 chillers over a period of seven years 
with an average incentive of 20% of the cost of chillers.  
 
The GEF project components and activities are as follow:  
 
Component 1. Incentive Scheme for Investments in Energy Efficient Chillers  
 
Two incentive options will be offered: (i) an up-front incentive of 20% of the chiller 
cost; or (ii) annual payments to be made in accordance with carbon finance proceeds 
earned by each installation.  It is expected that 30% of chiller owners, stemming from the 
public sector, will select the second option.  For the first option, grant funds from GEF 
and MLF will be used to finance incentives for chiller replacement during the first 2 
years of the Project. The remaining 80% of the cost of chillers would be financed through 
commercial loans to be arranged by chiller owners. Additional units will be replaced in 
subsequent years through support by proceeds generated by carbon credits earned from 
installations of these new non-CFC chillers replaced in the earlier years.  
 
Component 2. Measurement, Monitoring and Validation  
 
Part of the grant funds provided by the MLF will finance the initial cost of baseline 
power measurement, monitoring and validation of emission reductions in order to meet 
CDM requirements.  In subsequent Project years, these costs will be borne by part of the 
carbon finance proceeds.  Costs of data loggers and transmitters will also be covered as 
well as the cost of monitoring the data generated.  
Page  3
Component 3. Technical Assistance  
 
This component will be collaborated with IFC and possibly other development partners. 
Technical workshops and public awareness work will be financed to familiarize chiller 
owners with life-cycle analyses in relation to chiller replacement and to inform 
stakeholders of the viability of chiller replacement. Awareness raising activities will be 
conducted among the key stakeholders of the business case for energy efficiency - the 
regulatory agencies, chiller owners, commercial banks, suppliers, ESCOs, associations, 
vendors and other development partners.  Technical guidance and capacity building 
targeting the key stakeholders is necessary as the EE, non-CFC chillers will utilize state-
of-the-art technologies that require new refrigerants, special structural specifications,  as 
well as tailored-fit operating and maintenance procedures that are different from those of 
the older chillers. Technical advice will also be provided to the chiller owners on the 
various techno-economic intricacies of determining the appropriate model for their new 
EE, non-CFC chiller that will match their specific cooling requirements as well as 
financial capabilities.  
 
Component 4. Project Management  
 
Project management costs including that of the coordinating entity will be covered, 
including transaction costs incurred by all sub-projects, disbursement and financial 
management, supervision of project implementation and cost associated with executing 
fiduciary responsibilities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program will be implemented nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Simon Peter Gregorio (EASPS) 
Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment.  An Environmental management framework (EMF) was 
prepared that includes the procedures, criteria, reporting requirements, and institutional 
responsibilities during project implementation. The EMF also prescribes the necessary 
legal framework that requires compliance with other relevant environmental regulations 
such as water and air pollution in the process units or the industry as a whole. The EMF 
contains an environmental management plan, an environmental monitoring plan, capacity 
building of government regulators, chiller owners and other stakeholders and the EMF 
implementation budget. An Operations Manual, a Manual of Protocols (MoP) and an 
Operational Monitoring Plan (OMP) were also prepared by the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) to complement the EMF. The said draft 
Manuals specify, among other things, i) the assessment for the replacement and disposal 
of old chillers and handling (including any disposal) of CFC refrigerants; and (ii) 
inspections for compliance with project guidelines. During appraisal, the OM, MoP, 
OMP will be finalized by the government.  
 
This project will directly contribute to global environmental benefits. During project 
preparation the Coordinating entity will ensure that the project will assist financial 
institutions and chiller owners conduct an environmental assessment and implement the 
EMF (including the implementation of safeguard framework procedures). If this capacity 
is deficient, technical assistance will be used to strengthen the capacity.  
 
This project is classified as a Category B project because during installation and major 
building renovations/retrofitting, appropriate procedures for ensuring worker and 
building occupant safety should be in place and followed and that workers are given 
appropriate training in safe handling. In line with the MLF guidelines, the building 
owners will be required to properly manage the recovered CFC refrigerants and to 
dismantle the old CFC chillers after the replacement according to the plans and 
procedures approved by DENR and the Bank. The DENR will certify compliance with 
the equipment disposal guidelines. The building owners will also be required to provide 
access to their properties for such inspections and share chiller performance and 
experience with refrigerant management with DENR, relevant agencies, the Bank and the 
general public.  
 
The government endorsed to the Bank in a letter dated June 16, 2009 the EMF for the 
project and this has been posted locally at the DENR library and the website of DENR 
Foreign-assisted and Special Projects Office (FASPO). The same has also been submitted 
to the Bank#s Infoshop on June 17, 2009 for posting.  
 
No other safeguard issues have been triggered aside from OP 4.01 on Environmental 
Assessment, in view of the nature and limited scope of the Project.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term environmental or social impacts are foreseen by this operation.  
The project is financing minor renovations works for existing office building, there is no 
scope for any kind of land acquisition, taking of assets, or restrictions on use of natural 
resources. The project will explore all technology alternatives available and support only 
those replacement options that promise the least impact on global warming that are 
technically feasible, environmentally sound and economically viable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project has prepared an Operations Manual that contains an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) within the Environmental Management Framework (EMF). It 
is anticipated though that the project will not generate any significant adverse impact to 
the environment since the project will only fund the replacement of chillers. The 
Operations Manual contains provisions for a minimum set of requirements that building 
owners need to fulfill which includes the conduct of an environmental assessment of the 
chillers to be financed. Further, the EMF identified potential environmental impacts and 
related mitigating measures, as well as any necessary capacity building and institutional 
strengthening measures, and an Environmental monitoring plan for the supervision of 
EMP implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders such as the chiller owners, regulatory agencies, manufacturers and 
suppliers have been consulted through the project preparation to ensure that the project 
significantly contributes to the advancement of the chiller sector in the country. Close 
consultation among these key stakeholders will be maintained throughout the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/18/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/18/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is Category "B" Project, the EIA and/EMP will be disclosed in the Infoshop and in 
public places such as the government's website and its public library.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  7
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
06/18/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gerardo F. Parco 
06/18/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Simon Peter Gregorio 
06/18/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark C. Woodward 
06/18/2009 
Comments:   
