Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/27/2008 
Report No.:  AC3935
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P113159 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Rural Power 
Task Team Leader:  Arturo S. Rivera 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (50%);Power (50%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed APL is to assist the country in making available affordable 
and reliable electricity services to meet the needs of rural communities in a sustainable 
manner. However, electrification must be viewed as an important component-but by no 
means the only one-of overall rural development efforts. With financing from the Bank 
and other donors, the government is presently carrying out projects to provide other 
infrastructure (notably roads and water supply), social facilities and other rural 
development support. The APL for the rural power project would complement a range of 
these ongoing and planned efforts for rural development in the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project components, which would be demand-driven, would include the following:  
 
(a) rural electrification subprojects;  
 
(b) partial credit guarantee fund; and  
 
(c) capacity building.  
 
Page  2
I. Rural Electrification Subprojects  
 
(a) Decentralized Electrification: This will include small scale energy generation and 
distribution of basic electricity services to households, public centers (e.g. schools, health 
clinics) and productive applications. For purposes of testing different business models, 
these customers would be classified into two broad categories: concentrated and 
dispersed. The least-cost electrification solution for the concentrated users is normally a 
minigrid (or microgrid depending on the number of connections) powered by a 
centralized generation system, usually diesel, hydro and/or biomass power. For the 
dispersed users who are remote from the grid, the least-cost solution is normally 
individual photovoltaic (PV) systems, notably solar home systems (SHS). The first phase 
APL is intended to support systematic piloting of market-based electrification services at 
a
sufficient scale and visibility, and generate needed interest and support by the private 
sector and municipalities.  
 
Small scale energy generation and minigrids  
 
The strategy for this subcomponent is to group the target barangays into "market 
packages" of sufficient critical mass for business operations. Depending on the 
characteristics of each package, one or more minigrids may be installed. For example, 
several barangays could be linked into one minigrid powered by a single hydro resource 
or the barangays could each have their own microgrids powered by small diesels.  
 
In any case, the business model is for a single entity to be contracted to provide long-
term services to all customers in the entire package. Consistent with the provisions of the 
EPIRA, qualified third parties would be allowed to provide energy services in the 
unserved franchise areas of the incumbent ECs. These parties could be private rural 
energy service companies (RESCO), qualified NGOs or local cooperatives organized for 
this specific purpose. An important objective of APLI is to pilot these various types of 
service mechanisms and adopt the most successful ones for the subsequent phases. To the 
extent possible, the priority packages for project support are those that are commercially 
viable in themselves and require only non-financial incentives. It is recognized, however, 
that many of the offgrid communities have very low-income consumers, and that some 
form of "smart" subsidies may need to be provided by the government to enable the 
subprojects to be implemented. The preinvestment studies for two of the market packages 
have recently been completed. A transaction task force will be established at  
 
DOE and, with the assistance of transaction advisors, prepare bidding documents and 
model contract, along with marketing activities, including consultations with potential 
investors, investment promotion/road shows.  
 
Stand-alone Renewable Energy Systems  
 
For dispersed users that are not feasible to connect to the grids, this subcomponent will 
make available funds for direct purchase various capacities of PV systems through 
private vendors and NGOs. The solar PV subcomponents would include individual solar 
home systems, community or commercial sector applications including battery charging 
stations, schools, health clinics and other social institutions, community water supply, 
offices, shops, restaurants and other commercial facilities. Recognizing the generally low 
Page  3
incomes of dispersed users and the still high capital costs of PV systems, the project will 
provide, through GEF and government funds, subsidies to lower the cost to consumers, 
and financing to spread out the payments. The suppliers would offer small PV system 
options (e.g. 20-60 Wp) sufficient to provide basic services to households. Competing 
vendors would be enticed to do business through incentives that include assistance in 
market development and capacity building, product promotions and other risk-reducing 
activities funded by the GEF grants. These grants would be supplemented with 
government subsidies to bring PV system prices close to the willingness-to-pay levels of 
consumers.  
 
Further, to remove the barrier of credit access, this subcomponent would provide a line 
of credits to financial intermediaries (such as rural banks and micro-finance institutions) 
to enable them to provide consumer loans for the PV systems and financing of 
incremental working for dealers. In addition, as elaborated below, GEF funding would 
support the provision of training in PV financing operations and partial credit risk 
guarantees for the suppliers and users of PV systems.  
 
(b) EC Grid Subcomponents: this subcomponent of the project will include support for 
the transformation of participating ECs through financially viable investments and other 
measures aimed at:  
 
(i) Improving power supply system safety, reliability, efficiency and power quality for 
existing customers, through rehabilitation and capacity upgrades of the existing supply 
system and, in pursuance of EPIRA, acquisition of existing subtransmission assets from 
the National Transmission Corporation (Transco);  
 
(ii) Removing supply system constraints and thus allowing additional customers to be 
supplied within financially viable grid service areas;  
 
(iii) Encouraging institutional development of ECs, through implementation and 
adoption of efficient and effective staff organization structures, adoption of progressive, 
objective and transparent policies for staff hiring and promotions, performance based 
compensation packages to improve productivity and accountability of staff and 
management; and  
 
(iv) Providing the necessary hardwvare, software, motor vehicles, tools and equipment 
to improve employee productivity, safety and efficiency of customer service provision.  
 
II. Partial Credit Guarantee Fund  
 
One of the key barriers for renewable energy development is the lack of medium and 
longer term commercial debt financing, which is in turn attributable to the stringent 
collateral requirements of the commercial banks. This has already been recognized in the 
UNDP-GEF project for Capacity Building to Remove Barriers to Renewable Energy 
Development (CBRED) in the Philippines, which includes a Loan Guarantee Fund, but 
does not cover solar PV. Under this project, a GEF-financed partial credit risk guarantee 
fund would be established to provide grant funds to financiers of renewable energy 
technology (RET), notably solar PV, to partially cover loan losses incurred in the 
provision of loans to RET purchasers and suppliers. As it is more efficient and effective 
Page  4
for the two funds to be consolidated under one execution agency and one Project 
Management Office (PMO) at DOE, UNDP would be the implementation agency for the 
GEF trust fund for this component.  
 
III. Capacity Building  
 
(a) Reduction of market barriers to the commercialization of renewable energy 
technologies  
 
This component would mainly be financed by GEF to cover the reduction of market 
barriers to the commercialization of RETs suitable for offgrid electrification through a 
comprehensive range of activities to build capacity on RET matters in the various energy 
agencies (DOE, SPUG, NEA, ERC), the financial intermediaries (DBP and other 
commercial banks, rural banks, microfinance institutions, etc) and private participants 
(solar PV companies, ECs, NGOs, etc); reduce investment risks by more detailed 
characterization of market packages; and develop and operationalize policies on 
subsidies, tariffs, regulation and integration of RETs into the missionary electrification 
program. Taking into account the lessons learned from similar projects in other countries, 
the technical assistance component to reduce market barriers to the commercialization of 
RETs would be front-loaded during the first phase of APL.  
 
(b) Non-renewable energy subproject appraisal/supervision  
 
This component would be financed under the Bank loan to strengthen the capacity of 
DBP to appraise and supervise non-renewable energy subprojects, notably those for EC 
transformation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is spread all over the country, with most sub-projects located in Mindanao. 
While the road systems to be upgraded are mainly national roads, these are existing ones 
needing major rehabilitation and reconstruction work. Thus it is expected that there will 
be little disturbance on the natural ecosystems traversed by these roads.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSO) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
DBP has made significant progress in advocating private-public partnerships on rural 
electrification with emphasis on the use of new and renewable energy sources. The 
proposed additional financing operation will provide scale-
up
financing under DBP’s 
pipeline including new and renewable energy projects as well as distribution and sub-
transmission at ECs. There are no changes in the PDOs since the additional financing 
would finance similar sub-projects as the ongoing ones under APL1.  
 
The environmental assessment process was undertaken in accordance with the 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy Framework adopted in APL1.  The same 
Safeguards management framework defines a set of guidelines for undertaking 
environmental assessment has been applied to all RPP projects regardless of funding 
source. For RPP, the same safeguards framework need not be revised as it has 
mainstreamed during project preparation and implementation a set of due diligence 
guidelines in complying with the safeguards requirements of the Bank.  This framework 
addresses the EA requirements set by the government (Presidential Decree (PD) 1151, 
Presidential proclamation 2146, DAO 03-30). This is complementary to World Bank OP 
4.01 and includes environmental screening and scoping, impact assessment, development 
of an environmental management plan, monitoring and public disclosure and 
consultation.  
 
The assessment process will produce Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) reports 
and EMPs for the additional sub-projects. For the second batch of sub-projects, the IEEs 
will be prepared during implementation.  The impacts are expected to be similar to those 
for the earlier RPP-APL1 projects which include impacts associated with construction 
(waste management, traffic and accidents, erosion, removal of trees, air and noise 
pollution, localized flooding) and operation (dust, odor and noise, waste from generator 
and employees, flooding of area near site, fire and safety, and management of cut 
materials).   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is specifically designed to support environmentally and socially sustainable 
renewable energy projects which will not generate any significant long term or indirect 
environment impacts. As practiced in RPP-APL1, all additional projects will follow 
methods and processes defined in the Social and Environment Safeguards Policy 
Framework which includes preventing long term environmental impacts to occur.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project was designed with environmental enhancement in mind and thus the project 
alternatives which include choosing the best design or alignment that will not create 
significant environmental effects.  
 
Environmental Assessments. For programmatic initiatives such as RPP- APL1, sub-
projects need to be screened to identify environmental impacts. As part of its enhanced 
social and environmental management system, to be integrated in full EAs are risk 
assessments for sub-projects located in environmentally critical areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project impacts anticipated are manageable and not environmentally significant. 
These are shown below along with their attendant mitigation measures.  
 
Construction phase  
 
Impact: Minimal erosion from site preparation and spoil management.  
 
Mitigation Measures: Dry season construction activities, spoil management plan.  
 
Impact: Demolition and construction wastes  
 
Mitigation Measures: Proper recycling and disposal of debris as they are generated.  
 
Impact:  Safety of workers and pedestrians.  
 
Mitigation Measures: Protective equipment, fencing of areas, safety nets to prevent 
falling debris.  
 
Impact: Traffic congestion.  
 
Mitigation Measures: Hauling of debris in non-rush hour. Assign workers to direct 
traffic.  
 
Impact: Dust from construction site activities.  
 
Mitigation Measures: Regular watering in affected areas.  
 
Impact: Noise  
 
Mitigation Measures: Use of new and well-maintained earthmoving equipment.  
 
Impact: Waste management from construction workers.  
 
Mitigation Measures: Sanitation facilities and proper waste collection and disposal.  
 
Impact: Local flooding  
 
Mitigation Measures: Provision of adequate drainage system.  
 
Operation of Upgraded Roads  
Page  7
Impact:  Ponding of storm water  
 
Mitigation Measure:Adequate drainage system.  
 
Impact: Air emissions from vehicles  
 
Mitigation Measure: Smooth flow of vehicles to prevent traffic congestion. Lining of 
vegetation along the road right of way.  
 
Impact: Noise pollution.  
 
Mitigation Measure: Establishment of buffer zones and road barriers.  
 
Impact: Solid waste from facility.  
 
Mitigation Measure: Treatment of wastewater in facility and proper waste collection and 
disposal.  
 
Impact: Flooding impacting area and building.  
 
Mitigation Measure: Drainage system and good building design.  
 
Impact: Health and safety for residents and visitors.  
 
Mitigation Measure: Design of building and safety equipment.  
 
Collection and transport of construction materials and debris  
 
Impact: Quarrying  
 
Mitigation Measure: Quarrying will be conducted in stable areas and relevant permits 
will be secured for its operation.  
 
Impact: Transport of materials and maintenance of equipment.  
 
Mitigation Measure: Regular maintenance and management of equipment, cement plant 
and cleaning of vehicles.  
 
Impact: Traffic and congestion.  
 
Mitigation Measure: Assign workers to direct traffic, traffic plan and ensuring sufficient 
parking area for operational vehicles at construction sites.  
 
The mitigating measures for construction and other impacts as well as the monitoring 
costs (odor, noise, workers health, site safety and hygiene) will be included in the project 
cost and in the construction contracts.  
 
Implementation arrangements: The sub-borrowers would be primarily responsible for 
compliance with the environmental and social safeguard policies by preparing the EAs 
and other safeguards documents and securing proper implementation of the ECC and 
EMP. Implementation of the environmental management plan during construction will be 
undertaken by the construction contractors as an obligation under their contracts to be 
supervised by the sub-borrowers.  
 
Institutional Responsibilities:  The DBP shall be responsible for ensuring the 
completeness and accuracy of all the RPP-APL1 environmental and social reports to be 
submitted to the Bank and that the EMP is properly incorporated into the construction 
contracts.  The DENR, through its environmental unit will perform an oversight function 
to ensure that environmental covenants in the Loan Agreement are complied with.  
 
EA approval: The IEEs and EMPs for the first year of the additional financing have 
been approved by DENR.  
 
Page  8
Monitoring, auditing and reporting:  Monitoring, auditing and reporting procedures 
related to the EA implementation, covering both biophysical and socio-economic 
parameters, are described in the EMP.  
 
Capacity to implement safeguards: DBP has extensive experience in the preparation and 
implementation of similar World Bank projects.  Through the implementation of RPP-
APL1, DBP has developed effective working procedures and extensive experience with 
Bank procedures for preparing and implementing similar investment activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The proposed project has strong support from the residents and government authorities at 
the national and local levels with strong commitment. Several public consultations were 
done during the EA work, including the residents. The following approaches were taken 
for public consultation (a) consultation meetings with local residents, communities, local 
government representatives, and (b) questionnaire analysis of public opinion 
supplemented by interviews.  
 
The environmental documents were publicly disclosed on October 2, 2008 at the 
Knowledge Development Center of the World Bank Manila Office and on October 2, 
2008 at the InfoShop in Washington.  Project related information and the EA 
documentations were also disclosed in the project area during public consultation 
processes and to the general public from June 25 to October 2, 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/02/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/02/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  9
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arturo S. Rivera 
10/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
10/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro 
10/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
10/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
10/24/2008 
Comments:   
