Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC3931
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P082144 
Project Name:  PH-Social Welfare and Development Reform 
Task Team Leader:  Jehan Arulpragasam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
405.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
107.60
107.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the effectiveness of DSWD as 
a
social protection agency to (i) efficiently implement the new CCT program (4Ps) and 
(ii)expand an efficient and functional National Household Targeting System of social 
protection programs in selected areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance the following three components:  
 
Component 1: Implementation of a National Household Targeting System for Poverty 
Reduction - Support the DSWD in developing and implementing its National Household 
Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTSPR) which will be used to better target to 
the poor key social assistance and social protection programs of DSWD and other 
government agencies. Component 2: Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps)- 
Support the new 4Ps Program through provision of health and education grants to 
360,000 households. Component 3: Building Institutional Capacity to Lead in Social 
Protection 
–Support the strengthening of basic institutional capacity of DSWD to 
undertake policy analysis  and strategic planning and the installation of a technically 
sound monitoring and evaluation system.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASPS) 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not support any physical investments or civil works, hence any 
environmental impacts is not expected. The project, however, is likely to benefit directly 
or indirectly the indigenous peoples (IPs) through the conditional cash transfer (CCT) 
program or 4Ps, which targets poor areas where IPs may be present. In addition, IPs are 
also likely to benefit indirectly from the policy reforms outlined in the first three project 
components. Thus, it was agreed during the PCN Stage Safeguards Review Meeting 
(June 17, 2008) that the Borrower will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) to describe the plan for carrying out the detailed IP plan during project 
implementation.  It was also agreed that initial assessment of the Project’s effect on IPs 
will be undertaken during the project preparation in consultation with the NCIP and other 
IP representatives.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long terms impacts on the IPs are positive.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The DSWD has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) which defines 
the plan for carrying out a detailed social assessment during project implementation, as 
soon as the specific IP groups that will be affected by the Project are identified. The 
framework also defines the plan for ensuring participation of affected IPs during the 
project implementation and to address their concerns as part of the proposed reforms.  
DSWD intends to apply the IPPF not only for the SWDRP but for other policies and 
programs of the Department as well.  
 
In the course of the preparation of social welfare and development reform agenda, 
DSWD conducted national and regional consultations that involved representations from 
NCIP and other IP groups. Initial discussions on the effects of the CCT program on IPs 
were conducted in the National Advisory Committee and, in principle, it was agreed that 
there will be regular review of the program’s effects onIPs and strategic adjustments will 
be instituted once these are identified.  
 
DSWD is familiar with the Bank’s safeguard policies since it is currently implementing 
World-Bank assisted KALAHI-CIDSS Project for which safeguards policies/framework 
have been formulated and implemented satisfactorily.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In the process of formulating the Social Welfare and Development Reform Agenda, the 
Department of Social Welfare and Development undertook series of national and local 
consultations which involved representatives of the National Commission on Indigenous 
People (NCIP) as well as representatives of IP groups.  
 
At the project level, the 4Ps involves the assembly or organizing of grantees through 
which DSWD will ensure that IPs are able to participate in information dissemination and 
decision-making at the village level.  DSWD will also ensure that IP representatives are 
consulted through out the project through their participation in municipal, provincial, 
regional and national decision-making bodies.  The National Advisory Committee of 4Ps 
will coordinate with NCIP for program adjustments that are responsiveness to IP 
grantees. Similarly, DSWD will ensure that IP groups are represented in all policy 
dialogues, social marketing, program monitoring and evaluation activities which the 
Project will undertake.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  4
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  5
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jehan Arulpragasam 
01/29/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
01/29/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua 
01/29/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Xiaoqing Yu 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
