Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3926 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P114119 
Project Name: PH - Chiller Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader: Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
GEF Focal Area: Ozone 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (50%);District heating and energy efficiency services 
(50%) 
Theme: Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.60 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Carbon 
Fund 
7.77 
 
Montreal Protocol Investment Fund 
1.02 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
42.50
51.29 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the project is to capture the significant potential for energy efficiency of new 
non-CFC chillers by accelerating the replacement of the existing stock of CFC-based chillers, 
and contribute to more energy conscious decision-making by chiller owners and, eventually, a 
permanent market transformation of the chiller sector. The development objective of the project 
is to accelerate conversion of CFC-based chillers to new and more energy efficient technology.  
 
The project will achieve this objective by assisting the Philippines to (i) reduce institutional, 
market and techno-economic barriers (eg. weak regulatory system, high capital expenditures, 
unfamiliar technology, etc.), to early adoption of EE chillers through provision of a range of 
market-based, technological and economic incentives to chiller owners in order to lower 
opportunity costs and up-front capital costs; (ii) establish a revolving fund by using carbon 
finance proceeds earned from installations of first batches of efficient chillers financed by the 
Page  2
MLF and GEF to support replacement of subsequent units; (iii) increase chiller owner awareness 
of the 2010 CFC ban on consumption and production; (iv) remove chiller owners' perception of 
technology risks by demonstrating a significant rate-of-return on investment from chiller 
replacement; and (v) build country capacity for carbon finance intermediation.  Project outcomes 
therefore include a market transformation to more energy efficient technologies and through 
introduction of the life cycle approach to decision-making, and enhanced country capacity to 
introduce, implement and mobilize finance for future carbon reduction interventions.  
 
The global environmental objective of the project is to reduce the harmful emissions of 
greenhouse gases and ozone depleting substances (which are also potent greenhouse gases) 
directly through chiller replacement and management which will increase energy efficiency and 
eliminate the need for CFC use as refrigerant.  In turn, significant reduction in emissions of 
greenhouse gases will contribute to the reduction of hardships anticipated from increased climate 
variability and climate change.  
 
In achieving the project objectives and outcomes, the following outputs are expected:  
 
•
250 chillers replaced  
 
•
Total emission reductions of approximately 1.5 million tons of CO2 equivalent(emissions 
abatement) through demonstrated and verifiable energy savings  
 
•
Approximately 22 MT of annual CFC recharge demand eliminated through non-CFC 
using equipment replacement.  
 
The project meets the objective of GEF operational programs on SP #1 and 2 (energy efficiency 
in commercial buildings and promoting energy efficiency in the industrial sector) in that it will 
(a) replace older chillers with newer, EE ones; (b) support the development and transformation 
of the market for energy and facilitate a low-carbon growth path; (c)  increase market penetration 
of energy-efficient chillers in the residential and commercial building markets; (d) support a 
single market transformation to accelerate GHG emissions reduction by making use of carbon 
finance; and, (e) deploy and diffuse energy-efficient chillers inindustrial production and 
manufacturing processes.  
 
The additional chillers replaced with financing by CDM resources is equivalent to a replicaton 
strategy, which is consistent with the goal of ensuring consistency between the GEF and CDM 
initiatives while avoiding duplication of efforts and funding between the two.  The project will 
also support the Philippines to meet its MP ODS phaseout obligations, with minimum disruption 
to industry and the economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will facilitate the replacement of 250 chillers over a period of seven years with an 
average incentive of 20% of the cost of chillers.  
 
The GEF project components and activities are as follow:  
 
Component 1. Incentive Scheme for Investments in Energy Efficient Chillers  
 
Page  3
Two incentive options will be offered: (i) an up-front incentive of 20% of the chiller cost; or (ii) 
annual payments to be made in accordance with carbon finance proceeds earned by each 
installation.  It is expected that 30% of chiller owners, stemming from the public sector, will 
select the second option.  For the first option, grant funds from GEF and MLF will be used to 
finance incentives for chiller replacement during the first 2 years of the Project. The remaining 
80% of the cost of chillers would be financed through commercial loans to be arranged by chiller 
owners. Additional units will be replaced in subsequent years through support by proceeds 
generated by carbon credits earned from installations of these new non-CFC chillers replaced in 
the earlier years.  
 
Component 2. Measurement, Monitoring and Validation  
 
Part of the grant funds provided by the MLF will finance the initial cost of baseline power 
measurement, monitoring and validation of emission reductions in order to meet CDM 
requirements.  In subsequent Project years, these costs will be borne by part of the carbon 
finance proceeds.  Costs of data loggers and transmitters will also be covered as well as the cost 
of monitoring the data generated.  
 
Component 3. Technical Assistance  
 
This component will be collaborated with IFC and possibly other development partners. 
Technical workshops and public awareness work will be financed to familiarize chiller owners 
with life-cycle analyses in relation to chiller replacement and to inform stakeholders of the 
viability of chiller replacement. Awareness raising activities will be conducted among the key 
stakeholders of the business case for energy efficiency - the regulatory agencies, chiller owners, 
commercial banks, suppliers, ESCOs, associations, vendors and other development partners.  
Technical guidance and capacity building targeting the key stakeholders is necessary as the EE, 
non-CFC chillers will utilize state-of-the-art technologies that require new refrigerants, special 
structural specifications,  as well as tailored-fit operating and maintenance procedures that are 
different from those of the older chillers. Technical advice will also be provided to the chiller 
owners on the various techno-economic intricacies of determining the appropriate model for their 
new EE, non-CFC chiller that will match their specific cooling requirements as well as financial 
capabilities.  
 
Component 4. Project Management  
 
Project management costs of the national EA and the project management contractor will be 
covered, including transaction costs incurred by all sub-projects, disbursement and financial 
management, supervision of project implementation and cost associated with executing fiduciary 
responsibilities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Philippines   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
The Department of Environment and Natural Resources, the Executing Agency (EA) follows an 
Environment and Social Safeguard Framework, which is consistent with national policies and the 
Bank’s safeguard policies, particularly OP 4.01 and BP4.01, to provide guidance to the chiller 
owners, suppliers and others who are directly involved in the project. It is anticipated that the 
project will not generate significant adverse environmental impacts. Where appropriate, the sub-
borrowers will hire consultants for the preparation and implementation of the Environmental 
Assessment. The EA will require and monitor project recipients to comply with environmental 
requirements, following the Environment Safeguards Framework. Implementation and 
monitoring of the Environmental Management Plan will be carried out by the sub-borrowers. 
The EA has sufficient capacity and dedicated staff to supervise and monitor compliance with the 
safeguards framework. To ensure that the sub-borrowers possess adequate capacity to plan, 
prepare and implement projects in a sustainable manner, necessary costs for environmental 
management support will be allocated as part of the sub-loan agreement.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Simon Peter Gregorio (EASSO) 
Ms Qing Wang (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
During installation and major building renovations/retrofitting, appropriate procedures for 
ensuring worker and building occupant safety should be in place and followed and that workers 
are given appropriate training in safe handling. In line with the MLF guidelines, the building 
owners will be required to properly manage the recovered CFC refrigerants and to dismantle the 
old CFC chillers after the replacement according to the plans and procedures approved by DENR 
and the Bank.  
 
Environmental Assessment.  This project will directly contribute to global environmental 
benefits. During project preparation the safeguards specialist will ensure that the Executing 
agency (EA) has the capacity to assist the commercial banks and chiller owners for 
environmental assessment of the chiller sub-projects (implementation of safeguard framework 
procedures). If this capacity is deficient, technical assistance will be used to strengthen the 
capacity.  
 
The EA’s project management office will prepare an Operations Manual that will contain an 
Environmental Safeguard Framework (ESF) to include the EA process to be followed and a 
template for a generic Project Description and an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and 
an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). It is anticipated though that the project will not 
generate any significant adverse impact to the environment since the project will only fund the 
replacement of chillers. The Operations Manual would contain provisions for a minimum set of 
requirements that building owners need to fulfill which includes the conduct of an environmental 
assessment of the chillers to be financed. Further, the EMP would identify, for activities financed 
under component 2, potential environmental impacts and related mitigating measures, as well as 
any necessary capacity building and institutional strengthening measures, and a monitoring plan 
for the supervision of EMP implementation.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
This project could be assigned a Category B because during installation and major building 
renovations/retrofitting, appropriate procedures for ensuring worker and building occupant safety 
should be in place and followed and that workers are given appropriate training in safe handling. 
In line with the MLF guidelines, the building owners will be required to properly manage the 
recovered CFC refrigerants and to dismantle the old CFC chillers after the replacement 
according to the plans and procedures approved by DENR and the Bank. The DENR will certify 
compliance with the equipment disposal guidelines. The building owners will also be required to 
provide access to their properties for such inspections and share chiller performance and 
experience with refrigerant management with DENR, relevant agencies, the Bank and the 
general public. Close consultation among these key stakeholders will be maintained throughout 
the project.  Adoption of the chiller using natural refrigerants will be promoted. The project will 
explore all technology alternatives available and support only those replacement options that 
promise the least impact on global warning that are technically feasible, environmentally sound 
and economically viable. The final selection of the refrigerant type for each CFC chiller to be 
replaced will be assessed on a case by case basis and ensure that the new replacement chillers 
will use alternative refrigerant with low or no Global warming potential.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/20/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
Task team is ready to do appraisal work and will be ready with documents needed for the 
PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
10/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
10/16/2008 
Comments:  Received email from Linn Van Nguyen of Safeguards secretariat transfering safeguards 
clearance to EASRE. Preliminary guidance on safeguards issues was signed by Juan Quintero of 
EASRE. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark C. Woodward 
02/17/2009 
Comments:   
