Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3350 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/14/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P106443 
Project Name: PH-Support for Basic Ed. Sector Reform 
Task Team Leader: Dingyong Hou 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Philippines - Free-standing  Trust Fund Program 
32.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
32.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Grant is to support implementation of the basic education sector reform 
agenda (BESRA) that contributes to the achievement of improved quality and equity in learning 
outcomes for all Filipinos.  The specific and measurable outputs to be produced through the 
SPHERE are as follows: (1) a functioning Quality Assurance system established with 
stakeholder participation at regional level, (2) Action Plans developed for key reform thrusts of 
BESRA, (3) increased number of schools implementing school based management in targeted 
divisions; and (4) increased number of functional classrooms in targeted schools; (5) increased 
utilization rate of DepEd budget allocation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The World Bank has agreed to manage a grant from the Government of Australia, represented by 
the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAid) through a Trust Fund. The Trust 
Fund will support the implementation of the Philippines’ Basic Education Sector Reform 
Agenda(BESRA) which will complement the World Bank’s support through the National 
Program Support for Basic Education (NPSBE) Project.  
 
Page  2
The Support to Philippine Basic Education Reforms (SPHERE) will provide additional 
financing and technical support for a subset of activities and expenditures distinct of NPSBE in 
the implementation of BESRA. The SPHERE will cover the activities and expenditures that are 
not covered in the ongoing programs and or areas with additional needs where the gaps are 
clearly identified to support the essential building blocks of the reform agenda.  The proposed 
partnership subscribes to the World Bank’s move towards increased support to and strengthened 
reliance on country systems. It includes the following three components:  
 
Component 1:  Translation of system-level policies into actions (US$16.2m.) through  
 
(A1) providing funding for short to medium term technical assistance (TA), to translate policy 
ideas on reform into action plans and to build the capacity of key DepEd managers to implement 
and manage change in line with DepEd reforms (US$0.4m);  
 
(A2) capacity building in regional offices by supporting them to undertake their  quality 
assurance functions of monitoring progress in divisions and schools, delivering support as 
required, and enhancing feedback on their performance. Support could include training programs 
for regional managers to enhance their role as change agents and assisting them to put in place 
strategies for monitoring and supporting divisions and schools ($3.1 m);  
 
(A3) funding the construction and/or refurbishment of teaching and learning resource centers 
across the country (estimated 150), including ICT support, managed by regions as part of their 
QA work to enhance monitoring and to improve teaching, learning and assessment, and with 
satellite hubs constructed at a division level (US$6.4m); and  
 
(A4) funding the provision of teaching and learning materials (except textbooks) and training 
programs, many derived from products of previous AusAID, WB and ADB-funded projects and 
linked to systematic in-service training for managers and teachers, and teacher upgrading ($6.4 
m).  
 
Component 2:  Support for School-Based Management (SBM) through grants for school 
improvement plan targeting disadvantaged elementary schools (US$3.4m.).  Grants will be 
provided to public elementary schools which have installed the basic elements of School-Based 
Management (SBM) (with well-developed school improvement plans, established school-
community partnerships, transparent reporting and accountability mechanisms at the school-
level).  The purpose of the grants is to accelerate SBM even in the most difficult situations.  The 
grants will be provided over 5 years to eligible schools with year 3 funding allocated on the basis 
of demonstrated performance.  
 
Component 3: Classroom construction in high need locations in Southern Philippines (US$ 
10.6m.). This will involve the construction of classrooms in identified priority schools under the 
DepEd-managed Schoolbuilding Program in Southern Philippines.   This will be implemented by 
DepEd with extensive community partnership. This could serve as a forerunner to policy reform 
on cost sharing between the national government and other partners such as the private sector 
and local government units as a strategy in improved resource mobilization.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
SPHERE will support the school improvement plan (SIP) of disadvantaged elementary schools 
from all over the country.  Specific target elementary schools will be selected on the basis of the 
results of school mapping to be completed by January 2008.  With regard the 
rehabilitation/construction of classrooms, SPHERE will cover schools in Southern Philippines, 
the selection of which will be based also on the school mapping results.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As part of the assessment of institutional capacity for project implementation, arrangements for 
complying with the safeguard requirements were assessed and agreed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASRE) 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not envisaged to have any signifacant impacts beyond those associated with 
the rehabilitation and construction of school buildings, which may generate minor impacts 
during civil works (see Annex 10). The Project has put in place enviornmental guidelines that 
will be striclty adhered to by the Department of Education and its contractors during 
implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The reform agenda addresses both quality and equity, and seeks to enhance learning 
outcomes, especially for poor and disadvantaged groups, including indigenous peoples. The 
reforms are designed to benefit these groups through a more enabling education policy 
environment, with specific interventions to enhance opportunities for indigenous people to 
acquire the skills and competencies necessary to participate equally in socal and economic 
developoment. The mechanisms to ensure participation of indigenous people during the project 
and to address their concerns are central to the proposed reforms (see Annex 10).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No studies were planned for.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dingyong Hou 
12/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
10/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
12/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
