Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3305 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/12/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P097445 
Project Name: Local Government Support for Performance Grants 
Task Team Leader: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 16, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Municipal finance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development20.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To enhance the performance of LGUs in priority provinces in core functional areas such as 
planning and budgeting, financial management, revenue mobilization, accountability and 
transparency.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will pilot a performance based grant system that will create incentives for improved 
performance in local governance and service delivery, by linking access to a “development 
grant” to the achievement of minimum conditions in core LGU functional areas.  The size of the 
grants may be adjusted to reflect performance in additional areas (e.g. increased revenue 
collection).  As currently envisioned the Performance Base Grant System (PBGS)would have 
four core components the performance (development) grant, performance assessment system, 
capacity building grant and institutional strengthening.  These will be designed in a mutually 
strengthening manner to provide focused support for LGUs to enhance performance and 
consequently improve the basic conditions for local government service delivery:  
 
Page  2
1)The performance assessment would be a periodic review of LGU performance in relation to 
minimum conditions (and performance targets) to determine their eligibility for the performance 
grant.  It is expected that this would complement the existing Local Government Performance 
Measurement System (LGPMS) in order to reduce duplication of effort while also improving the 
quality of data collected through LGPMS;  
 
2) The development (capital) grants will be transferred to LGUs that pass their performance 
assessment through the government’s budget on an annual basis.  These grants would support 
investments in key services and infrastructure and could also cover project preparation and 
maintenance costs;  
 
3) A capacity building grant will be provided to LGUs that do not meet performance criteria in 
order that they can build their capacity and qualify for subsequent grants. The capacity building 
grants would enhance the oversight agencies ongoing efforts to build LGU capacity in core areas 
of planning, budgeting, resource mobilization and financial management; and  
 
4) A robust institutional arrangement that would strengthen the capacity of the four oversight 
agencies in monitoring and management of LGU performance.  Institutional arrangements for 
supporting the PBG system would take cognizance of the role of the four oversight agencies in 
setting objectives, policies, and procedures, managing, monitoring and maintaining the PBG 
system.  
 
During the first phase of the pilot, it is envisioned that approximately 15 to 20 percent of all 
LGUs (270-360) would be targeted by the PBGS.  Various factors will be taken into 
consideration in the selection of the pool of LGUs, including the type of LGU (province, 
municipality, city), income class (1st to 6th class), preferred scale of pilot (administration needs), 
and size of grants. The estimated cost of the project is $120 including an IBRD loan of $70 
million and an AUSAID grant of $20 million  
 
Following the pilot phase, the Government may choose to scale up the PBGS by gradually 
folding in other grants (national government and development partners) or tapping additional 
financing from the Bank and/or other Development Partners.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Department of Finance(DOF) is currently implementing several Bank operations including 
LOGOFIND and Community Based Resource Management Project(CBRMP) which include 
environmental components.   Both projects have prepared operational manuals that incorporate 
environmental and social safeguards frameworks that have been implemented by DOF and 
LGUs/sub-borrowers.  
 
DOF has also successfully completed needed environmental and social assessment studies, 
issuance of the required environmental clearances, department orders governing land acquisition, 
resettlement and compensation and other relevant permits from the government regulatory 
Page  3
agencies and the local governments that have implemented subprojects. Monitoring records 
indicate DOF has performed satisfactorily   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance a range of local public infrastructure and services priorities including 
but not limited to water supply, roads, health clinics, schools, markets.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project is unlikely to finance any infrastructure improvements that could have an impact 
on natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Due to the nature of infrastructure to be financed, the project may have some impact on 
resettlement, however this is likely to be limited to small numbers of individuals or households.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/08/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
07/08/2008   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rosemary Mukami Kariuki 
01/30/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
02/11/2008 
Comments:   
