Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/09/2009 
Report No.:  AC3893
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P088926 
Project Name:  Participatory Irrigation Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Carolina V. Figueroa-Geron 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 21, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASPS 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.36 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
43.23
43.23 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objectives for the overall PIDP Program (3 phases) will be to 
help restore the viability and technical performance of the public irrigation sector through 
the NIA as the primary irrigation service provider of the government. This transformation 
has three interlinked elements of corporate reform, Irrigation Management Transfer and 
NIS operational efficiency.  
 
This will be done through the following:  
 
(i) 
Transforming NIA into a more strategically focused and financially viable 
irrigation service agency;  
 
(ii) 
Institutionalizing shared management responsibilities for operation and 
maintenance of NISs through IMT schemes in  all NIS; and  
 
(iii) 
 Improving irrigation efficiency in NISs to narrow down the gap between their 
service area and actual irrigated area, through rehabilitation, modernization and adoption 
of improved O&M arrangements.  
 
For APL 1, the project development objective is to enable government through the NIA 
to introduce the desired irrigation sector reforms in the O&M of NISs and as a result 
Page  2
improve the operational efficiency and financial viability of 58 NISs, i.e. to narrow the 
gap between service area and actually irrigated area.  
 
This will be achieved through the adoption of a coherent and unified set of policies and 
processes for Irrigation Management Transfer by the NIA and the restructuring of its 
operating units and human resources to match the new functions and responsibilities 
under this scheme. NIA’s financial position will improve withthe reduction in staff costs 
and the increased revenues from better delivery of irrigation service.   
 
3. Project Description 
PIDP APL1 is the first of three APLs (total period of 13 years) designed to support NIA’s 
long term sector reform program, through the implementation of a phased Rationalization 
Plan (RP) for NIA and its field operation restructuring. The total estimated cost of the 
program will be US$215 million, consisting of three tranches (US$113.59 million, 
US$51 million,  and US$50 million) of an adaptable program loan (APL).  
 
The proposed project (APL1) would have two components: (i) Irrigation Sector 
Restructuring and Reform; and (ii) Infrastructure Development. The first component 
would help establish more sustainable financial and institutional mechanisms for 
improved O&M and routine rehabilitation of irrigation systems in the Philippines. This 
component will incorporate the package to support implementation of NIA’s RP and 
institutional strengthening.  The second component would improve the delivery of 
irrigation services in about 58 NISs through infrastructure development, participatory 
O&M and procurement of equipment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will support rehabilitation of 14 core A and 58 core B NIS systems in the 
Philippines. In addition, one of the core B NIS systems will draw water from the 
reservoir retained by the existing Magat dam built in the 1980s with support from the 
World Bank. The differences between Core A and Core B systems are on the nature of 
rehabilitation and modernization works to be carried out under the project. Core A will 
have major rehabilitation works (such as repairs of dam structures, installation of gates, 
concreting and repairs of canal linings, etc.), whereas Core B activities will mainly 
involve minor repair works which would improve O&M and efficiency.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASPS) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impacts. The environmental assessment (EA) study commissioned by 
NIA indicated that the environmental impacts of the Project will be mostly positive and 
beneficial, as the current threats to the long term sustainability of the Core A NIS systems 
(i.e., siltation, erosion, flooding, etc.) would be significantly addressed through 
installation of physical measures as part of the systems rehabilitation and capacity 
building of irrigators associations (IAs) to conduct routine operation and maintenance 
activities. The negative impacts identified in the EA are those related to civil works 
resulting from the rehabilitation of the existing system, all deemed assessed to be 
localized and temporary and expected to occur only during the construction phase. The 
project is not expected to affect any natural habitats since the civil works will be limited 
only to the rehabilitation of the existing systems and no new areas will be opened.  
 
Pesticide use. The EA study, which also covered an assessment on the use of chemical 
pesticides by farmers in all Core A NIS systems, revealed that 11 out of the 14 core A 
systems are already practicing Integrated Pest Management (IPM) under the Department 
of Agriculture’s National KASAKALIKASAN Program (the national IPM Program in 
the Philippines). The non-adoption of IPM in the three systems, all in Mindanao, may be 
an indication that IPM is not yet popular and/or getting support from Mindanao farmers. 
It is expected that with the rehabilitation and repair of irrigation systems under the 
project, greater agricultural productivity will be achieved in the project sites, however, in 
view of the adoption of IPM by farmers in majority of the Core A systems, coupled with 
the project guidelines not to finance purchase of chemical pesticides, the task team has 
assessed that pesticide impacts would be very minor.  
 
Dam safety. A dam safety assessment was also carried out by a World Bank Dam 
Specialist to evaluate the integrity of the Magat dam, where one of the Core B NIS will 
draw water from the reservoir retained by dam. This is in accordance with the Dam 
Safety Policy. Based on the assessment, it was concluded that the Magat dam and its 
appurtenants were designed according to good practice, built with quality and the 
Page  4
structures are reasonably well maintained. However, as Magat dam is a high hazard large 
dam with catastrophic consequence if failure occurs, the assessment required that an 
Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) and an Operation and Maintenance Plan (OMP) be 
prepared and submitted to the Bank prior to appraisal. The Borrower has submitted to the 
Bank its Operation, Maintenance and Safety Manual for Magat Dam and this has been 
submitted to the Safeguards Secretariat and the Infoshop.  
 
Social impacts. The January 2007 Social Assessment Report (SAR) revealed that eight 
and five of the 14 Core A systems have involuntary resettlement (IR) and indigenous 
peoples (IPs) issues, respectively. An Updated SAR, however, resulting from extensive 
joint field visits by NIA and the Bank from June to September 2008 showed that, of the 
14 Core A systems, four do not have IR issues, nine have minor IR impacts and only one 
system (i.e, THIRIS) has significant impacts, where the number of potentially displaced 
persons, all informal settlers, may go beyond 200. The Updated SAR also showed that 
none of the Core A systems has impacts on IPs. The site visits confirmed that the IPs and 
their ancestral domains are in the watershed areas and will not be affected by the civil 
works activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will have a number of long term positive impacts in terms of achieving 
sustained yields through improved irrigation services, reduced conflicts due to illegal 
turnouts and addressing the current threats to the long term sustainability of the Core A 
NIS systems due to problems of siltation, erosion, flooding, etc. which will be addressed 
by the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Among the alternatives considered to reduce involuntary resettlement is the revision in 
the design of the rehabilitation work to avoid and/or minimize displacement of settlers.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address potential negative environmental impacts, individual initial environmental 
examination (IEE) report was prepared for each of the Core A NIS system, which was 
annexed to the main EA report. The IEE reports include specific mitigation measures to 
address identified impacts as well as set out the implementation and monitoring 
arrangements for the EMP. The IEE reports were submitted to the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) for review and issuance of environmental 
compliance certificates (ECCs) in compliance with the requirement of the Philippine EIA 
system.  
 
On pesticides, while the project will not finance the purchase of chemical pesticides nor 
will encourage its use, it will however support the continuous and sustained adoption of 
IPM in all systems (both in Core A and B NISs) through trainings and season-long 
Page  5
farmers field school (FFS) under the KASAKALIKASAN Program. The funding for 
training will be made part of the Project.  
 
NIA has also submitted to the Bank its updated Operations, Maintenance and Safety 
Manual for Magat Dam which is equivalent in content and substance to the EPP and 
OMP. The manual would guide the operational staff in performing their day-to-day work.  
 
To mitigate the IR impacts, an inventory of affected persons and affected assets for the 
nine Core A systems with minor IR issues, was conducted by NIA, the results of which 
were submitted to the Bank. The Bank reviewed these documents and asked the borrower 
to complete all the supporting documents. NIA committed to complete all the documents 
and submit to the Bank before the negotiations, if these systems are to be implemented in 
year 1. Failure to submit will mean that these systems will be tabled for future year 
implementation or as soon as the documents are ready and accepted by the Bank. A full 
RAP was prepared for THIRIS, the only system with major IR issue, which is now 
undergoing validation of its inventory of affected persons. Again, the RAP for THIRIS 
will be submitted prior to negotiations, otherwise this will be scheduled for year 2.  
 
The IP Framework was prepared by NIA and submitted to the Bank in case any of the 
Core B systems POWs would affect the IPs. The Framework defined the mechanisms for 
just and humane engagement of the potentially displaced persons and indigenous peoples.  
 
The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework and IP Policy Framework 
were submitted by NIA to the Bank, who found these documents to be compliant with the 
Banks OP 4.10 and OP 4.12, respectively. The same have been disclosed locally and sent 
to the EAP Safeguards Secretariat as well as submitted to and disclosed at the Infoshop.  
 
NIA has been implementing World Bank-funded projects and, as such, is familiar with 
and has implemented the safeguard policies of the World Bank. Its approved 
Rationalization Plan has also included the establishment of a permanent Environmental 
Unit (EU) to ensure implementation of environmental and social safeguard measures in 
NIA Projects and to help build the capacity of the Regions and IAs. The EU will be 
staffed by an Engineer, an Environmental Specialist, a Social Safeguard Specialist, a 
Watershed Management Specialist and a Research Analyst. For enhanced accountability 
and transparency the safeguards planning and implementation has been integrated to the 
NIA’s Integrity Development Program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
participatory stakeholder analysis identified the project’s major stakeholders among 
government agencies, the irrigation associations, and business groups and other non 
government organizations. Acceptance of the project is high but terms of engagements 
with them to get their cooperation due to sometimes conflicting interests will have to be 
seriously addressed on a system-to-system basis. Most significant of the stakeholders 
because of the critical functions they play in the sustainability of the irrigation systems 
are the Irrigators’ Associations (IAs) which are in varying degrees of organizational 
Page  6
capacities, mostly low, despite major inputs given by NIA in the past. Attention to gender 
balanced development inputs is practically nil; fortunately, there are enough women 
leaders who are active within the IAs. The project may engage the services of NGOs and 
other development partners for different aspects of institution building activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  7
credit/loan? 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Carolina V. Figueroa-Geron 
09/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
09/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro 
09/16/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
