Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1606 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P078252 
Project Name: National Program Support for Agrarian Reform (NP-SAR) 
Task Team Leader: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2012 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Animal production (80%);Crops (20%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00 
 Local 
Communities 
8.00
38.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project would be to support the Government meet its major development 
goals related to growth, equity and poverty reduction, by completing essential processes in 
agrarian reform as efficiently as possible. This would reduce the overall cost of prolonged 
uncertainties and distortions in the agriculture sector which currently hamper investment and 
hence, performance, competitiveness and responsiveness of the sector to changing global trends. 
More specifically, the project would aim to: (i) rationalize expenditures in line with agreed DLR 
priorities, thereby supporting government?s broader objective of improving public sector 
effectiveness; (ii) expedite the efficient provision of support services, including, where 
appropriate, the devolution of functions to other agencies and LGUs; and (iii) scale-up lessons 
and positive experiences from past projects supporting agrarian reform.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would be designed within the framework of the Medium Term Philippine 
Development Plan (MTPDP), DLR?s Medium Term Project Implementation Plan (MTPIP) and 
its budget.  The project would have four components, three in support of DLR?s Major Final 
Outputs (MFOs)  and the fourth for institutional strengthening. The proposed components are: (i) 
Page  2
Land Administration and Distribution (LAD); (ii) Agrarian and Social Justice; (iii) Support 
services; and (iv) Institutional Strengthening and Management. In addition, it would aim to 
strengthen the impact of DLR?s programs for growth by focusing on improving cost-
effectiveness, strengthening linkages with other agencies and programs to reduce duplication 
especially at LGU level. Such convergence between different institutions is central to 
government?s wider rationalization program for which the project would provide an key 
platform. Accordingly, the project would support consultations (within DLR and with the 
oversight agencies) and facilitate development of Action Plans for rationalizing the strategic 
thrusts, functions, and implementation goals for DLR.  
 
Suggested activities under the components are summarized below and are in line with DLR 
priorities.  Emphasis would be on ensuring linkages with other programs and institutions, 
through memorandum of agreements MOAs and contracts, to avoid overlapping functions and 
harmonize operational procedures, cost?sharing requirements and coordination at the field level.  
 
NP-SAR Component # 1 - Land Adjudication and administrative Support  
 
Key Activities to be supported  
 
(Preparation of each activity to be supported through a PHRD grant):  
 
a) Land survey and mapping ( in collaboration with DENR)  
 
b)
Technical and policy support for land tenure Improvement  
 
c) Land tenure M&E  
 
NP-SAR Component # 2 - Agrarian and Social Justice  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
 
a) Agrarian Legal Assistance to accelerate the resolution of land cases  
 
b)
Agrarian reform education and training  
 
c) Training  
 
NP-SAR Component # 3 - Support Services and market related Infrastructure  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
 
a) Agriculture and enterprise development (linking with DA)  
 
b)
Technology promotion, farmer support and training promotion (with LGUs and DA)  
 
c) Marketing assistance (with DA)  
 
d)
Expansion of market infrastructure (in line with operational procedures adopted by DA for 
similar activities)  
 
e) Targeted poverty interventions for very poor areas  
 
NP-SAR Component # 4 - Institutional Strengthening and rationalization  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
 
a) Strengthen linkage between policies, plans, budgets and (MFOs)  
 
b)
Improve implementation efficiency through program Contracts & Agreements with DLR 
units  
 
c) Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
d)
Refinement of Core Functions and MFO?s   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Borrower through its Department of Land Reform (DLR), which is the project?s 
implementing agency, has been implementing the World Bank-funded Agrarian Reform 
Communities Development Project (ARCDP) which is now in its second phase of 
implementation. Both ARCDP I and II have invested enormous resources in building the 
safeguards capacity of the Central Project Office (CPO), which is mostly manned by consultants, 
the Regional and Provincial Offices of DLR, participating LGUs and agrarian communities. Both 
projects have been rated satisfactory by the Bank in terms of complying with the safeguard 
requirements of the Bank.  
 
DLR has an in-house environment unit, but this has not been actively engaged in ODA-assisted 
projects in the past. A rapid assessment of its capacity, and needs for strengthening it is currently 
being carried out as part of the stocktaking exercise on the country safeguards system managed 
by the Manila ES team.  There is no specific focal unit in the agency for involuntary resettlement 
and indigenous peoples?.  However, there is a clear legal and grievance redress system and 
process (from the municipal level-MARO to the Provincial and Central Office level) for issues 
related to the agrarian land transfer (from landowners to farmers).  Issues related to valuation, 
compensation payments, titling, conflicting claims, etc. are managed through this existing 
structure.  The Municipal Agrarian Reform Officers (MAROs) have in the past been the primary 
grievance officers on issues between tenants and landowners; between tenants and subtenants, 
among tenants, etc.  
 
The proposed project?s preparatory activities will need to include a more substantive 
institutional assessment of the agency?s present in-house capacity and structure for safeguards 
oversight and implementation, so as to recommend measures for strengthening capacities and 
procedures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The component on support services and market-related infrastructure will be supporting 
market-related infrastructure (e.g., farm-to-market roads, bridges, water systems, irrigation 
systems, etc.) that may have environmental impacts during construction if proper housekeeping, 
environment and health safety measures are not properly put in place and implemented. In view 
of these, the EA policy is deemed triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Since the project will include civil works, and sub-projects sites have not been identified, it is 
not known at this time whether sub-projects will be located in  protected areas, known natural 
habitats, or established or proposed critical natural habitats. Sub-project sites need to be further 
identified during the preparation mission.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
To be decided.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The project documents state that the project will finance agriculture and enterprise 
development and technology promotion that will result in increased use of chemical pesticides to 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
control pests,   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Potential impact of infrastructure subprojects to be supported under the project on cultural 
property cannot be ascertained in advance. However, as a safeguard measure the following shall 
be undertaken by DLR: a) prior reference to the government listing of significant historical and 
cultural sites, which must be integrated into the screening/appraisal of subprojects; and b) 
inclusion of a clause on all civil works contracts concerning actions to be undertaken in case of a 
chance find.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Some of the agrarian reform beneficiaries (ARBs) are indigenous peoples and some Agrarian 
Reform Communities (ARCs) assisted by the DLR are inhabited by IPs. Both IP-ARBs and IP 
inhabitants in ARCs are among the targeted sectors within the agrarian reform context. The 
challenge has been on the effectiveness of the inclusion/participation mechanisms to ensure that 
IPs equally benefit from the agrarian reform related support being provided by DLR.  An 
improved IP targeting mechanism is being developed as part of an ongoing JSDF grant, which is 
also being supervised by the Bank.  Once agreed with key stakeholders and approved by the 
DLR Management, this enhanced mechanism (together with the streamlined FPIC process also 
being developed through the same grant) will serve as the over-all IP framework for the project 
and all the other projects of DLR.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Infrastructure subprojects to be supported under the project may result in minor land 
acquisition and losses/damage to some privately owned assets. The land acquisition, resettlement 
and rehabilitation adopted for ARCDP2 will need to be reviewed to fit the new arrangements in 
the proposed project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
At this point, it is not certain if any irrigation dams will be planned. If there are any planned 
dams, there may depending on size, be need for mitigation measures, such as, appropriate 
engineering standards and practices and siting criteria.  This needs to be determined during 
preparation mission.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
To be decided.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
To be decided.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/20/2006 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It will be completed by pre-appraisal, as the only action is to update the environmental 
guidelines for ARCDP 2, which has been rated Satifactory by the Bank.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
06/06/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
06/21/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
