Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3440
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P071119 
Project Name:  Manila Water Supply Financial Strengthening and Service Expansion 
Task Team Leader:  William D. Kingdom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
125.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
25.00
25.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to expand connections, reduce non-revenue water, 
and improve service quality resulting in the improved financial strength of MWSS.  This 
will be done through: (i) upgrading the level of water supply services in the concession 
area via reconstruction of the distribution network, better control of non-revenue water, 
improved performance of provided services, and increase in water sales; and, (ii) 
strengthening the associated institutional arrangements focused on managerial 
responsibility for regularly monitoring the status of distribution network and ensuring  
sustainability of high-quality, state-of-repair of production and distribution facilities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Maynilad Water Services Inc (MWSI) is a private company awarded a government 
concession through the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) to 
operate the West zone of Metro Manila (population=7.9 million) for 25 years (1997-
2022).  The MWSI concession agreement includes obligations to provide water supply 
connections, continuity of water supply and ensure adequate water quality.  They are also 
obligated to provide sewerage and sanitation services in compliance with wastewater 
standards.  The system currently does not serve approximately 8 million people in the 
Page  2
concession area, has very high physical and commercial non-revenue water levels 
(approximately 60%), insufficient water pressure (affecting 3 million people) and in some 
areas 24 hour service cannot be provided (affecting 3 million people).  Due to financial 
difficulties of MWSI, investments in sewerage and septage services are very limited in 
the West Concession area.  
 
Since being awarded the concession in 1997, MWSI has had financial difficulties and in 
2003 filed a petition for Corporate Rehabilitation.  In 2005 a Debt and Capital 
Restructuring Agreement and a Rehabilitation Plan was approved that among other things 
set targets for increasing the billed water volume (from 700 Mld to 1800 Mld by 2015) 
and associated reduction in non-revenue water.  The Concession was successfully rebid 
in December 2006 and the new owners are now in place.  
 
The Bank-supported project will assist MWSI in restructuring and rehabilitating the 
network in the northern and central hydraulic areas of their concession in order to reduce 
non-revenue water.  It will include the following components:  
 
•
Component 1: Establishment of Hydraulic Areas (HA): Restructuring and 
optimization of the primary distribution network to form 31 HA, each with a single feed 
equipped with a flow meter to enable computation of individual water balances of HAs. 
Works comprise construction of about 120 km primary distribution mains and the 
installation of flow and pressure monitoring equipment. Base cost: PHP 5.235 billion 
(US$ 130.9 million).  
 
•
Component 2: Establishment of District Metered Areas (DMA). Division of HAs 
to form 1,362 discrete DMA (i.e., average of about 40 DMAs per HA), in the existing 
distribution network with single inflow feed and pressure reducing valves (PRV). Works 
comprise construction of about 118 km of distribution mains, inflow chambers and PRV 
chambers.  Base cost: PHP 3.288 billion (US$82.2 million).  
 
•
Component 3: New service connections. Installation of about 175,000 new service 
connections to new consumers in the existing service area, the expansion areas, and un-
serviced areas. Base cost: PHP 900 million (US$ 22.5 million).  
 
•
Component 4: Technical Assistance. Project technical assistance comprises of two 
parts (Base Cost PHP:  
 
(a) Project implementation support: (i) international consultant services for construction 
supervision, and in addition to perform the independent functions to certify, confirm and 
certify achievement of outputs, and outcomes, required for output-based disbursements; 
(ii) services of a NRW specialist to formulate a structured results-oriented NRW 
reduction strategy and action plan, including necessary staff, training, equipment and 
annual operating budget; (iii) consultant services for detailed design of specific areas.  
 
(b) Capacity building support: (i) development of a comprehensive GIS-based database 
of the water supply networks to provide the framework and reference base for the 
Page  3
continuing work of the NRW management units in the Business Centers (BC), including 
hardware, software and application development; (ii) meters and other specials for the 
NRW management work; and (iii) training.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Manila’s west zone concession area covers 540 km2 and consists of nine cities and two 
municipalities in Metro Manila and one city and five municipalities in the province of 
Cavite.  The project will be located in all zones excluding the southern zone.  The area of 
construction is largely on urban roads throughout this area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The impacts of the project are largely related to the construction activities. The project 
involves restructuring and rehabilitation of the water supply network in the northern and 
central hydraulic areas of the MWSI concession.  Civil works include: Restructuring and 
optimization of the primary distribution network to form 31 hydraulic areas, each with a 
single feed equipped with a flow meter; about 120 km primary distribution mains and the 
installation of flow and pressure monitoring equipment; construction of about 118 km of 
distribution mains, inflow chambers and pressure reducing valve chambers and 
installation of about 175,000 new service connections.  In addition, as a parallel activity 
MWSI will finance non-revenue water reduction work in tertiary distribution networks 
including the rehabilitation including full or partial replacement of the distribution 
network, installation of flow meters, pressure reducing valves and associated works.  
 
Environmental impacts related to these works include general construction impacts 
including solid waste management of construction debris and the possible de-
commissioning of asbestos pipes, provision of erosion control measures, disposal of used 
Page  4
oils and degreasers, proper excavation and backfilling, handling of asbestos cement pipes, 
toilet facilities, traffic management, health and safety, dust and noise control and chance 
finds of cultural property.  
 
Resettlement impacts: The rights of way for the new primary mains (to be located 
adjacent to the existing ones) and for the improvement of the secondary and tertiary 
distribution lines and pumping stations have been occupied or encroached upon for the 
last twenty years by informal settlers who have built either semi permanent or permanent 
structures on them.  These settlers will need to be cleared in varying degrees.  Except for 
a
few private properties, most of these rights of way are titled to MWSS. The 
rehabilitation works may also affect business activities (streetside vendors and 
commercial establishments). The exact areas and extent of the impact will depend on the 
rehabilitation works which will remain flexible to allow for prioritization based on 
monitoring of the leakage within a given hydraulic area or zone.   Whenever possible, 
appropriate modification to the project to avoid or minimize the impacts shall be adopted.  
 
Dam Safety: The water supply for the system to be rehabilitated originates from a 
reservoir that is retained by the Ipo Dam, which is itself fed by a reservoir retained by the 
Angat Dam.  Both dams are >15 m in height and thus considered large dams under the 
Safety of Dams Policy (OP4.37).  Based on reviews by independent dam safety experts, 
both dams need Emergency Preparedness Plans and Operation and Maintenance 
Manuals.  Remedial measures including rehabilitation works, improved maintenance, and 
additional analysis of seismic risks are also needed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long term impacts are predominantly positive, improving the health and quality of 
life in Metro Manila by increasing water supply connections and the level of service 
which will provide increased quantities of water for drinking, hygienic and other 
purposes.  It also will improve the reliability of the quality of the water used in the project 
area by providing piped connections for people currently using unregulated independent 
water providers and by reducing leakage in the system which can lead to contamination 
of the piped water supply.  For low income communities in the project area it is estimated 
that a total of 3.45 million people will benefit from increased pressure, increasing water 
use and lower the risk of contamination.  Approximately 60,000 people of low income 
will receive new connections also increasing the quality and quantity of water.  
 
The project will also in the long term increase the volume of wastewater produced.  This 
would result in an increased flow and decreased concentration of wastewater in the canals 
and rivers that based on estimates are insignificant during the wet season and only slight 
during the dry season.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project will explicitly make all efforts to avoid resettlement in the location and 
design of the systems an effort that will involve the consideration of alternative 
alignments.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and Environmental Compliance Certificate 
(ECC): MWSI has prepared an EIS and a corresponding Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) for the project. It has also secured an ECC from the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources.  
 
The environmental management plan utilizes MWSI’s environmental management 
system and requirements for contractors, impacts associated with construction activities 
will be mitigated using standard operating procedures that cover the identified impacts.  
 
Implementation of the construction-related mitigation measures will be the 
responsibility of construction subcontractors as part of their obligations to MWSI.The 
costs of mitigating construction impacts will be included in the costs of facilities while 
the other mitigating and monitoring costs (odor, noise, workers health, site safety and 
hygiene) will be born by MWSI.  
 
MWSI environmental unit will supervise the compliance of the subcontractors.  They 
will also monitor water quality in the distribution network along with other service 
standards (water pressure etc) as part of their obligations under the concession agreement.  
They will report to the World Bank on overall compliance as part of supervision.  
 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy (LARRP):  The LARRP 
ensures that all impacts of land acquisition of assets and properties are mitigated and that 
the project affected persons are benefited and are not worse off compared to the pre 
project standard of living. The legal framework consists of the Philippine Constitution 
and other relevant orders of the government and the World Bank OP 4.12. It further states 
that MWSI will comply with whichever is the higher standard in case of discrepancy in 
resettlement and compensation standards of the existing laws in the Philippines and of the 
standards of the lender.  
 
Dam Safety: Draft Operation and Maintenance Emergency Preparedness Plans have 
been developed for project appraisal for both dams. These will be improved during the 
project.  An action plan has also been developed for remedial works, instrumentation and 
studies to determine seismic risk including activities, budgets, responsibilities and 
schedule.  Financing will be provided through the Common Purpose Facilities which 
manages the common facilities of the two concessionaires.For the activities for Angat 
Dam the responsibilities for implementation will be shared between the two 
concessionaries (MWCI and MWSI) and the National Power Corporation with active 
coordination through a technical working group comprised of NPC, MWSI, MWCI and 
Page  6
National Irrigation Association.  The activities for IPO dam will be implemented directly 
by the Common Purpose Facilities.  
 
Capacity to undertake safeguards:  MWSI has experience in the preparation and 
implementation of similar World Bank projects including the Manila Second Sewerage 
Project and the GEF- Manila Third Sewerage Project and developed effective working 
procedures for World Bank assisted investment projects.  Supervision has indicated their 
implementation to be satisfactory.  NPC, MWSS and MWSI have qualified dam 
engineers to undertake and supervise the work under dam safety.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EIA process included consultation at the scoping stage and on the draft EA.  At the 
scoping stage meetings were held to elicit issues and concerns from the stakeholders 
including Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and Local Government Units (LGUs). 
Subsequently, surveys and interviews, public consultations for concerned barangays and 
communities, and focus group discussions with local government officials (Barangay and 
municipal level) were conducted.  The findings, issues and concerns were later 
incorporated in the scope of the environmental assessment.  Similar consultations were 
then undertaken on the draft environmental assessment.  These comments were 
incorporated into the final report.  
 
The LARRP has been disclosed in WB Infoshop on December 4, 2006. As part of the 
roles and responsibilities under the LARRP, the project proponent is obligated to hold 
participatory activities that include meeting with concerned local government units up to 
the barangay level for the overview of the proposed project, conduct of technical and 
social studies, RAP preparation (including consultation on draft RAP and orientation on 
the final RAP) and setting up of multi-sectoral committees for the implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of the RAP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/04/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/04/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
 
Page  8
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. Kingdom 
02/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr John Morton 
02/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
