                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                    Report No.:42045

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/13/2007

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Philippines                          Project ID: P106732
Project Name: Ethanol Plant Wastewater Biogas Project
Task Team Leader: Josefo B. Tuyor
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2008            Estimated Board Date: Not applicable
Managing Unit: EASRE                          Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset
Sector: Agro-industry (60%); environment (40%)
Theme: Climate change
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
       BORROWER                                                            0.00
       LOCAL COMMUNITIES                                                   0.00
                                                                            .00

B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]

The project development objective is to contribute to reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
through the capture of methane from the ethanol plant's wastewater treatment system and the
displacement of the traditional bunker fuel with the captured methane and bagasse for the plant's
fuel requirements. The project is also seen to contribute to the country's development objectives
by supporting the development of indigenous renewable energy sources and by enhancing the
environmental quality.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]

The project is an ethanol production plant with waste to energy recovery. Part of the ethanol
production is intended to meet the anticipated demand for fuel grade ethanol with the
implementation of the Biofuels Act. The waste to energy recovery is the object of the Bank's
Carbon Finance support.

The project has the following components:

Component 1: Ethanol Manufacturing/Production Plant. This component involves the
construction and operation of a 100,000 liters/day ethanol plant in Negros Occidental,

Philippines, utilizing molasses substrate from sugar mills for the production of potable hydrous
ethanol for the alcoholic beverage, industrial, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals market, and
anhydrous fuel grade ethanol. The molasses will be sourced from Central Azucarera Don Pedro,42045
Inc., Central Azucarera de La Carlota, Inc., Hawaiian-Philippines Company and other sugar
mills in the Philippines. It will consist of the following facilities: (i) fermentation facility; (ii)
distillation column; (iii) dehydration facility to produce fuel grade ethanol; (iv) steam boiler and
power plant; and (v) storage facilities for molasses, ethanol, fuel, etc.;

Component 2: Wastewater Treatment Facility and Disposal System will handle and manage the
vinasse, the liquid waste produced from the distillation of the fermented molasses for the
production of ethanol. The component will comprise of the following: (i) primary treatment
through biomethanation with the use of anaerobic digesters (AD); (ii) ponds/lagoons to store and
further treat the biomethanated vinasse; (iii) land application of treated vinasse as fertilizer or
"fertigation"; and (iv) sea disposal facility (sea outfall). It is anticipated that initially only around
20% of the final effluents will go to land application while the rest will be disposed at deep sea.
In the long term, the proportion of effluents going to land application is projected to increase as
the fertigation scheme gains acceptance among sugarcane farmers in the area.

Component 3: Waste-to-Energy Facility. The waste-to-energy recovery facility will involve the
utilization of the captured methane and bagasse to generate steam for the plant's boilers. The
component will comprise of: (i) methane capture facility; (ii) 20 ton/hr capacity
bagasse/bunker/methane-fueled boiler; and (iii) 3.0-MW capacity steam turbine system.

It is estimated that the GHG emissions avoidance due to the waste to energy component would
be about 99,364 tons CO2-e per year based on the "business as usual" scenario, i.e., 800 cubic
meters/day of vinasse would be treated using the traditional open lagooning system to comply
with the Philippine government wastewater standards and the use of 6,000 tons of the traditional
bunker fuel for the steam boilers.

D. Project location (if known)

The project is located in the province of Negros Occidental, the Philippines. Two options for the
site of the ethanol plant are currently being evaluated by the project sponsor, taking into
consideration the transport costs of raw materials and the finished products and the land and sea
disposal of the treated vinasse. The first option is to locate the ethanol plant near the La Carlota
Sugar Mill owned by the project sponsor, while the second option is to locate it in a coastal area in
Binalbagan, Negros Occidental, which is around 34 km from the La Carlota Sugar Mill. Either way,
a depot, possibly including a pier and other ancillary facilities will have to be built in a coastal
area to facilitate the transport of ethanol products and the disposal of effluent into the deep sea.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

The CADP Group has an in-house Environment Management and Safety Department which is
staffed by around 20 personnel, some of them are Pollution Control Officers. The Department
ensures its sugar mill operations and projects are in compliance with environmental laws and
standards and that the occupational safety of its workers is given due attention. The Department

is headed by a Group Manager. The company also has a Social Development Department that
takes charge of its community benefits program, community relations and social impacts of the
project its workers and host communities.                                                        42045

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
The project is expected to contribute to the reduction in the GHG emissions and to improve the
local environmental quality through improved compliance of the project to effluent standards and
the displacement of the pollutive bunker fuel as the traditional source of fuel for the plant's
boiler. It is also expected to stir up the local economy, increase the income of small farmers in
Negros Occidental who are beneficiaries of the Government's Comprehensive Agrarian Reform
Program and provide livelihood opportunities to the sugarcane and ethanol plant workers, as well
as their dependents.

Notwithstanding the positive environmental and social impacts, considering the anticipated
heavy civil works related to the construction of the ethanol plant, the project is recommended to
be categorized as an Environmental Category A project. The same category is expected under the
Philippine EA system which the project is covered. The potential negative environmental
impacts, however, are well defined and manageable. These relate to civil works during
construction and air emissions from fuel combustion and wastewater discharges from the ethanol
plant. To address air emissions from fuel combustion, a wet scrubber system will be installed.
The two-stage wastewater treatment involving biomethanation as the primary treatment and
lagooning as secondary treatment is expected to allow the project to meet both the World Bank
and the Philippine effluent standards.

A full blown environmental impact assessment, the scope and coverage of which will be agreed
with the Bank, shall conducted and the report submitted to the Bank and to Department of
Environment and Natural Resources for review and approval. A social impact assessment which
addresses the requirements of the Philippine EIS, the social assessment requirement of the
Bank's social safeguards policy, as well as the Community Benefits Plan requirements of the
Community Development Carbon Fund will be part of the environmental impact assessment.
Due diligence will also be undertaken to ensure that workers and host communities are not
adversely affected by the project and that they do benefit from the project.

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                            Yes               No               TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
The project, regardless of its final location, will likely not affect any forest or areas declared as42045
natural habitats. Under the first option, the ethanol plant will be located in an agricultural area
planted to sugarcane, while under the second location option the ethanol plant will be located in
privately owned coastal land also planted to sugarcane.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                  X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                                                                 X
There are no indigenous cultural communities/indigenous peoples in the site considered under
the first option. The host communities are lowlanders belonging to the Hiligaynon group, the
mainstream ethno-linguistic group in Negros Occidental and the nearby Iloilo Province. A few
thriving IP communities consisting of Ati/Magahat/Bukidnon sub-tribes reside in some parts of
Negros Island and their presence or absence at the site considered under the second option will
be determined in the environmental and social impact assessment study.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                                        X
Depending on the final site selected for the project, the policy may or may not be triggered. If
Option 1 is taken, the project is not expected to cause dislocation of people nor is there
acquisition of land, as the CADP Group already owns the land that will host the ethanol plant
and the waste-to-energy facility. Dislocation of sugar cane farmers, workers and people is not
expected. If Option 2, however, is taken there will be acquisition of lands involved that will
trigger the policy. The proponent is fully aware of the issues involved in acquiring the lands and
takes these issues seriously in deciding the final site.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X

Environmental Category: A - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared:

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.



1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:                              42045
 Task Team Leader:                Josefo B. Tuyor
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                  Rahul Raturi
   Comments:

