Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4436 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/11/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Poland 
Project ID: P116213 
Project Name: Poland Enterprise Finance Project (PEF) 
Task Team Leader: Steen Byskov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 17, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 16, 2010 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (50%);General finance sector (25%);Other 
industry (25%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project#s objective is to support enterprise performance by providing medium term 
working capital and investment finance to SMEs, helping to alleviate the access to finance 
constraint imposed by the global financial conditions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have a single component of a US$500 million equivalent credit line to PKO BP 
guaranteed by the Government of Poland.  The credit line will be on-lent to participating 
financial intermediaries (PFI), which in turn will on-lend to SMEs.  PFIs will be selected by 
PKO BP subject to no-objection by the World Bank Team and compliance with OP 8.30 criteria 
for financial institutions including pre-qualification and eligibility criteria regarding: (i) adequate 
managerial autonomy and commercially oriented governance, (ii) proved ability to reach SMEs, 
and (iii) acceptable level of credit risk and financial performance including compliance with 
Polish FSA prudential requirements, which have adopted EU norms. The exchange rate risk will 
be managed by PKO BP with the option of using IBRD Flexible Loan conversion options.   
 
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
The borrower is located in Warsaw and sub-loans will be available to SMEs throughout Poland.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be assessed during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alexei Slenzak (ECSS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment Policies (OP/BP 4.01) will apply to PEF. Environmental issues of 
sub-borrowers and their sub-projects will be addressed through the sub-loan environmental 
eligibility assessment. The environmental assessment will be carried according to environmental 
review procedures in the Operation Manual for PKO BP and PFI. All environmental Category III 
sub-projects will be subject to the Bank#s prior review for potential environmental impact 
purposes. There will be no large scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts associated with the 
project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The team will assess during preparation whether OP 4.36 will apply.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The team will assess during preparation whether OP 4.09 will apply.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The team will assess during preparation whether OP 4.11 will apply.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/22/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No such studies are envisaged.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Steen Byskov 
08/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/23/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
06/23/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
