Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2009 
Report No.:  AC2845
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P092211 
Project Name:  RY-RURAL ENERGY ACCESS 
Task Team Leader:  Somin Mukherji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Renewable energy (30%);General energy sector (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.10 
 
African Development Bank 
47.10 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
5.00 
 
German Development Service 
3.50 
 
Islamic Development Bank - Al Aqsa Fund 
25.40
92.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed Project are to: (i) improve electricity access 
of rural populations in the selected project areas in a financially sustainable manner; and 
(ii) demonstrate the feasibility of increasing the access to electricity of RHH in off-grid 
areas through implementation of SHS.  The proposed Project would seek to increase the 
electricity access of rural households from the current level of 20% to about 30% through 
the implementation of grid extension and Solar Home Systems in off-grid.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would focus on detailed design and implementation of an initial 
program for rural electrification based on the community/cooperative model of ownership 
and delivery of grid-based electricity supply.  This has proven successful in other 
countries where the national institutions were weak.  The proposed Project would also 
support selected off-grid rural electrification programs through the integration of Solar 
Page  2
Home Systems (SHS) within its scope.  Finally, the proposed Project would support the 
development of a strategy for improved LPG access in rural areas.  Future financing is 
expected to expand the initial RE initiatives as well as support implementation of other 
off-grid renewable energy technologies (particularly wind energy which has been shown 
to have strong potential), and also support implementation of initiatives to increase cost-
effective supply of LPG to rural households.  
 
The proposed Project would encompass new public, private and community based 
delivery models for both grid and off-grid technologies and would consist of the 
following components: (a) Electrification of twelve service territories in twelve 
governorates which can cost-effectively be integrated into the national grid; (b) 
Electrification of a number of isolated communities in selected areas that can not be 
connected to the national grid in a cost effective manner using Solar Home Systems 
(SHS); and (c) Provision of technical assistance in project implementation, institutional 
development of the agencies needed to implement the long-range rural electrification 
strategy, and additional studies related to rural energy supply with particular focus on 
LPG distribution in rural areas.  The following sections  briefly describe these 
components.  
 
Component 1:  On-Grid Rural Electrification: The National Rural Electrification 
Strategy study has identified 27 service territories in twelve governorates for rural electric 
service expansion and integration into the national grid.  A priority ranking for the 
development of these service territories has been prepared based primarily on economic 
efficiency (cost per connection and required government subsidy), although geographic 
coverage was also considered.  An overall program of about US$259 million has been 
defined which is expected to be implemented in three phases in a period of ten years and 
would provide access to electricity for over 520,000 new rural households that will 
increase access from the current level of about 20% to about 46% of rural households  
and benefit more than 3.5 million people.  Rural Electrification for the remaining seven  
governorates is not currently viable through grid extension and, will therefore be based 
on development of renewable energy resources (SHS in the case of the proposed Project 
–
see Component 2).  
 
The proposed Project will finance the first phase of the on-grid program implementation 
that would include development of twelve service territories in twelve governorates 
(Taiz, Amran, Hajjah, Dhamar, Al-Mahweet, Ibb, Al-Baida, Lahj, Sanaa, Al-Hodeidah, 
Abyan and Al-Dhale) to provide grid-based electricity to 174,000 new customers.  
Investments include financing of the medium voltage transmission lines (at 33-kV and 
11-kV), sub-stations, transformers, other distribution materials including meters, and 
related civil works.  The total investment cost (excluding contingencies) for this 
component is estimated at approximately US$ 82.2 million of which IDA’s share is about 
US$14.8 million.  Subsequent phases to substantially increase rural access could be 
brought forward if greater financing became available, including the Energy for the Poor 
Initiative (EFPI).  
 
Page  3
Component 2:  Off-Grid Electrification Strategy:  This component would provide 
electricity service to off grid areas based on SHS. The areas of focus will be the fringe 
areas of the twelve selected service territories that are on-grid extensions and areas 
outside the service territories in the seven governorates which have been defined as off-
grid areas.  The grid and the off-grid programs will broadly follow common principles 
with respect to technical quality, service standards and organizational principles. 
However, the off-grid program will also test a range of different business models, 
replicating some of the business models being piloted in various parts of the country.  
Details of the basic principles of off-grid development, as well as the basis for selecting 
participating areas, are described in Annex 4.  Investments are currently expected to be in 
the range of US$9.0 million (excluding contingencies) of which IDA’s share would be 
US$4.3 million; this is expected to result in about 18,000 new connections.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Support and Technical Assistance:  Key items to be 
addressed through this component are: (i) strengthening the institutional capacity of the 
agencies responsible for carrying out the grid-based rural electricity delivery services, 
viz., the RESPs and micro-finance institutions/private service providers in case of off-
grid rural electrification; (ii) capacity building within the REA; (iii) designing and 
implementing a tariff framework that will ensure the financial sustainability of the 
RESPs; (iv) operating cost of the PMU; (v) start-up costs  of the REA and the RESPs; 
(vi) additional studies on rural energy with particular emphasis on renewable energy; and 
(vii) developing a LPG supply strategy to improve access to LPG among the rural 
population.  The total cost of the Technical Assistance component including 
implementation support is estimated at US$16.5 million of which IDA’s share would be 
US$4.0 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Out of the 21 governorates, two are urban (Sana’a and Aden).  Of the remaining 19 
governorates, twelve are included for on-grid rural electrification; electrification of the 
remaining seven will be carried out through renewable energy development.  For on-grid 
electrification, 27 service territories have been identified in rural areas of the twelve 
governorates.  The proposed project will finance the development of distribution system 
of twelve out of the 27 service territories.  These investments will mainly comprise 
construction of new distribution systems and strengthening of existing distribution 
systems.  Off-grid rural electrification will mainly focus on the fringe areas of the twelve 
service territories and areas outside these twelve service territories in the remaining seven 
governorates.  As determined by the environmental assessment that was carried out for 
the project, potential negative environmental impacts are expected to be minor given the 
barren terrain in Yemen over which the facilities (power lines and substations) will be 
constructed.  
 
There will be some land acquisition under the project, although specific sites have not 
yet been identified.  Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared, in case any instances of involuntary land acquisition should occur.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Project is rated as environmental Category B and no significant negative 
environmental impacts are expected as a result of the project activities.  Investments 
would include construction of medium voltage sub-transmission lines 33-kV and 11-kV, 
sub-stations, transformers, installation of other distribution materials including meters, 
and related civil works.  The construction of sub-transmission lines and sub-stations is 
expected to have minor, site-specific environmental impacts, and no irreversible impacts.  
The sub-transmission lines will utilize existing high-voltage transmission lines from 
which additional lines will be drawn to help in distribution of power more widely in rural 
areas thereby building on existing infrastructure.  
 
The main environmental aspects that will be considered during the construction and 
operation phases of the proposed project and that are expected to impact the environment 
may include the following:  
 
During the construction phase, potential impacts are expected in the form of inert waste 
from construction material (soil, trimmings of steel, wood, tiling materials, concrete); air 
emissions due to increased dust; noise emissions due to increased noise levels; and some 
loss of trees along right of way for power lines.  Furthermore, construction on power 
lines could cause impacts to traffic by narrowing of roads or occupation of one or more 
lanes of roads by stored construction material/waste; and by increasing traffic volumes on 
rural access roads by construction vehicles and machinery.  All of these impacts are 
expected to be localized, short lived, and reversible.  Mitigation measures and monitoring 
plan are included in the ESIA.  
 
During the operation phase, the main potential impacts can be summarized as follows:  
 
Page  5
-
Wastes generated during operation phase resulting from maintenance, repair and 
replacement activities such as: used batteries from off-grid systems; used florescent 
lamps containing mercury; scrap transformers; wasted cables and wood poles. These fall 
under both hazardous and non-hazardous wastes.  
 
-
Safety of power lines and substations: safety risks associated with the operations such 
as electric shocks and fire risks  
 
-
Risks of soil contamination with oil from transformers, diesel generators and storage 
tanks  
 
All the mitigation, monitoring and management measures proposed will be adopted by 
Rural Electricity Authority (REA) and included as conditions of contract in the bidding 
documents for any contractor or sub-contractor.  
 
It is expected that the physical installation of substations and transformers (transmission 
towers) and the establishment of the right of way (ROW) in the grid component will 
require access to certain unknown amounts of land.  During the construction phase, 
temporary land acquisition also may occur in association with the construction camps and 
the storing of equipment.  The sites for establishing the substation and other associated 
facilities had not been identified prior to appraisal, however, stakeholders indicated that 
these stations normally are established on state lands far from residential areas.  In cases 
where state lands are not available, people are often willing to donate land for projects 
benefiting the public good.  A Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared to 
address any instances of involuntary land acquisition that may occur.  The RPF   
establishes overall resettlement objectives and principles and includes criteria for the 
screening of subprojects, guidelines for mitigation, compensation, and addressing 
grievances, and implementation arrangements for the RPF and assessment of the capacity 
for its implementation, and the identification of the source of funding for any resettlement 
activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to result in any negative indirect environmental impact, as 
determined by the ESIA. Once completed, the project is expected to have significant 
positive environmental impacts, including the replacement of fuel wood and kerosene 
that are currently used by rural populations for purposes of cooking, heating and lighting, 
with electricity.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
An analysis of alternatives was carried out during the ESIA preparation and the proposed 
project was chosen as the best option for not only providing many developmental 
advantages such as upgrading facilities and infrastructure in rural areas, poverty 
reduction, improve education, healthcare, nutrition and other services; but also due to the 
many environmental benefits that it could potentially achieve. The analysis also 
examined: location alternatives for the project service territories according to 
socioeconomic criteria; suitable renewable energy alternatives across the country (wind, 
Page  6
solar); and service provider alternatives with case studies and good practice success 
stories.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is classified as environmental Category B and  an Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) report was prepared for the project by an independent 
consulting firm (EcoConServ Environmental Solutions), following Terms of Reference 
cleared by the World Bank.  Because of the large geographic extent of the project and the 
fact that exact subprojects were not identified during the ESIA, the study was carried out 
as a framework, focusing on strategic environment and social issues, rather than on issues 
relating to specific subprojects. The study therefore includes tables summarizing the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) during construction and operation, 
including monitoring plan. Institutionally, the ESMP delineates the roles and 
responsibilities for its implementation during construction and operation.  
 
The consulting firm has also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) (see 
above). The RPF discusses capacity building needs and identifies specific topics for 
capacity building activities.  
 
Development and implementation of the rural electrification program will be carried out 
by the newly-established Rural Electrification Authority (REA), an independent agency 
charged with planning, coordinating and attracting financing for expansion of rural 
electrification in the country in accordance with the National Rural Electrification 
Strategy.  A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been setup under the REA with the 
necessary skills to implement the project. Assets built by the PMU/REA will be 
transferred to the service providers (SPs) to own, manage and operate them.  
 
The PMUs project director, technical specialist, as well as the six site engineers will 
undertake training on environmental and social aspects of the project before and during 
project implementation as necessary, as they will be primarily responsible for oversight 
implementation of ESMP and compliance with the ESMP and the RPF. The ESIA has 
proposed an Environment, Health and Safety Unit (EHS) to be setup under the REA and 
has listed relevant individuals (e.g. environment officer, social affairs officer, etc.) as 
those responsible for oversight on implementation of various mitigation measures as well 
as the RPF. However REA will not be fully staffed at the start of project implementation, 
as staffing will occur gradually during the course of the project. Therefore the PMU's 
project director, technical specialist and the site engineers will be directly responsible 
from the start of the project till such time that an EHS unit is established under the REA, 
for compliance with the ESMP and the RPF (Once the environment/social staff are 
included in the REA, they will take over responsibility for oversight on ESMP and RPF 
com
pliance). The site engineers and PMU’s technical specialist will contract relevant 
consultants to undertake the environmental due diligence during design and construction 
stages.  These consultants will work closely with the site supervision consultants. The 
PMU/REA will be responsible for regular reporting on progress of ESMP and RPF 
compliance during implementation in annual progress reports that they will submit to the 
Page  7
Bank. Additionally, the project will hire an independent consultant before mid-term to 
prepare an ESMP implementation review report.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESIA and RPF preparation processes has included in-depth consultations with 
various relevant stakeholders, as required by World Bank safeguard policies. Public 
consultations have been carried out to ensure that the views and interests of all project 
stakeholders are taken into account. During the scoping period, stakeholder meetings and 
community consultation activities (e.g. focus groups discussion, structured group and 
individual interviews) were held. These activities have targeted different stakeholders 
including organizations such as the 
Yemeni Women’s Union (YWU), Care International 
and water users’ bonds/associations, and others such as rural residents in targeted 
communities (men and women), relevant governmental agencies, NGOs, and service 
provision cooperatives. Status of the current energy access situation as well as predicted 
impacts as a result of the project have been developed in full consultation with local 
people and reflected in the report. A detailed description of these meetings as well as 
other consultation activities is presented in Chapter 8 of the ESIA report. Annex 2 of the 
report includes checklists/guidelines used for community meetings and Annex 3 lists 
names of stakeholders interviewed.  
 
The executive summary of the ESIA has been translated into Arabic, and the ESIA 
(English and Arabic) and RPF have been disclosed at the World Bank’s Infoshop and in-
country in easily accessible places to the public, including relevant government websites 
and local governorate offices before appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Somin Mukherji 
04/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alaa Ahmed Sarhan 
04/14/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
04/10/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/10/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
04/14/2009 
Comments:   
