Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4239 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Republic of 
Project ID: P113508 
Project Name: Support to Basic Education Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Marcelo Becerra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (40%);Secondary education (35%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);Central government administration (10%);Vocational training (5%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Decentralization (P);Conflict prevention and post-conflict 
reconstruction (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original project development objectives are: to improve efficiency in the allocation and 
management of resources, improve the quality of the education services offered, and reduce the 
inequities in the provision of these services. As envisaged under OP 13.20, the proposed 
additional financing will: (i) revise the PDO to align it with the current education sector context 
and government strategy; (ii) finance the implementation of additional or expanded activities that 
scale-
up the project’s impact and development effectiveness.  
 
The revised Project Development Objective will be: to improve efficiency, quality and equity in 
the provision of basic education in Congo. These results will contribute to the efforts of the 
Government of Congo in achieving primary universal quality education by 2015.  In order to 
achieve these outcomes, the proposed Additional Financing will pursue a four-fold agenda of 
action: (i) support the Government of Congo priority to prepare and implement a sustainable, 
long-term EFA FTI education sector plan for all educational levels; (ii) build the capacity of the 
Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, in particular to improve planning, human 
resources and budget management, and strengthening the capacity of the Regional Departments 
Page  2
of Education (DDEPSA) to provide support to the school system; (iii) provide support to 
increase equity in the provision of services by providing free textbooks and focusing 
infrastructure expansion efforts in underserved areas; and (iv) provide support to out of school 
youth and excluded populations such as pygmies. Project specific indicators and benchmarks for 
monitoring the achievement of these objectives will be included in the context of an updated 
results framework, which will be based on the Africa Region Education Results Chain.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Grant supporting the Support to Basic Education Project ($20 million) was approved by the 
Board on September 23, 2004 and became effective March 25, 2005. The project has four 
components: (i) capacity building of the MEPSA ($5 million). The objective is to enhance 
capacity for planning, improve the human resources and budget management and to prepare the 
system for a successful decentralization management of primary and secondary education. This 
component also supports the cost of project management; (ii) rehabilitation of school 
infrastructure ($9 million). The objective of this component is to rehabilitate school buildings 
that were damaged during the war, and/or deteriorated due the lack of maintenance, and to 
support the creation, training and effectiveness of the School Management Committees (CDGC); 
(iii) support to improve the quality of education ($4,8 million). The objective is to consolidate 
the in-service training program initiated by 
MEPSA, support the inspections’ ability to provide 
pedagogical support to schools, provide textbooks to students at primary and secondary level, 
and support curriculum development; (iv) Support to out of school youth and pygmies ($1,2 
million). The objective is to pilot approaches to provide formal and non-formal education and 
training opportunities to youth aged 14-19 and to strengthen the design, efficiency and overall 
coherence of programs that support pygmies’ schooling.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Republic of Congo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Support to Basic Education Project has been implemented with satisfactory capacity for 
safeguard policies implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An ESMF has been developed for the original project. It includes a screening process 
environmental management and monitoring measures to mitigate possible negative impact on the 
environment. All infrastructure interventions for the Additional financing will include sanitation 
(latrines) as part of the screening process and support for its construction as needed. During the 
original project this has been the case since most intervention includes the 
rehabilitation/reconstruction of sanitation infrastructure.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The original project has a specific component of support to pygmy schooling which will 
continue in the Additional Financing as a specific subcomponent to address pygmy schooling 
and to support the new strategy/ IDPD concerning:(i) dissemination of the strategy for the 
schooling of pygmy children, including mobilizing pygmy parents for the schooling; (ii) the 
continuation and the expansion of the support to pygmy children (teaching materials, school 
books, school uniforms, and other measures).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/23/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Two reports: An Environmental and Social Management Framework and a National Strategy 
for the Education of the Pygmy population in the Republic of Congo has been published in 
the country as well a in the Bank Infoshop.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcelo Becerra 
03/25/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/25/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
03/25/2009 
Comments:   
