                                                                                                    43131




                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE


Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 27, 2008


I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Russian Federation                     Project ID: P095812
                                                Additional Project ID (ifany):
Project Name: Power Station North-Danilovsk ­ Gas flaring reduction project
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber
Estimated Appraisal Date: 05/02/2008            Estimated Board Date: 05/15/2008
Managing Unit: ECSSD                            Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
Sector: Environment, Energy
Theme: Climate Change Mitigation , Energy Efficiency
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):           6,88
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                       Yes [ ]                  No [X]
Simplified Processing                                Simple [X]              Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)                Yes [ ]     No [X]


B. Project Objectives:

The project development objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emission by recovering
associated petroleum gas (APG) from the Komsomolskoye oil field that without the project
would be burnt in flare. The key indicator for this objective will be the annual delivery of ERs.


C. Project Description:

The Project is a carbon finance operation based on a completed investment of a new 36 MW gas
power plant (GPP) utilizing associated petroleum gas (APG) that otherwise would have been
flared. The GPP is located at the North-Danilovsk oil field, Khanty-Mansiysk Okrug, Tumen
oblast, Western Siberia, Russia. Twelve GE Jenbacher generating units of 3.0 MW of nominal
electrical capacity each are installed in the plant. The generated electricity is being purchased by
local users at the North-Danilovsk oil field and neighboring oil fields and replaces the electricity
that was formerly supplied from the regional electric grid.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known):

The project is located near the oil specialized city of Kogalim, Khanti Mansiysk (KhMAO), right
in the heart of the Tumen region in Western Siberia. The population size of the Tumen region is
about 700,000. KhMAO is Russia's main oil and gas producing region (60% of national oil
production) and one of the world's largest oil-producing regions.

The project area is part of the Siberian boreal zone which in the North of Sovietsk consists of
large swathes of undisturbed primary forest mainly of conifers, which form a more or less
unbroken cover disrupted only by lakes, rivers and swamp areas. There is commercial logging on
a large scale, however not in the immediate vicinity of the GPP. The area is characterized by a
continental type climate.

GPP was constructed on the premise of an oilfield actively exploited by Lukoil, on a site which
had already been cleared due to oilfield operation. It is located between various pre-existing
installations, and by the status of degradation pertaining to the immediate area can be considered
as brownfields development. The GPP lies also near a gas flaring compound and an oil storage
facility. Immediately adjacent to the GPP is the main access road to the Lukoil premises, which
also is the road to Sovietsk.


E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The Project owner the LUKOIL company; LUKOIL is one of the largest oil companies
worldwide and is well suited to fulfill the necessary safeguards policies.


Regarding safeguards compliance the project has been diligently prepared by the previous
owner, REGIONERGOGAS. An EIA and EMP complying with the Russian country system and
satisfying World Bank safeguards policies were prepared and approved by public environmental
authorities of the district. Site personnel are well trained and manage the site diligently, including
emission control and monitoring and waste handling and management.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

    Environmental Safeguards Specialist: Wolfhart Pohl, Sr. Environmental Specialist; Alexej
    Retejum, Consultant;

    Social Safeguards Specialist: Sergey Artobolevsky, Consultant;


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (pleaseexplainwhy)                     Yes           No          TBD

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X

By producing electricity locally from the associated petroleum gas, the project contributes to
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions as it reduces the need to generate electricity elsewhere on

Safeguard Policies Triggered (pleaseexplainwhy)                    Yes          No          TBD

the power grid. The project is assigned Category B as the potential environmental impacts are
minor, well defined and site-specific. The project included medium scale construction and
technical installation measures for a small thermal power pant. It thus required a simple EIA and
an EMP for implementation and operation phases.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X

    The GPP was constructed within an existing oilfield compound with various installations; no
new transmission lines or access roads were constructed.

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X

    Not relevant. No preexisting structures of any cultural value exist on or near the site.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              X

Khanty-Mansiysk okrug is home to a number of indigenous groups (termed the Small Peoples of
the North). Therefore the project team will undertake a screening to determine whether
indigenous peoples are present in the project area or have collective attachment to the area. If
the team determines that the safeguard is triggered then the following will be done: a social
assessment, a process of consultation with the affected groups during all stages of the project,
and the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan that must be disclosed prior to appraisal.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X

No land acquisition or resettlement occurred during project implementation or operation.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X

Disclosure Policy (OP 17.50)                                        X

All relevant safeguards documents will be disclosed before appraisal.



III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: N/A


B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: 03/25/08

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:


   Safeguards studies have been completed for the project. An environmental impact assessment
   (EIA) with environmental management plan (EMP) according to current Russian Legislation
   was prepared (OVOS in Russian terminology), which in scope and detail corresponds to the
   World Bank's safeguards requirements under OP4.01. Specifically the Order of the State
   Committee of the Russian Federation for Environmental protection as of 15.04.2000 # 372
   "On the approval of the regulations on the assessment of the impact of the planned economic
   and other activity on the environment of the Russian Federation" requires the project
   developers to include in the project documentation the clause on assessment of
   environmental impact. There is no indication that stakeholder consultation has been carried
   out during EA, but this is not considered a significant issue because no local population is
   living nearby. This Russian OVOS has been disclosed locally to the public and authorities in
   2005 and in the World Bank's Infoshop in Russian Language as well an English summary.
   Before Project appraisal the project team will undertake a screening to determine whether
   indigenous peoples are present in the project area or have collective attachment to the area
   since Khanty-Mansiysk okrug is home to a number of indigenous groups (termed the Small
   Peoples of the North). This screening will involve seeking the technical judgment of
   qualified social scientists with expertise on the indigenous groups in the area as well as
   consultation with these groups and with the Borrower. Following the screening the team will
   consult with the ECA safeguards team regarding further steps. If the team determines that
   the safeguard is triggered then the following will be required: a social assessment, a process
   of consultation with the affected groups during all stages of the project, and the preparation
   of an Indigenous Peoples Plan that must be disclosed prior to appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS


 Signed and submitted by:

 Task Team Leader:                         Helmut Schreiber                                           09/25/2007

 Approved by:

 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:          Agi Kiss                                                   09/28/2007

   Comments:

 Sector Manager:                           Charles Feinstein                                          02/27/2008

   Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

       InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
       potentially affected persons.

