Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3240 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P106232 
Project Name: Southern Okrug Local Initiatives Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Anush Bezhanyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed program development objective is to improve quality of local social services and 
efficiency of public resources utilization through improved capacity of local authorities, citizen 
and community participation in targeted municipalities of the Southern Okrug.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Program includes the following components:  
 
Component 1: Community Development Grants to targeted settlement level municipalities for 
improvement of basic service delivery at the community level that address priority needs of 
population.  The mechanism for provision of such grants has been tested in Stavropol Krai and 
can be easily replicated in other regions.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Development of participating municipalities, local communities, 
and other stakeholders to improve their capacity to deliver basic services and efficiently manage 
municipal assets and budget with community and citizen participation. It will also support policy 
and capacity building efforts for participating federal and regional authorities.  
Page  2
Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation of the program results and outcomes at  federal, 
regional and community level (including participatory monitoring and evaluation), impact 
evaluation of the Program as a whole, as well as activities aimed at dissemination of information 
and program replication.  
 
Component 4: Program Management for supporting program implementation and other 
operational needs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Southern Territorial Okrug of Russian Federation. The regions in which project will be active 
will be selected together with the RF government based on agreed criteria. The municipalities in 
which the project will be implemented will be selected on competitive basis using preliminarily 
agreed (with RF government) criteria.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has sufficient regulatory and supervision capacity. The implementation and 
supervision capacity at the regional and local level is high. The project objective is to develop 
process and capacity for citizen and community participation in implementation and monitoring 
of project results.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance minor civil works mostly of rehabilitation nature, including 
rehabilitation of public buildings (plastering, painting, roof repairs and other reparation works), 
rehabilitation of small village roads, water supply pipelines, garbage collection, beatification etc. 
There will be no new construction and the project is not expected to have any land acquisition, 
resettlement or loss of access to income. To ensure due-diligence Environmental Management 
Checklist will be prepared as part of Operational Manual (OM) before appraisal   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/31/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Preparation mission December 17-22, 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anush Bezhanyan 
11/14/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/14/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
