                                                                                                         43129




                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 27, 2008

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Russian Federation                      Project ID: P101994
                                                 Additional Project ID (ifany):
Project Name: Ulyanovsk ­ Landfill Gas Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber
Estimated Appraisal Date: 04/29/2008             Estimated Board Date: 06/14/2008
Managing Unit: ECSSD                             Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
Sector: Landfill Management
Theme: Climate Change Mitigation
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):               3.6
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                        Yes [ ]                    No [X]
Simplified Processing                                Simple [X]                 Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)                   Yes [ ]     No [X]

B. Project Objectives:
The Ulyanovsk Landfill Gas Recovery Project is a pilot demonstration project in Russia with the
objectives to reduce green house gas emissions caused by methane generated in the landfill. At local
level, the project aims to improve solid waste final disposal practices, reducing the risk of
uncontrolled fires and explosions in landfills and contributing to better air quality through a reduction
in hazardous trace gases contained in LFG.

C. Project Description:
Disposal of solid waste on landfills is the main waste disposal strategy in Russia. At the moment,
the organic part of household waste is being decomposed under anaerobic conditions in landfills
generating methane emissions which are emitted to the atmosphere. Nowadays, capture and
utilization or flaring of LFG is a well proven technology to reduce the methane emissions.
However, currently, the extraction and utilization or flaring of methane gas from landfill is not
widely implemented in Russia and there are no landfills in Ulyanovsk Oblast that are capturing
and flaring the LFG.




                                                                                                        1

The project has three components. The main one and primary focus of the carbon finance
operation is the establishment of a LFG flaring system on the existing landfill area and
progressively on new areas as they are filled. This is being done by the CF project
proponent/beneficiary: JSC "Green Project Management" who has a 10 year landfill gas rights
agreement: The second component is the upgrading of the existing landfill operation undertaken
by the concession operator Center of Ecological Technologies Ltd. The third component is the
proposed plastics separation and processing operation undertaken by JSC "Green Project
Management", based on the inclusion of claimed but minor carbon emission reductions from this
project.
The main components of applied technology include gas extraction wells, gas transportation
pipes, condensate wells, blowers and flaring stack. Reductions of methane emissions will be
achieved through flaring of captured landfill gas. The equipment that will be installed will have
gas metering system recording gas quality and quantity in accordance with the UNFCCC
verification criteria.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The landfill has been operative for about three decades. The project area covers 30 ha, of which
the landfill are 23 ha. The landfill today contains just over 1 Mill m3 (0.5 Mill t) of municipal
waste. The project foresees a total capacity of around 4.5 Mill t. Current waste production of
Ulyanovsk amounts to about 350,000 t/year thus the lifetime of the project is estimated to about
11.5 years.

The landfill is located about 5 km from the western boundary of Ulyanovsk on a river terrace
elevated about 30 m above the Wolga valley and dipping gently southwards. There are two
villages near the LF, Barataevka (ca. 1.5 km S) and Krotovka (ca. 3 km SW). About 3 km NW of
the LF a group of drinking water wells is located, which draw water from an aquifer below the
landfill level.

Near surface groundwater and surface water from a small stream (Seld, ca. 1 km S) have been
shown to be affected by landfill related contamination.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The project management of the operating company JSC "Green Project Management" (GPM) is
also cooperating with the WB in other carbon finance projects and is one of the first companies
in Russia to invest in Landfill gas reduction projects.

The landfill is operated according to the Russian sanitary regulation SP 2.17.1038-01 "Hygienic
Requirements to Arrangement and Maintenance of SDW Disposal Landfills," which specifies the
types of solid wastes allowed on the landfill and the requirements for sanitary and
epidemiological supervision.

The regulatory authorities in Ulyanovsk are the environmental agency and the territorial center
for sanitary and epidemiological supervision. The list of permissible wastes used for reclamation
of disposal quarries during their exploitation should also be coordinated with the territorial
agency of the Federal Service for Supervision of Consumer Rights Protection and Human



                                                                                               2

Welfare (Rospotrebnadzor) in the Ulyanovsk District. This organization also reviews analytical
and toxicological data from environmental monitoring operations in the landslide vicinity.

The project has gone through Russian environmental approval process (OBOC/OVOS) and was
approved by local and Oblast level regulatory authorities. In the course of the OVOS process a
detailed environmental and technical study was prepared by the landfill operator.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
     Environmental Specialist: Wolfhart Pohl, Alexey Retejum;
     Social Specialist: Sergey Artobolevsky;

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Safeguard Policies Triggered (pleaseexplainwhy)                            Yes          No            TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X
The project is assigned Category B as the potential environmental impacts are well defined and
site-specific, and the environmental risks associated with the project are probably lower than the
risk of continued operation of the landfill facility as it is.

The project itself is not expected to have negative environmental impacts beyond those of routine civil
works sites. Instead, the project is expected to create an overall positive environmental balance:

(i)The potential for groundwater contaminations would likely be reduced by the impermeable cover
system, which would form a key component of the Methane capture system, as the percolation of
precipitation water through waste body would be restricted.

(ii) The installation of a gas capture system and flaring of GHG, especially the conversion of Methane to
CO2 by combustion, and the additional benefit of energy generation, will be clear positive impacts under
the climate change agenda.

However, there are risks of harmful impacts and poor environmental performance of continued landfill
operation.

Contaminations from the landfill could already have reached groundwater bodies, which are used as
drinking water sources, or surface water courses. This hazard should be carefully investigated and
monitored during project preparation and implementation to exclude and additional risk induced by
project activities.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                  X
According to Russian regulations LF operations have to be surrounded by a 0.5 km wide buffer zone,
which must not be used for agricultural purposes or be inhabited. This cordon sanitaire is not enforced;
agriculturally used land starts immediately adjacent to the LF. The project team will need to establish
whether implementation of the project will impose restrictions on the use of the buffer area (i.e., whether
the regulations will be enforced as a result of the project). If so, this would be equivalent to the taking of
land, the safeguard would be triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan would have to be prepared and
disclosed before appraisal.
The project is not expected to have any negative social impacts. There will be positive signal for the local


                                                                                                            3

Safeguard Policies Triggered (pleaseexplainwhy)                                         Yes               No               TBD
job market, the quality of life for the neighboring population and regional economic activity is expected
to be improved by the project.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X
Disclosure Policy 17.50                                                                   X
All relevant safeguard documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal.


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:04/20/2008

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
EIA with an EMP before appraisal including all necessary public disclosures and consultations.
If OP4.12 would be triggered a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.


IV. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Helmut Schreiber                                                09/25/2007
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Agi Kiss                                                       09/ 28/2007
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                 Charles Feinstein                                               02/27/2008
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.




                                                                                                                                   4

