                                                                                                  43126




                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 27, 2008

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Russian Federation                    Project ID: P102324
                                               Additional Project ID (ifany):
Project Name: Rosneft - Gas Flaring Reduction Project
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber
Estimated Appraisal Date: 04/04/2008           Estimated Board Date: 05/11/2008
Managing Unit: ECSSD                           Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
Sector: Environment, Energy
Theme: Climate Change Mitigation , Energy Efficiency
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):             77 (estimates)
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                      Yes [ ]                  No [X]
Simplified Processing                              Simple [X]               Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)               Yes [ ]     No [X]



B. Project Objectives:

The project development objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emission by recovering
associated petroleum gas (APG) from the Komsomolskoye oil field that without the project
would be burnt in flare. The key indicator for this objective will be the annual delivery of ERs.

C. Project Description:

The Project will contribute to climate change mitigation by capturing and processing APG that
would otherwise be flared.

The proposed project includes the construction of a booster compressor station/separator, and a
pipeline of about 5 km length to an existing gas treatment plant/compressor station that is owned
and operated by Gazprom. From here the associated gas will be fed into the existing Unified Gas
Transmission System of Gazprom. The proposed booster compressor station/separator will be
located near the current flare stack that forms part of an existing treatment facility operated by




                                                                                                 1

Gazprom. Through implementing this Project, the majority of associated gas that is produced
will be collected, processed and fed into the Unified Gas Transmission System.

Under the business as usual scenario the project produces carbon dioxide emissions from flaring
recovered APG and from methane emissions due to leaks, venting and flaring activities during
the recovery, transport and processing of associated recovered gas.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The project is located in West Siberia, Tyumen Oblast in the Yamal-Nenets Autonomous District
which is situated north of Tyumen Oblast. The Komsomolskoye oilfield is located near
Gubkinsky, a city of roughly 20,000, mainly consisting of oil workers, oil industry contractors
and their families. The population of the Tyumen Oblast is 3,700,000 people.

The wider project area is a very flat plateau with abundant lakes and rivers, swamps, brush and
forests. Outside of oil fields and related settlements there is very little human activity. The
immediate project area lies 10 km west of Gubkinsky in the Komsomolskoye Oil Field which is
simultaneously exploited by Gazprom (natural gas) and Rozneft (oil) in different depth levels.
There are numerous existing installations, such as drilling pads with towers, service and haulage
roads, storage areas, power transmission lines, pipelines, pumping, booster and regulation
stations, gas separation and treatment plants.

Thus the environment in the oilfield areas has been considerably degraded, mainly by
infrastructure related construction activities. However, no major contaminations by
hydrocarbons, aside from localized phenomena, were observed. The area of the prospective
construction works is dry (i. e. not swampy), mostly covered by loose forest, the pipeline would
have to cross only one minor stream.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

OJSC Rosneft engages in exploration, field facilities construction and exploitation of oil and gas
condensate fields, oil products production and distribution, oil and oil products transshipment
and storage, oil and oil products trading in a number of countries.

The Company's subsidiary directly engaging in exploitation of hydrocarbons under this Project
is OOO Rn ­ Purneftegaz. Purneftgaz has a relatively large environmental department with a
number of well trained engineers who are actively engaged in due diligence and quality control
in the company's production processes. There is likely a demand for upgrading their skills by
targeted training for WB specific safeguards requirements. The designer for the technical project
also has an environmental unit which will be responsible for the preparation og the Russian EIA /
EMP (OBOC/OVOS).

To obtain a construction permit from the public oversight authorities an environmental review
stage is mandatory. The provisions of the national legislation are laid out in the Federal Law on
Environmental Reviews (1995); Federal Law on Environmental Protection (1991) and Ordinance
on the Environmental Impact Assessment in the Russian Federation (1994), and are generally



                                                                                                2

rigorously applied by project owners and enforced by the authorities. In the context of this
project the Russian OBOC process is in technical detail, outcome and impact on the project
expected to fulfill the World Bank's safeguards policies, especially re. Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).

Complementary safeguards: The required PDD incorporates the need to present proof that an
EIA is conducted and that mitigating measures are incorporated with the Environmental
Management Plan (EMP). The construction permit, in addition, mandates the preparation of an
EIA (OVOS under local legislation). As for social issues, the PDD requires public consultation
of the project, which is probably as well mandatory within the EIA. All of these
procedures/checks will help safeguard/mitigate identified potential significant issues highlighted
in the WB Safeguard data sheet (i.e. crossing of wetland and consultation with potentially
affected indigenous groups).

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    Environmental Specialist: Wolfhart Pohl, Alexey Retejum
    Social Specialist: Sergey Artobolevsky

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Safeguard Policies Triggered (pleaseexplainwhy)                     Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
The project included medium scale construction and technical installation measures for a
compressor station and a pipeline of about 5 km length to an existing gas treatment plant. It thus
requires an EIA and an EMP for implementation and operation phases, but is not expected to
have any large scale or irreversible negative impacts on sensitive environmental or social
conditions. The project is assigned Category B as the potential environmental impacts are well
defined and site-specific
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
The project does involve medium scale green-field construction and technical installation
measures for a compressor station and a pipeline of about 5 km length to an existing gas
treatment plant The gas pipeline corridor will run parallel to existing service roads and through
already cleared forest. Environmental critical will be the crossing of a wetland area of about
500m. The EA must include mitigation measures as appropriate to minimize habitat loss i.e.
strategic habitat retention and post-development restoration.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                               X
Yamalo-Nenetsk Okrug is home to a number of indigenous groups (termed the Small Peoples of
the North). Therefore the project team will undertake a screening to determine whether
indigenous peoples are present in the project area or have collective attachment to the area. This
screening will involve seeking the technical judgment of qualified social scientists with expertise
on the indigenous groups in the area as well as consultation with these groups and with the
Borrower. If safeguard will be triggered a social assessment and a process of consultation with
the affected groups during all stages of the project and the preparation of an Indigenous People



                                                                                                  3

Safeguard Policies Triggered (pleaseexplainwhy)                                         Yes               No               TBD
plan will be prepared disclosed prior to appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                                        X
It has to be determined whether the construction work associated with the pipeline and terminal
involves the acquisition of any private land. If so a land acquisition plan will be prepared and
disclosed prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Disclosure Policy (OP 17.50)                                                              X
All relevant safeguards documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: 03/13/2008

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.

The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Key issues to meet project timeline:
The project schedule consists of three major components, relating to (1) technical design, (2)
carbon finance issues and (3) safeguards issues. It should be recognized, that the technical design
process (which normally includes an EIA/EMP = "OBOC" under Russian legislation) is moving
too slow to accommodate safeguards studies and produce deliverables in time for the carbon
finance schedule. As the carbon finance transaction needs to proceed swiftly, the pressure on the
Task Team to fast-track the EA/EMP process is apparent. Therefore, EA will be done prior to
the final technical designs being completed. The EA team needs to stay in contact with the
project design team to ensure the relevant EA findings are reflected in the technical
specifications / bidding documents.




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.




                                                                                                                                   4

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                Helmut Schreiber     09/25/2007
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Agi Kiss             09/28/2007
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                  Charles Feinstein    02/27/2008
   Comments:




                                                                 5

