Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:   
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 6, 2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P101997 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: Bratsk Hydropower Plant Power Generation Efficiency Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 06/20/2009 
Estimated ERPA Signing: 07/15/2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance 
Sector: Power, Environment 
Theme: Climate change 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
\ 
Spanish Carbon Fund (US$m.):  
13.5  
Other financing amounts by source:  
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
B.  Project Objectives: 
 
The project development objective is to reduce GHG emissions by increasing power generation 
efficiency at 6 turbines of the Bratsk HPP and thereby generating zero emissions power that 
would otherwise be generated by the fossil fuel power plants of the Irkutskenergo power system, 
namely from relatively inefficient coal fired power plants. The project will generate 2,103,743 
tCO2eq of emission reductions during the 1st crediting period between 2008 and 2012. 
 
C. Project Description: 
 
Bratsk hydroelectric plant (BHPP) is the second HPP of the coordinated hydroelectric system 
downstream on the Angara River
 and the world’s leader in the total volume of electricity 
production since the first generating unit was put into operation. The installed capacity of Bratsk 
HPP is 4500 MW (18 generating units of 250 MW each). The annual output under the design is 
about 26-28 TWh. The share of BHPP in the total electricity production of OJSC 
«Irkutskenergo» is more than 40%. Due to the unique and sufficiently stable water resources, 
49
1
38
Page  2
2
Bratsk HPP plays an important role in providing the steady-state reliable functioning of Irkutsk 
region. BHPP supplies the electric energy through the Irkutsk power grid to the regional 
industries and residential consumers.  
Currently, the electricity production by “Irkutskenergo” energy system is generated by the hydro 
power plants that represent about 82% of the installed capacity and the remaining power is 
generated by the relatively low-efficiency thermal power plants mainly consuming coal. BHPP 
generates «low-cost -must-run» electricity that is loaded at the maximum in the primary order. 
Overall, the BHPP generation can only be limited by the specified restrictions of water resources 
utilization provided by the Operative Group of the Ministry of Natural Resources that can give 
out the recommendations on running the water schedule.
1
The project comprises the replacement of 6 impellers (blade wheels) of turbines No. 13-18 
during the period from 2006 to 2010. The rehabilitation will result in the increase of units’ 
generation efficiency up to 95.3% and result in the supplemental generation of about 674 GWh 
per year by the six rehabilitated turbines. The supplemental power generation from the Project is 
expected to reduce about 2,103,743 tonnes of CO
2
during the period 2008-2012 by displacing the 
power generation by fossil-fuel power plants of the Irkutskenergo power grid. The combined 
margin emission factor of the Irkutskenergo power grid is calculated 
ex ante
 at 0.833 
tCO
2
/MWh.  
Without the contribution of the JI component, the rehabilitation of the turbines would not be 
economically feasible for “Irkutskenergo” and the wheels would continue operating based on 
their existing operational reserve beyond 2012. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The project is located in the Irkutsk Oblast of the Russian Federation, near Bratsk City. The 
Bratsk Hydropower Plant (BHPP) is the second one in a cascade of hydropower plants on the 
River of Angara and is a world leader in terms of total electricity generation. Irkutsk Oblast is 
located in south-eastern Siberia in the basins of Angara, Lena, and Nizhnyaya Tunguska Rivers, 
and occupies an area of 767,900 km² (4.6% of Russia's territory). The City of Bratsk is located in 
the North-West of Irkutsk Oblast near Bratsk water reservoir. The City of above 250,000 
inhabitants occupies a territory of 43,000 hectares. It was created in 1955 when the construction 
of the Bratsk Hydropower Plant (BHPP) started. Bratsk is one of the largest industrial centers of 
Eastern Siberia. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
The project will be implemented by the owner of BHPP, Irkutskenergo. Irkutskenergo (Irkutsk 
Joint Stock Company of Energy and Electrification) is the largest independent energy company 
in Russia with the headquarters in Irkutsk City, the capital of Irkutsk Oblast. The power 
generation base of Irkutskenergo comprises various hydro- and thermal power plants. The 
company is well experienced in the execution of major construction and maintenance works, 
1
Water regime of BHPP which means the support of water level in the reservoir in the prescribed range, the control of overflow 
water in the period of snowmelt flood, etc. is specified by the Yenisei Basin Water Directorate, the requirements of navigation, 
conservation of fish resources in the river Angara and normal water stream in the lower reach is taken into account.
 
Page  3
3
which are carried out with the approval of public authorities, including environmental protection 
agencies.  
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Environmental Specialist: Arcadie Capcelea 
Social Specialist: TBD 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The environmental 
category B
 was assigned due to the need for an EMP for the planned 
construction activities of the project. No significant negative environmental impacts are expected 
and the EMP will contain provisions mainly referring to good practice during routine civil and 
mechanical construction works. The main issues will likely relate to prevention of accidental 
pollution of the downstream aquatic environment, emission control (noise, dust), waste 
management and transport of the new turbine parts to the site (traffic safety, protection of local 
population on transport routes against noise, dust, exhaust emissions). This will include an 
assessment of the potential impacts of increased road traffic and the development related 
mitigation/ management measures. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
At an earlier stage of project preparation it was decided that the planned investment will not 
relate to the structural stability or performance of the dam. However during the Project Concept 
review the team will seek for the guidance on the issue of dam safety and if the full-scale dam 
safety analysis will have to be carried out later on.  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Disclosure Policy (OP 17.50) 
 X  
Safeguard documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal. 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared: N/A  
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the appraisal-
stage ISDS: 06/10/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
Page  4
4
The specific studies and their timing
2
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: 
 
An EMP will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Helmut Schreiber 
05/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Agi Kiss 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ranjit Lamech 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
2
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
5
