Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3425 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P110595 
Project Name: Public-Private Partnership Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Vickram Cuttaree 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (40%);General transportation sector 
(20%);General energy sector (20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s development objective is to increase private investment in priority sectors of the 
Russian economy using PPP instruments .  
 
These objectives will be met through (i) developing the capacity of Federal Ministry of 
Economic Development and Trade to identify, prepare, and implement large infrastructure PPP 
projects, including strengthening the existing Federal and Sub-National PPP framework; and (ii) 
strengthening the capacity of FASEZ to attract private sector partners to utilize SEZs to nurture 
innovation-based industries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost, which consists entirely of technical assistance (TA), is currently estimated 
at US$100 million, and would be supported by a Technical Assistance Loan (TAL) of US$50 
million and US$ 50 million government co-financing. . A TAL is being proposed due to the 
exclusive focus of the project on institutional capacity building and technical assistance. The 
Page  2
project is expected to be structured around three components: a PPP component, a SEZ 
component and a Project Management component.  
 
Component 1 (US$85 million): The PPP component would focus on strengthening the Federal 
PPP framework and developing PPP projects that will meet the Government development 
objectives and be attractive to the private investors. This component would support: (i) the 
development of federal and sub-national PPP legislation and regulations for specific sectors, (ii) 
development of knowledge and mechanisms to improve access to capital markets for the 
financing of PPP projects and reducing selected risks (iii) identification, evaluation, preparation 
and management of potential PPP projects including financial/economic feasibility studies and 
transaction advice at federal and sub-national levels, (iv) technical assistance to regions on 
identifying, developing and management PPP projects at the sub-national level; and (iv) capacity 
building both at federal and sub-national level on the above topics.  
 
Component 2 (US$10 million): The SEZ component would support FASEZ in development of 
efficient management system and promotion of SEZ concept and services to innovation-oriented 
investors. In particular, this component would support (i) strengthening institutional capacity of 
the Agency to manage the zones and service their clients efficiently through advisory services on 
policy, strategy and technical issues, training programs for the staff of the FASEZ and its 
regional branches, and (ii) conducting specific activities to attract investors and market the SEZs 
to Russian and international business community..  
 
Component 3 (preliminary cost 
–
about US$ 5 million): The Project Management component 
would provide assistance to the Russian Ministry of Economic Development and Trade and the 
FASEZ in the following areas (i) procurement and disbursement, (ii) accounting and financial 
reporting, and (iii) audit.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Russian Federation, areas in or near urban centers and existing infrastructure.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will not directly finance any PPP project. The Ministry of Economic Development 
and Trade is essentially involved in economic and financial matters and will not implement any 
of the potential PPP projects identified by the project. Targeted capacity building on 
environmental and social safeguards will be considered for the Ministries or agencies involved in 
the implementation of projects. Overall, safeguards capacity of the various Russian Ministries 
and agencies is likely to improve, with President Putin recent emphasis on the importance of 
environmental protection.  
 
FASEZ has some but limited safeguards capacity. The project’s TA activitieswillinclude the 
provision of environmental and social expertise and assistance for elaborating the few 
environmental documents required under a category C project to insure diligent processing of 
safeguards issues according to the World Bank’soperational policies.  
 
FASEZ will be assisted in training staff in elementary safeguards implementation and appoint a 
safeguards coordinator within the project implementation team.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
No Safeguard OP’s are triggered, based on the grounds that the project is solely providing 
technical assistance, including feasibility studies and advisory services for yet-to-be determined 
projects (including infrastructure). The project will  develop a medium-term PPP investment 
program, and support  feasibility studies to assess the economic and financial viability of projects 
under the program. The advisory works on PPP projects would support the PPP transaction 
(financial structuring and procurement) until financial close. The selected company or 
consortium, would be responsible for preparing the technical proposal, and would be guided by 
the framework developed in component 1. The projecct will help to strengthen the environmental 
and social aspects of the framework, consistent with the principles of the WB policies.  
 
This project will support measures to ensure that the TA provided at this preliminary stage 
is consistent with, and promotes the objectives of, the WB’s Safeguard Policies and international 
good practice. Such measures will likely include:  
 
*
inclusion of environmental and social “good practice” guidelines for different types of 
activities in the Operational Manual for PPP to be developed under the project;  
 
*
provision of TA on environmental and social aspects in Component 1 (Strengthening of 
the Federal PPP framework)  
 
*
inclusion of environmental and social aspects in the TORs for TA  
 
*
training/capacity building aspects of the project and in TORs for PPP project feasibility 
studies (these TORs being subject to No Objection by the Bank);  
 
*
prepare and implement a communication strategy on the nature and importance of 
environmental and social issues in PPP and on the respective roles and responsibilities of the 
Bank the Clients in this project  
 
Despite the category C rating the team will include both an environmental and a social 
safeguards specialist in the project team for both project preparation and implementation phases 
to diligently address the issues outlined above.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/27/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vickram Cuttaree 
02/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/22/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
02/22/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
