Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3284 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P108002 
Project Name: ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITIES 
Task Team Leader: Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 4, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (50%);Central government administration (50%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to support Russia’s effort to begin addressing the 
PEL issue through initiating development of the necessary legal and regulatory framework, the 
technical tools necessary to assess and prioritize long term actions, and undertaking a number of 
pilot investment operations in cleaning up high priority sites for which a variety of physical 
situations and financing mechanisms can be demonstrated.  
 
The expected outcomes associated with the project are: i) a sustained public policy commitment 
to systematically addressing PEL in the long term; (ii) improved legal clarity respecting 
responsibility for PEL and its transfer; (iii) established institutional capacity at the national level 
and in targeted regions to deal with the PEL issue on an ongoing basis; and (iv) emergence of 
technical and management capability to address PEl situations on a commercial basis.  
 
The expected outputs would be (i) number of institutional, legal and regulatory documents 
dedicated to addressing PEL issues on the national basis; (ii) a framework inventory and registry 
of PEL; (iii) practical methodological and regulatory tools for assessment, prioritization and 
Page  2
cleaning up PEL; (iv) 4 to 7 cleaned up pilot sites of PELs that can be replicated; and (v) a range 
of potential financial instruments for dealing with PEL on the national, regional and local level;   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project scope tracks from the results and recommendations of the joint 
Bank/government study work on PEL which was completed in 2007 . This study describes the 
current situation respecting PEL including its extensive scale, impacts, status of action on it, 
barriers to addressing it, international comparisons and action required to address it. The 
proposed project is structured in four components targeting key activities supporting such action 
on the issue as well as provide for project management. These components are described in the 
following.  
 
Component 1: Institutional and Regulatory Capacity Development and Strengthening: This 
component would focus on developing the institutional and legal framework within which the 
long term process of addressing the issue can be administered as a public policy. It would 
specifically aim at defining institutional focal points for the various aspect of the issue including 
responsibility for policy setting, information gathering, regulatory standards and enforcement, 
and functionally addressing PEL situations both financially and operationally.  It would seek to 
develop appropriate mechanisms for integration of state financing requirements within the 
national and regional program budgeting systems as well as make long term provision for 
acknowledgement of outstanding liabilities in public sector accounts.  
 
Component 2: Development and Application of PEL Assessment Tools: This component would 
be directed to developing and applying the principal technical and regulatory tools that are 
required to identify, inventory, assess and prioritize PEL, in support of both Components 1 and 
2. At the national level, inventory development would this might initially focus on relatively high 
level information and major situations of national importance, while the local level inventories 
would be more detailed, reflect local priorities and opportunities, and include public stakeholder 
involvement. This component It would also include the introduction of the modern practical 
methodologies for assessment and prioritizing of PEL in terms of environmental and health risk, 
setting performance based clean up or containment standards for addressing them and selecting 
techniques for undertaking feasibility studies and clean-up technologies.  
 
Component 3: Demonstration Investment Projects Addressing Priority PEL Situations: This 
component will deal with 4-6 specific priority PEL situations which would serve as 
demonstrations of various types of PEL and financing mechanisms that may be practical to 
realize at this initial stage.  These demonstrations might include some or all of the following 
situations:  
 
•
Brownfield urban re-development is a current priority in a number of places, being 
stimulated by demand for land where higher value development can occur and/or where 
residential/industrial land conflicts exist and social impacts are being experienced.  
 
•
Integration of industrial modernization/pollution abatement investment with clean up of 
PEL has been identified in viable enterprises, specifically in the chemical sector where 
investment in new low pollution technology and by-product management is linked to cleaning up 
land and waste disposal facilities containing significant legacies of organic chemical and heavy 
metal contamination. The Bank loan would be directed to PEL aspects while using this to 
Page  3
leverage cleaner production technology change and pollution abatement to ensure that the source 
of the PEL is eliminated.  
 
•
Creation of pilot sectoral PEL Clean Up programs using collective financing capacity 
funded by current and developing industrial operations may be used to addressing PEL issues 
associated with specific sectors particularly in resource development. His could include such as 
rehabilitation of old oil and gas fields, and various types of historic mining operations.  
 
•
Development of clean up support infrastructure will be required to support a sustained 
capacity to physically address PEL in the long term which might be promoted in close proximity 
to a cluster of PEL situations that it might commercially service.  
 
•
Public sector PEL clean up demonstrations addressing “orphan site” situationswhere the 
state must act to protect critical public health and/or environmental impacts, as well as providing 
the basis for longer term state programs where financing of these types of legacies are 
systematically addressed through regular budgeting.  
 
Component 4: Project Management: This component covers the administrative and project 
management costs associated with project implementation at both the federal and regional level 
in selected pilot regions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The specific locations of the Component 3 demonstration investment projects are not know at 
this stage, while some will be determined during preparation. However, based on the originating 
PEL study work and consultations with counterparts several candidate regional and 
municipalities have been identified including Kemerovo, Irkutsk, Bashkortostan and Volgograd 
regions. As discussed below all specific PEL clean up investments will have environmental 
implications both positive and potentially negative. As such, OP/BP 4.01 will apply regardless of 
candidate location.  They may also have similarly positive and potentially negative social 
impacts relevant to the safeguards analysis, particularly in urban areas where “brownfields” type 
investments may involve land use, social equity and local relocation issues.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While Russia has an established environmental review and assessment system, this has degraded 
at the federal level in terms of public sector resources available to it and recent legislative 
changes in its application. However, many regions have proactively established their own 
capability and the availability of local capacity and commitment in this area will be part of the 
selection criteria for pilot demonstration investment projects and regions. At both the Federal and 
regional level the recent transfer of environmental enforcement responsibility from Ministry of 
Natural Resources to Rostekhnadzor has provided a renewed regulatory focus on environmental 
management, particularly at the local level. Finally, the proposed implementation arrangements 
will involve the use of the National Pollution Abatement Facility Executive Directorate 
established for the environmental investment component of the on-going Russia Environmental 
Management Project as the project PIU.  The NPAF ED have undertaken more than 40 industrial 
pollution abatement project appraisals and have or are currently supervising 7 active investment 
projects. This includes undertaking and supervising environmental assessments in accordance 
with Bank standards and policies.  
 
Page  4
Notwithstanding the above, one of the main objectives of the project is to build institutional and 
technical capacity specific in relation to identification, evaluation, prioritization and ultimately 
clean up of contaminated sites, consistent with international experience. This should add 
substantially to the capacity within regulatory agencies and local authorities respecting 
environmental safeguards, particularly in areas such as risk assessment and technology/technique 
selection. This in turn is also a fundamental part of the environment assessment process that 
would be required under Bank safeguard policies. It would also be integrated with a high level of 
public consultation and disclosure, something is also an important part of both the Bank’s 
environmental and socially related safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The inherent nature of contaminated site clean up or containment activities dictates the need 
to appropriate environmental assessment both with respect to the situation being addressed and 
the approach taken to addressing it.  However, the depth and complexity of this environmental 
assessment required will be site specific and in fact will be determined incrementally through the 
generally adopted stepwise or staged approach to site assessment where by environmental and 
public health impacts are identified and assessed using risk assessment techniques and physical 
analysis of sites and their surroundings. It is planned to develop a comprehensive Framework EA 
document prior to appraisal of the project. Two public consultations will be undertaken: the first 
to discuss the draft TOR for the Framework document and the second to discuss the draft 
Framework document itself. It is also planned to identify at least one and at most two pilot 
subprojects at appraisal. The Framework document will be “field tested” on this (these) 
project(s). One or two public consultations to discuss EA/EMP will be undertaken for pilot 
subprojects depending on the EA category of pilot(s).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
There may be site specific situations where PEL investments could impact affected sites with 
cultural heritage particularly for the "brownfield" development.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There may be site specific situations where PEL investments could impact affected 
populations in such a way as to trigger this safeguard policy. This will be a factor in the selection 
of PEL pilot investments and the applicability of OP/BP 4.12 will be determined before 
appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/22/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Uncertain at this stage   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
12/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/14/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
12/18/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
