Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4086 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P114931 
Project Name: Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation 
Task Team Leader: Loraine Ronchi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 29, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (55%);Irrigation and drainage 
(45%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
26.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 8.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the commercialization and productivity 
of hillside agriculture targeted for development under the Project.  Specifically, the key outcome 
indicators for the project objective  are proposed as follows: (i) increased agricultural 
productivity of selected crops in targeted areas (MT/ha) (an agricultural productivity indicator); 
(ii) increased productivity of targeted areas ($/ha) (an overall productivity indicator that 
incorporates commercialization and income/welfare considerations); and (iii) increased share in 
commercialized products from the targeted areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The LWH Program, as conceived by Government is a two-phased program to implement 
improved land-husbandry and increased productivity in 101 pilot watersheds covering 30,250 ha 
of land, across 101 sites.  Some 12,000 ha of the 30,250 ha total will be irrigated. It is expected 
that a number of development partners will each finance a slice of the overall program, which 
therefore calls for strong programmatic guidance by the Government to ensure coherence, 
complementarities and adherence to a common approach, including safeguards. The Government 
Page  2
has therefore expressed its desire to have key development partners help in formulating a 
common framework of engagement (CFE) for investments in LWH.  Such a framework would 
include technical specifications (on quality and safety, a common economic and financial 
analysis (EFA) methodology, a common environmental and social safeguards framework 
(including common approaches to resettlement and land issues), common approaches to 
community engagement, and common socio-technical site selection criteria (see Section D 
below). Working with key partners, the World Bank-funded operation would assist the 
Government in the formulation of that framework, and then undertake a first phase of its use in 
investment through the development of 4-6 sites  under the LWH. The intention of the 
Government is to require LWH partners to adopt the CFE in their support for LWH.  
 
The project uses a watershed approach, inspired by the successful Loess Plateau experience in 
China. The LWH involves infrastructural development, closely linked to the mobilization and 
sensitization of farmers to intensification and to the use of good practice land husbandry 
technologies. Each site (average size of 400 ha) will be com
prised of an irrigated ‘command 
area’ accounting for roughly one quarter of the site size, while the remainder of the site is 
occupied by water harvesting infrastructure (dam and reservoir) and hillside hectares under 
improved land husbandry infrastructure and techniques. While the proposed irrigation 
technology has been shown in the overall program’s economic and financial analysis (EFA) to be 
a
cost effective technology choice, fully aligned with the Government’s land consolidation 
policy (a policy that stipulates the voluntary and non-expropriatory process of land consolidation 
for land-holders wishing to raise productivity), the EFA will be assessed on a site-by-site basis to 
ensure the selection of the most cost-effective approach and sites in each case. This selection 
process will form part of the Government’s common framework of engagement forinvestment 
under the LWH.   The Government’s current detailed proposal envisions that both the (irrigated) 
command area and, to some extent, the improved catchment areas be planted with horticultural 
crops, with a view to exporting high-valued products to premium niche markets; in particular, to 
organic markets. Plantain, pineapple, avocado, mango and coffee were initially identified (on 
agronomic criteria) as the focus crops.  Complementing the agronomic decision parameters, 
however, a wider market demand study would be key to maximizing the returns on the irrigation 
and land husbandry investments proposed under the LWH. The operation will need to carefully 
select the crops and varieties best adapted to domestic, regional and international markets.  
 
The LWH has three components: (A) Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening for 
Hillside Intensification; (B) Infrastructure for Hillside Intensification; and (C) Project 
Management through the SWAp.  
 
Component A: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening for Hillside 
Intensification would have four sub-components covering (i) support to farmer organizations; (ii) 
extension to develop the essential training of beneficiary farmers on the benefits of sustainable 
land husbandry and on the practical skills and technologies required for irrigated and non-
irrigated hillside intensification (e.g. grass stripping, intercropping, green manuring, etc.) ; (iii) 
support to marketing and financing activities to address the key constraints critical to the 
Government’s LWH Program objectives concerning horticultural export promotion, including, 
access to finance, market information and rural infrastructure  (e.g. cold chain, rural roads, etc.); 
(iv) institutional strengthening for MINAGRI and its agencies to improve their long term 
Page  3
capacity for hillside intensification, sustainable land management, and the associated 
environmental and social due diligence.  
 
Component B Infrastructure for Hillside Intensification provides the essential ‘hardware’ to 
accompany Component A. Its three sub-components are organized around the L, W and H of 
LWH: (i) Land husbandry infrastructure supports the development of participatory and 
comprehensive land husbandry practices in a sub-watershed setting by providing infrastructure 
appropriate to differing slope categories (e.g. afforestation, bunding, progressive and radical 
terracing, soil conservation, etc.) and includes downstream reservoir protection through the 
development of a silt trap zone for sediment reduction into the reservoir; (ii) Water harvesting 
infrastructure, including  valley dams and reservoirs; and (iii) Hillside irrigation infrastructure, 
developing the conveyance structures for hillside irrigation. This includes primary and secondary 
water distributions piping, fittings and field level application for basin or furrow irrigation. This 
component also includes command area management of irrigated hillside, such as land 
preparation/ leveling, etc.  
 
Implementation Arrangements: Kick-starting the SWAp  
 
Component C Project Management through the SWAp is designed to implement the LWH, 
while supporting the recently introduced sector wide approach (SWAp) in the agricultural sector 
in Rwanda. The nascent SWAp requires the establishment of implementation capacity in 
MINAGRI, in the place of many disparate project implementation units (PIUs).  The 
Government has therefore indicated their desire to pilot their implementation capacity of the 
SWAp (through a ‘SWAp Secretariat’), using this Bank/CIDA-financed slice of the LWH as the 
first operation to be implemented in this way. The Component will draw on and benefit from the 
existing IFAD/DFID support for SWAp implementation, including their funding and technical 
assistance for establishing and setting up the SWAp Secretariat.  In practical terms, while the 
SWAp Secretariat would initially apply to the Bank for no objections just as an independent PIU 
would, if the outcome of the ongoing assessment of Rwanda’s readiness for full adoption by the 
Bank of country systems is positive, the LWH could then transition to the use of country 
systems.  In sum, the implementation measures proposed would follow an initial period of “PIU 
style” procurement, that could either lead to the use of country systems and/or, at the end of the 
operation, to an experienced SWAp Secretariat. This would contribute significantly to the 
mainstreaming of the SWAp. As its lead donor in the sector, the Government looks to the Bank 
to set these examples and act as the catalyst for change.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The 101 sites tentatively proposed for the overall LWH program are distributed evenly 
throughout the country to ensure representation of different climatic and pedological conditions 
in the project. The subset of these sites to be financed by the World Bank, and, therefore, their 
location, is yet to be finalized. It is expected that the Bank financed sites will also be distributed 
through different watersheds. The selection of the sites will be governed by the LWH Common 
Framework for Engagement (CFE) and includes technical, environmental, social, agronomic, 
marketing and economic criteria.  
 
Page  4
The economic decision criteria for site selection is the economic rate of return (ERR), as 
calculated by a specifically formulated economic and financial analysis (EFA) methodology. The 
methodology, currently being developed by the Bank team, will serve as the common 
methodology for all LWH partners and specifically includes guidance on the quantitative 
inclusion of environmental and social costs and benefits. It is, in fact, because of the desire to 
include such costs and benefits, that the team is investing in the development of the EFA 
methodology, rather than using the standard EFA commonly applied.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower Capacity for safeguards implementation is uneven. On the one hand, Rwanda has a 
dynamic and professionally staffed environmental regulatory agency (REMA) with politically 
astute leadership and demonstrated experience in effective enforcement of environmental 
regulations (including against WB financed projects). REMA has been involved with MINAGRI 
in LWH program development since its early development, and REMA advice has been 
integrated into the LWH approach to environmental management. REMA also works closely 
with the District Environmental Officers who will be involved at site level environmental 
management of project activities, and with the MINAGRI environmental specialist.  
 
On the other hand, demand for REMA services outstrips its staffing, and both REMA and 
district level environmental staff indicated need for capacity strengthening focused on irrigation, 
watershed management, and other topics specific to this operation, and logistical support for 
adequate implementation of environmental safeguards measures. Refinement of REMA and 
other key players’ capacity assessment and the design of the corresponding capacity 
strengthening measures will continue as the project preparation proceeds.  
 
With respect to social safeguards, limited capacity exists to implement the project consistently 
with the Bank resettlement policy. Existence of lower level structures like the district land 
commission, sector and cell land committees,  in addition to the district land bureaus, and land 
evaluation and adjudication committees are key to improved capacity for handling land 
acquisition issues. Close technical support will be provided by the project during preparation and 
implementation to ensure compliance with not only domestic but also international good 
resettlement practice.  
 
The capacity strengthening measures will be outlined in the project safeguards documents and 
supported by the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
LWH will intensify agriculture and introduce sustainable land management in an agricultural 
landscape that is already extensively used and densely populated, with soils, flora, fauna, and 
sometime hydrology considerably altered or degrade
d, and at sites that are under current (and 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
frequently unsustainable) agricultural use. Given this setting, LWH is not likely to have 
significant environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse or unprecedented, nor provide 
potential risk for further environmental degradation (e.g. soil erosion, pesticide use, hydrological 
changes, wetland degradation, increase in waterborne diseases)  from the construction and use of 
irrigation infrastructure and overall agricultural intensification.  
 
At the site level, these risks will be managed through implementation of mitigation 
measures resulting from site specific Environmental Assessments/EMPs. At the level of the GoR 
overall LWH program, these risks will be managed through implementing recommendations of 
an overall Environmental Assessment of the LWH Program which includes consideration of 
potential cumulative impacts, and application of Environmental and Social Management 
Framework for the LWH Program which includes site screening and selection criteria 
(environmental and social).  
 
It is important to note that LWH is expected to yield significant positive environmental 
impacts through promotion of sustainable land management, catchment conservation, exclusion 
of vulnerable portions of the pilot watershed from current unsustainable agricultural use, for 
afforestation, and other measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
LWH activities may potentially contribute to degradation of natural habitats such as wetlands 
downstream of the command area and remnants of natural vegetation in the catchment. These 
risks will be managed through implementation of the instruments mentioned above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
LWH may be implemented at sites where remnants of forests exist, thus, it may have “impact 
on the health and quality of forests”, triggering the forests policy. Potential impacts on forests 
will be addressed through the site specific EAs mentioned above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
LWH aims to bring about agricultural intensification, shift to cash and export crops, may lead 
to increase use of pesticides despite its explicit efforts to promote organic agriculture (targeting 
organic export markets in Europe). Therefore, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared 
and implemented to promote integrated pest management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Construction activities may lead to opportunistic finds of archaeological artifacts. Chance 
find provisions will, therefore, be included in construction contracts and potential for impact on 
other physical cultural resources will be addressed by the site specific EAs.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
There are no known ethnic groups categorized as indigenous people in Rwanda (the Twa) in 
the project area. During implementation the project will identify and mitigate adverse impacts on 
any vulnerable groups of people in the project area. This issue was assessed and clarified in a 
special Safeguards mission (09/2008) at an early stage of project identification.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is expected to support land husbandry infrastructure appropriate to differing 
slope categories (e.g. afforestation, bunding, terraces, etc.); water harvesting infrastructure, 
including valley dams and reservoirs; and hillside irrigation infrastructure, together with 
conveyance structures for hillside irrigation including primary and secondary water distributions 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
piping, fittings etc. Such activities imply the need for land acquisition and hence triggering the 
policy. Since details of the subprojects are not known, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Irrigation dams will be designed by qualified engineers, and dam safety measures will be 
incorporated in dam operations guidelines. Dam Safety Plans for large dams will be prepared and 
disclosed.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Riparian notification will be issued by the Government.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The following safeguards instruments:  
 
1.
Overall Environmental Assessment of the LWH Program;  
 
2.
ESMF for the LWH Program,  
 
3.
PMP for the IDA project; and  
 
4.
RPF will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal anticipated by April 30, 2009.  
 
Site specific EAs for sites identified for development under the IDA project during 
appraisal will be begun as soon as possible after site identification, particularly those slotted 
for develo;pment during the first year of the IDA project. As required, the specific studies 
and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Implementation of these instruments in the proposed IDA LWH project will be 
implemented by the Borrower, and supervised and funded (except RAP compensation) by 
IDA. Implementation of these instruments for the GoR LWH Program will be funded by 
GoR and/or other donors, and supervised by GoR.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Loraine Ronchi 
01/26/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/27/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/27/2009 
Comments:   
