Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC3360
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P105176 
Project Name:  Rwanda Second Rural Sector Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Morris 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Irrigation and drainage 
(30%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (P);Water resource 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural production and 
marketing in marshland and hillside areas targeted for development under the Project in 
an environmentally sustainable manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will have three components (two technical components and one project 
implementation component). The two technical components, which are fully aligned with 
the Government’s national agricultural development strategy as articulated in the Plan 
Strategique pour la Transformation Agricole (PSTA), all include capacity building and 
institutional development activities. Since the Project will be the second phase of a 
planned three-phase APL, many of the proposed activities are designed to extend the 
reach and/or scale up the intensity of activities currently being implemented successfully 
under the ongoing first phase of the APL. At the same time, several new activities will be 
added based on lessons learned during the first phase, particularly activities related to 
Page  2
building the knowledge base for sustainable intensification of hillside production 
systems.  
 
Component 1. Marshlands and hillsides rehabilitation and development  
 
The objective of Component 1 is to expand irrigated area in cultivated marshlands and 
increase use of sustainable land management practices on associated hillsides to 
accelerate the pace of intensification of agriculture. Component 1 will rehabilitate or 
develop irrigation infrastructure on at least 3,300 hectares of marshlands, and it will 
promote adoption of sustainable land management practices on at least 9,900 hectares of 
associated hillsides. Performance indicators include the area developed for irrigation in 
marshlands, the area put under sustainable land management practices on associated 
hillsides, and the recovery of irrigation operation and maintenance (O&M) costs by 
Water Users Associations (WUAs).  
 
Two sub-components will be supported under Component 1:  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Marshlands rehabilitation and development  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Sustainable development of hillsides  
 
Component 2. Strengthening commodity chains  
 
The objective of Component 2 is to support commercialization of smallholder 
agriculture in targeted marshland and hillside areas by intensifying production, expanding 
access to markets, and promoting agricultural value addition. Building on the improved 
primary production capacity achieved under RSSP1, RSSP2 will support the 
development of modern commodity chains for selected commodities. Using a holistic 
approach, the Project will simultaneously address constraints in the upper (production), 
middle (processing), and lower (marketing) stages of the commodity chain. The Project 
will focus mainly on strengthening commodity chains for leading food staples, including 
rice, potatoes, and maize, but it will remain responsive to the broader needs of 
marshlands and hillsides users and will respond to requests to provide support for other 
commodities. Performance indicators will include increased production, increased 
professionalism of farmers’ associations and cooperatives, increased value adding 
activity, and increased market participation of Project beneficiaries.  
 
Four sub-components will be supported under Component 2:  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening farmer organizations and cooperatives  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Improved production technologies  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Rural investments for economic infrastructure  
 
Sub-component 2.4: Knowledge generation and dissemination  
 
Component 3. Project management  
 
Page  3
Component 3 will support the Project Support and Coordination Unit (PSCU) to ensure: 
(i) efficient execution of administrative, financial management, and procurement 
functions; (ii) coordination of Project activities among the various stakeholders; (iii) 
timely implementation and monitoring of environmental and land-use management 
frameworks mandated by World Bank safeguards policies; and (iv) establishment and 
operation of an effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. The Government and 
the World Bank have both expressed a strong commitment to the principles enshrined in 
the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, so implementation arrangements will be 
designed with a view to transitioning administrative and management functions currently 
being carried out by the PSCU to Government ministries and agencies, as these develop 
the necessary capacity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will work in selected marshlands and hillsides throughout the national 
territory.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Improvements to irrigated agriculture in marshlands have the potential to alter 
hydrological conditions in the target watersheds, reduce natural habitats, and affect water 
quality from runoff of excess fertilizers and pesticides. A few families are likely to need 
resettlement support due to project investments.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternate layouts of marshland irrigation investments will be considered to minimize the 
loss of natural habitats, and provide buffer zones for the removal of runoff nutrients and 
pesticides.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment (EA) of RSSP2 marshland investments has been 
undertaken that includes Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for all proposed 
investments in irrigated marshland agriculture and associated hillsides. As well, an 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for aniticipated investments in 
rural infrastructures, a Pest Management Plan (PMP), and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) have been prepared. Borrower capacity has grown steadily through 
RSSP1 and is adequate to implement these safeguards instruments.  
 
Based on their experience implementing RSSP1, and having also assisted with the 
preparation of many of the safeguards-related assessments, plans and frameworks, PSCU 
technical staff have acquired substantial knowledge of World Bank safeguards policies. 
Given adequate resources, and assuming they can count on technical assistance from 
REMA and the GEF-financed Integrated Management of Critical Ecosystems Project 
(IMCEP), they a
re capable of implementing the requirements of the World Bank’s 
safeguards policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Preparation of the EAs and EMPs involved consultations with local residents in project 
areas concerning the environmental values that may be affected by Project-financed 
activities and how these values might be protected. Preparation of the PMP involved 
consultations with farmers to assess pest issues and evaluate current farmer practices. 
Preparation of the RPF involved local consultations about the appropriate compensation 
values, and previous compensation due to RSSP activities.  
 
The detailed preparation of all RSSP2 investments in marshland and hillsides 
development or rural infrastructure will involve consultations with stakeholders regarding 
their needs and desires. Stakeholders’ preferences will be taken into account before sub-
project designs are finalized. An important aspect of these consultations involves 
agreeing with the stakeholders how the investments will be locally managed after they 
have been completed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/23/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Morris 
01/31/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
01/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
01/31/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/31/2008 
Comments:   
