Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/15/2009 
Report No.:  AC4321
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P111567 
Project Name:  Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up and SWAp Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (60%);Renewable energy (20%);Power (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve access to reliable and affordable 
electricity services for households and priority public institutions.  
 
Although not explic
itly monitored as part of the government’s Economic Development 
and Policy Reduction Strategy, the project will also support efforts to increase productive 
use of electricity in the targeted areas to stimulate economic growth and job creation. Job 
creation will be achieved both through capacity building and employment of the local 
contracting industry and as an indirect benefit through provision of affordable and 
reliable electricity to industry (through the "Grid Roll-out" component).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components (1) Grid Roll-out; (2)”Green connections”; and(3) 
Technical assistance, capacity strengthening, and implementation support.  
 
COMPONENT 1. Grid rollout  (USD 51 Million) -   The investment program has been 
divided into the following subcomponents:  
Page  2
•
Subcomponent A: Grid intensification in Urban and Peri-Urban areas: The project 
will finance a grid intensification program for already connected urban areas with the 
target of doubling the number of consumers from today’s 110,000 to 210,000 households 
by end-2012. The program will initially focus on the larger cities such as Kigali, 
Cyangugu, Huye, Kibuye, Giseniy, Gitarama and Ruhengeri where the “unserved” 
potential is believed to be the highest.  
 
•
Subcomponent B: Electrification of new districts and sectors including MV 
extensions and LV reticulation: The project will finance extension of the existing national 
grid to previously unconnected areas identified in the National Electricity Access 
Program (NEAP) prospectus where there are major clusters of potential demand 
proximate to existing grid supply points.  
 
•
Subcomponent C: Backbone MV/HV grid strengthening, improved operational 
capacity and service network expansion: Investments will be focused on continued 
rehabilitation and capacity improvement of the existing grid infrastructure, started under 
the IDA funded UER project, including upgrade of the existing Kigali underground cable 
network rehabilitation needs as identified in the ELGZ Energy audit to be completed in 
2009. Support will also be provided to Electrogaz to extend its service network to new 
areas.  
 
COMPONENT 2.  “Green connections” (USD 6 Million) - The project will finance a 
range of activities to improve energy efficiency and affordability for consumers and 
reduce the need for additional generation resources through:  
 
Efficient lighting – To improve affordability and reduce impact on supply, eachnew 
customer will receive 4 CFLs (Compact fluorescent Lights, 2pcs 100W equivalent for 
space lighting and 2 pcs 60 w equivalent for task lighting) as the new meter is installed.  
 
•
Energy efficiency – The program will support incentives to promote the use 
ofsolar hot water heaters sold through private dealers.  The incentive scheme will 
introduce a voucher system to provide partial subsidies for households (up to 40% of an 
estimate capital cost of USD 1200 per unit) and a credit scheme to cover part of the 
remaining investment cost paid by monthly installments on the Electricity bill.  
 
•
Solutions adapted for low income households – The program will support 
initiatives to buy down connection costs further for the poorest households including 
mainstreaming the use of low cost “ready boards” for poor households to reduce the need 
for internal wiring and enable households in dwellings previously not eligible for a 
connection (such as thatched roof houses and temporary constructions) to qualify for a 
connection.  
 
COMPONENT 3.Technical assistance, capacity strengthening, and implementation 
support (USD 6 Million) –This component will finance technical assistance and capacity 
building. The program is focused on three main areas of support (i) Electrogaz 
Institutional Strengthening and Program implementation; (ii) Development of a Sector 
Wide Approach for the Energy sector; (iii) Technical assistance to develop strong sector 
institutions and strategies   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project investments target areas identified in the National Electricity Access Program 
(NEAP) access prospectus to be suitable for grid connection following a least cost 
prioritization model. The grid roll-out component will initially focus on urban areas with 
a
large potential to connect poorer households at relatively lower cost per connection. 
The program will then gradually move out to green-field areas close to the existing grid.  
 
Specific sub-project locations  will be determined during project implementation.  The 
use of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the use of a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) are therefore required for this project because it is 
not possible to ascertain the precise location of investments and the nature of site-specific 
impacts at this stage.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
•The Rwanda Electricity Access and Scale up and SWAp Development Project activities 
may have limited adverse environmental and social impacts. The Project has therefore 
been rated Category B under the World Bank Policy on Environmental Assessment 
(OP4.01), requiring a partial Environmental Assessment (EA). An Environment and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared which establishes a 
mechanism to determine and assess future potential environmental and social impacts of 
the Ministry for Infrastructure planned investments/activities under the proposed Project. 
The use of a Framework is required for this project because it is not possible to ascertain 
the precise location of investments and the nature of site-specific impacts at this stage. 
The ESMF outlines a screening and review process, which will determine whether a 
particular subproject will trigger a safeguard policy, and what mitigation measures will 
Page  4
need to be put in place. The screening and review process will also ascertain if any 
subprojects have potentially significant impacts, which would require more detailed study 
and the need for subproject specific EAs and/or EMPs.  
 
•The design and implementation of Project Component A (Grid Roll Out) is 
highlylikely to involve some land acquisition and so compensation and resettlement of 
the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) will be necessary,  as defined under O.P. 4.12 – 
Involuntary Resettlement. Owing to the nature of the project, the exact location, nature 
and magnitude of sub-projects to be financed by the project cannot be determined prior to 
project design. Consequently it is not yet possible to prepare detailed Resettlement 
Action Plans, which specify the detailed mitigation measures and develop strategies to 
provide for livelihood restoration in line with international standards.  A Resettlement 
Policy Framework has been developed to provide guidelines on how the projects will 
avoid, manage or mitigate potential risks and the process by which Resettlement Action 
Plans will be prepared and implemented during the project implementation period. The 
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans will be required once the location and scope of 
individual subprojects is known.  
 
•Overall, the project is likely to have a positive impact on the environment inRwanda.  
Any adverse environmental impacts on the environment are not expected to be 
significant. The project will not pose major or significant risks to biodiversity, natural 
habitats and wetlands as it will not fund activities in protected areas, national parks or 
wetlands.  
 
•By reducing the demand for fuel wood and charcoal as the main source of energy, the 
project has the potential to alleviate some of the root causes of deforestation in Rwanda 
through the supply of a predictable and reliable electrical power supply. This will have a 
cumulative positive impact on the conservation of forest ecosystems and their function as 
a
natural habitat.  
 
•The project’s promotion of solar hot water heaters and specific initiatives tobuy down 
connection costs for the poorest households including mainstreaming of the use of low 
cost “ready boards” in homes, will reduce the consumption of polluting and costly fossil 
fuels and the depletion of non-renewable biomass.  
 
•Compact Fluorescent Lighting (CFLs) contain traces of mercury requiring special care 
for transport, handling, disposal, and recycling.  
 
•Other project environmental impacts are short term and relate to the construction phase 
of infrastructure.  
 
•While it is unlikely that groups of ‘people left behind by history’ [Rwanda's accepted 
term for Indigenous Peoples] reside in potential project areas, and it is therefore not 
anticipated that they would be negatively affected by the project, the socio-economic 
study and baseline census to be conducted in the preparation of RAPs for sub-projects 
Page  5
will be able to determine this.  If it is determined that such groups are adversely affected, 
appropriate measures will be taken to mitigate this impact as delineated under OP 4.10.  
 
•The socio-economic study will also pay special attention to impacts on other vulnerable 
communities, including Internally Displaced Persons, returning and returned refugees; 
persons affected by HIV/AIDS; orphans and street children, and elderly persons. The 
study will also take care to identify impacts on widowers/widow/female/child headed 
households and single women, small-scale female farmers, and non-farming females.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative of a private sector led scale-up program for the grid rollout program was 
rejected taking into account several factors; (i) lack of a strong private sector base in the 
country suited to the job at hand; (ii) Electrogaz is the strongest sectoral institution and 
has charted a remarkable turnaround while gearing up aggressively to meet 
implementation challenges ahead. Significantly Electrogaz has been making greater use 
of external local contractors to further accelerate the pace of new connections, and under 
the project will also in parallel be mounting systematic efforts to build the capacity of 
local contractors and related supply chains to support program implementation -  simple 
designs, procurement, and construction -  in the medium term. Through working with the 
public sector and local contractors, environmental and social safeguard capacity will be 
built up domestically.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
•As there is no disposal and recycling system in place in Rwanda to date, a study will be 
conducted to provide guidance to the Rwandan government about CFL waste 
management. The study, which will target several countries, is expected to be conducted 
from March-December 2009. Waste disposal of used incandescent bulbs (IBs) will be 
addressed through ensuring that all the IBs collected in exchange for the CFLs are stored 
securely in a warehouse until a comprehensive disposal plan is prepared. An awareness 
building programme will be undertaken to ensure that consumers are aware of the need to 
dispose properly of CFLs and to handle breakages with care.  
 
•Other environmental and social safeguard issues are detailed in full in the ESMF and 
RPF.  
 
•Effective implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
will require that adequate capacity enhancement within institutions and other 
stakeholders be undertaken. There will be training for project Environmental and Social 
Specialists, Electrogaz Engineering and Survey staff (at least 2) at the national level, and 
REMA.  The training will cover implementation of the ESMF including project 
Page  6
screening, impact identification and analysis, Environmental Assessment procedures and 
requirements (EA and EIA), design and implementation of mitigation measures at sub 
project level, monitoring and review of environmental performance and reporting. 
Electrogaz design engineers at the national and local level will specifically require some 
degree of good environmental practice training because they are involved in the survey 
and design of the transmission lines and substations including project. Equally vital is 
training of the district/local level environmental officers within REMA who will also be 
involved in project implementation including supervision and monitoring of 
environmental aspects and undertaking review of the screening report.  
 
•Stakeholder groups including local authorities, Electrogaz, MININFR and 
MINITERRE will be provided with training necessary to equip them with skills to screen 
subproject activities for social impacts, prepare RAPs, and implement activities as set out 
in the RPF and subsequent RAPs. The national and local level institutions will appraise 
the planned interventions, and approve RAPs prior to commencement of the subprojects.  
 
Similarly, all resettlement related activities (including but not limited to compensation) 
will be completed prior to commencement of the subproject. Compensation and other 
resettlement issues will be funded from government counterpart funds or sectoral budget.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
•Electrogaz assisted by its Environment Adviser and the RWANDA Electricity Access 
Scale-up Project - Sectorwide Approach (EASP) local environmental specialist will 
monitor the environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures of their own 
planned activities as contained in their cleared and approved EMP and technical designs.  
 
The Environment Adviser will monitor and evaluate the environmental and social 
impacts at all project sites, regularly and as frequently as required and will maintain 
suitable records to be made available to the Rwanda Environmental Management 
Authority (REMA). The Environment Adviser will also be responsible for monitoring 
impacts and mitigation measures resulting from the actions of their contractors, 
transporters, suppliers and all third parties in the course of their duties under this project. 
The EA will prepare and submit periodic monitoring reports to Electrogaz and REMA.  
 
EASP will recruit a locally based environmental specialist who will be paired by the EA 
for a period of 6 months to learn and acquire on the job skills related to preparation of 
EMPs and monitoring. After this period the EASP local environmental specialist (if 
assessed to have adequate capacity) will take over all the duties of the EA.  
 
REMA will play the leading oversight role of monitoring the environmental activities of 
this project.  
 
•For the CFL program, the main implementing agency for the project is Electrogaz, 
through a Project Management Department (PMD) that will bear responsibility for the 
full CFL project.  
Page  7
•The Ministry of Infrastructure will oversee all resettlement planning and coordinate all 
issues relating to compensation. The project team will also collaborate with Local 
Authorities falling within the project area throughout the compensation procedure (as 
delineated in the RPF).  
 
Public consultation will be an on-going and regular activity through out the entire 
project cycle. Public consultation would also occur during the preparation of the (i) socio-
economic study, (ii) the resettlement and compensation plan (iv) the environmental 
impact assessment and (v) during the drafting and reading of the compensation contract.  
 
Resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared in consultation with the affected 
individuals and communities. Resettlement assistance and compensation for 
impacts/losses will also be determined through the same consultative process to ensure 
that no one is left worse off as a result of the project. RAPs preparation and 
implementation will be based on existing laws and regulations of Rwanda, as well as 
World Bank Policy OP/BP 4.12. Public participation and consultation will take place 
through meetings, radio programs, request for written proposals/comments, filling in of 
questionnaires/ application forms, public readings and explanations of project ideas and 
requirements, making public documents available at the National, local and homestead 
levels at suitable locations including the official residences/offices of local chiefs/elders.  
 
The grievance redress mechanisms have been well laid out in the RPF, and they utilize 
the existing systems and structures from the lowest levels through local governments. If 
all these channels for handling complaints fail, then the aggrieved individuals can resort 
to Rwanda Courts of Law.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/29/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/29/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
04/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
04/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
04/15/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/15/2009 
Comments:   
