Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4254
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P114931 
Project Name:  Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation 
Task Team Leader:  Loraine Ronchi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (55%);Irrigation and drainage 
(45%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (67%);Other rural development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
34.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.50 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
7.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 8.00 
 Local 
Communities 
2.50
22.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the productivity and 
commercialization of hillside agriculture targeted for development under the Project.  
Specifically, the key outcome indicators for the project objective are proposed as follows:  
(i) increased productivity of targeted irrigated command areas ($/ha); (ii) increased 
productivity of targeted non-irrigated command areas ($/ha); and  (iii) increased share in 
commercialized products from the targeted areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening for Hillside 
Intensification  
 
Page  2
The objective of Component A is to develop the capacity of individuals and institutions 
for improved hillside land husbandry, stronger agricultural value chains and expanded 
access to finance.  Component A includes four sub-components:  
 
Sub-component A1: Strengthening Farmer Organizations  
 
Sub-Component A2:  Extension  
 
Sub-component A3: Marketing and Finance  
 
Sub-Component A4:  Institutional strengthening and Capacity Building: MINAGRI  
 
and its Agencies  
 
Component B :Infrastructure for Hillside Intensification  
 
The objective of this component is to provide the essential "hardware" for hillside 
intensification to accompany the capacity development and institutional strengthening 
activities of Component A. Its three sub-components are organized around the L, the W 
and the H of LWH: (i) Land husbandry infrastructure supports the development of 
participatory and comprehensive land husbandry practices in sub-watersheds; (ii) Water 
harvesting infrastructure, including valley dams and reservoirs; and (iii) Hillside 
irrigation infrastructure, including the development of the conveyance structures for 
hillside irrigation. Altogether, the project will develop about 5,000 ha, utilizing a 
participatory sub-watershed approach . Three sub components will be will be supported 
under Component B:  
 
Sub-Component B1: Land husbandry Infrastructure  
 
Sub-Component B2:  Water harvesting infrastructure  
 
Sub-Component B3 : Irrigation infrastructure  
 
Component C: Implementation through the Ministerial SWAp Structure  
 
The objective of Component C is to ensure that Project activities are effectively 
managed within the new SWAp structure for Ministerial implementation of programs and 
projects at MINAGRI.    With the very recent restructuring of MINAGRI, both as part of 
a
Government-wide rationalization  and to facilitate the implementation of the 
agricultural sector's nascent SWAp, the World Bank is committed to helping MINAGRI 
effectively manage and implement its programs and projects without the creation of new 
project implementation units (PIUs).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Preliminary site selection for the Project takes place in 6 watersheds  in four Districts  
covering about 5,000 ha. Selection of the watersheds is based on the specific criteria 
developed with Government as part of their Common Framework for Engagement (CFE). 
These include (i) social criteria (responsiveness/interest of beneficiaries; district 
leadership and ownership; level of social impact, including the number of beneficiaries 
on the site, the proportion of female-headed households therein, rainfall and livelihood 
factors such as flood risk and drought prevalence; and the number of displaced 
Page  3
households relative to the site size); (ii) economic criteria (site-specific rate of return, 
year-round access to markets); and (iii) technical and environmental criteria (sufficient 
water harvesting potential for command size; severity of soil erosion; a moisture regime 
where water harvesting and irrigation makes a difference, i.e. distribution of rainfall over 
the year, coincidence of excess rainfall and drought); and the level of environmental 
impact of the watershed and on downstream marshlands. The full set of 101watersheds  
covering 30,250 ha in 17 Districts in the Government's overall LWH Program  have been 
identified by pre-feasibility studies and the Project team made a preliminary selection of 
6
sites from among these using the site selection criteria noted above. The selection must 
be confirmed during appraisal, particularly with respect to the subjective assessment of  
community buy-in and district ownership.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main environmental safeguards issues for the Project relate to (i) hydrological impact 
of water harvesting, water abstraction and changes to water outflows from the dams and 
irrigation systems, changes in water table and soil salinity, changes in water quality and 
eutrophication and siltation of water bodies, and associated impacts on downstream 
aquatic habitats and biodiversity, (ii) radical terracing and other earthworks in the 
command area and associated impacts on soil as well as potential increase in the use of 
agro-chemicals and spread of agricultural weeds;  (iii) afforestation of steep slopes, 
establishment of no-use areas on the most fragile slopes and other land husbandry 
measures and associated impacts from potential technical or institutional failure of these 
measures, and (iv) human health and safety impacts from waterborne diseases.  
 
Page  4
The key social safeguard issues arise from permanent and temporary land-taking that is 
required for establishment of water reservoirs, development of primary and secondary 
water distribution channels, and construction  of terraces.  
 
In particular:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
OP 4.01 is triggered due to potential adverse environmental impacts of dams, irrigation 
systems, and radical terracing. The EA summarizes the potential adverse environmental 
impacts of LWH activities, clarifying mitigation in the ESMF. It also clarifies that they 
are mostly short term.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
OP 4.04 is triggered due to potential impacts on natural habitats on target sites, as well 
as on downstream wetlands and water bodies, and the vegetation cover in the catchments. 
The EA findings indicate that downstream impacts are likely to include a temporary 
shortage in downstream water availability, changing flood plain, land use and ecology 
downstream for a short period.  The EA emphasizes the temporary nature of this impact. 
Further, as the target sites are heavily cultivated already, no site-level natural habitats 
have been identified so far.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
 
The EA confirms that the majority of Project area is heavily cultivated.  OP 4.36 is 
triggered due to planned aforestation of catchments and protection of the existing 
catchment forests, which will (positively) affect quality and health of forests. Due to a 
positive trigger, mitigation measures are non-applicable (N/A). No commercial logging is 
planned.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)  
 
OP 4.09 is triggered due to the possibility for induced increase in the use of agro-
chemicals associated with intensified agriculture, although the organic market is one of 
the primary potential LWH outlets. The EA concludes that if inorganic pesticides are 
used, that based on the average use levels, magntitude of impact is expected to be 
minimal.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
 
OP 4.11 is triggered due to the possibility of chance finds of physical cultural resources 
during earthworks for dam and irrigation infrastructure.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
OP 4.12 is triggered by the land taking for the project infrastructure.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
OP4.37 is triggered since pre-feasibility studies concluded that for at least some sites in 
the Government's program,  the optimum dam height may exceed 15 meters.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
Page  5
OP 7.50 is triggered since the project will affect quantity and quality of international 
waterways in the Nile Basin.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)  
 
Careful consideration was also made to the application of OP 4.10 for this project with 
regard to communities that have been historically marginalized due to cultural and 
political reasons, including the Batwa ethnic group, who in the past had distinct 
livelihoods.  It is estimated by the Government of Rwanda that 25-30,000 of these 
historically marginalized people live in Rwanda at present. A socio-economic survey 
undertaken in 2004 notes that the historically marginalized people live in small groups 
dispersed throughout the country and earn their livelihoods as potters, laborers and 
porters. Further, the survey notes that these people do not participate in traditional 
community life distinct to the group, although they would be considered vulnerable. The 
survey also concludes that only about 14% of these people which is about 920 households 
live in rural areas, where the LWH project will necessarily operate (as an agricultural 
project).  
 
Paragraph 9 of OP 4.10 provides that "the breadth, depth and type of analysis in the 
social assessment are proportional to the nature and scale of the proposed project's 
potential effects on the IPs." The Project therefore first assessed the nature and scale of 
the Project's likelihood to effect the IPs (see paragraph on "low likelihood" below), and 
then screened for the presence of any Indigenous Peoples, as defined by OP4.10 (see 
"OP4.10 screening for LWH" below). Namely (a) self-identification as members of a 
distinct indigenous cultural group and recognition of this identity by others; (b) collective 
attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories  in the project area 
and to the natural resources in these habitats and territories; (c) customary cultural, 
economic, social or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant 
society and culture; and (d) an indigenous language, often different from the official 
language of the country or region.  
 
OP4.10  
 
Low initial likelihood: If the rural historically marginalized people are evenly 
distributed in rural areas across the country, this implied a priori that that the likelihood 
of these 920  households falling into the four (out of 27) rural districts in which the 
Project is likely to operate is quite low. In fact, all of the 101 sites for hillside 
intensification of agriculture (in the Government's entire LWH Program)  are located in 
rural areas where farmers in one way or another are engaged in agriculture, by definition 
(NB: This Project will not be implemented in the high altitude forest areas that according 
to anthropological experts are the remaining geographically distinct ancestral areas to 
which the historically marginalized people have traditionally been collectively attached.) 
Since the historically marginalized people are largely socially integrated, no longer 
participate in the distinct livelihoods (that includes hunting and gathering), and constitute 
a
small fraction of the 1.59 million households in rural Rwanda, the likelihood that the 
Government Program will negatively affect a group that is expected to have maintained 
its livelihood as described by OP 4.10 is very low. For the Project itself, covering only 
six sites, the likelihood is even lower. This includes those that might have been subject to 
"forced severance" as described under OP 4.10.  
Page  6
OP4.10 screening for LWH: Notwithstanding the small number of rural historically 
marginalized households in Rwanda, the small likelihood that these would be found in 
groups, and the even smaller likelihood that if there were such groups, they would be 
living a traditional lifestyle, a screening was undertaken during Project preparation in 
areas likely to be served by the Project for field verification of an emerging conclusion 
that Indigenous Peoples would not be affected by the project.  
 
In determining whether OP 4.10 applies to the LWH Project, the following activities 
were undertaken and key points noted:  
 
#
Mayors, other local leaders and community members were consulted in seven 
communities of Kayonza, Bugesera, Karongi and Gatsibo districts. These districts are 
included in the proposed Rwanda LWH Project and are notable rural growth centers (that 
may also be considered for rural electricity connections under the Rwanda Electricity 
Access Scale Up project). Discussions with both men and women provided no evidence 
of distinct historically marginalized groups or individuals in the visited localities. There 
are no separate languages in use, nor any geographically distinct habitats or ancestral 
territories  in the Project area, etc. The limited screening by the Bank's Social 
Development Specialist was undertaken as a pulse taking and a modest effort in light of 
OP 4.10, given the low chances of expected impact on the historically marginalized 
people.  
 
#
Further to this modest effort, the socio-economic studies undertaken for the sites 
being considered for the Project did not yield information on indigenous people with 
distinct livelihoods that might be affected by the project. For example,  no evidence of 
"customary cultural, economic, social or political institutions that are separate from those 
of the dominant society and culture", such as the traditional Batwa custom of temporary 
shelters,  was found. Instead,  for example, the studies showed 100% of households 
owning residences (100%), and made out of earth walls and iron sheets roofing.  It also 
showed varying education levels within existing institutions (not separate from those of 
dominant society and culture), etc.  
 
Based on the above analysis, it was concluded that OP 4.10 does not apply to the 
proposed LWH project.  
 
Further to this screening, the recently commissioned Strategic Social Assessment will 
undertake, among other tasks, to identify any historically marginalized and vulnerable 
groups by conducting a self-identification survey in potential Project-affected areas. (This 
activity was prepared in order to better plan for the participation of vulnerable groups  in 
the proposed LWH project, including historically marginalized groups, returning and 
returned refugees, persons affected by HIV/Aids, orphans, widows /widowers and the 
elderly). This activity, with respect to OP4.10, will extend the screening beyond that 
which was done in the seven communities and followed up with the socio economic 
studies. Should the Strategic Social Assessment identify the presence of historically 
marginalized people, the Team will follow up with a screening during appraisal by the 
Safeguards Specialist to determine whether these are Indigenous People, as defined by 
OP4.10. In all cases, should vulnerable people that may be relevant to OP4.10 be 
unexpectedly noted through the preparation of the strategic social assessment or other 
project activities, and require the application of OP 4.10, an Indigenous Plan will be 
prepared in accordance with the policy.  
Page  7
Note that in general, the main Project impact on any  low-income household, including 
those who might be from the historically marginalized groups, would be the provision of 
targeted assistance to those who would like to improve their livelihoods through land use 
management measures for increased productivity and commercialization of hillside 
agriculture. Negative impacts, if any, would be related to both permanent and temporary 
land acquisition associated with land husbandry measures for hillside agriculture in 
selected sites (e.g. establishment of reservoirs, development of primary and secondary 
water distributions, and construction and maintenance of terraces). These issues have 
been addressed in the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that will be disclosed in 
accordance with OP 4.12. The RPF provides for impact on all groups of vulnerable and 
marginalized men and women, including returning and returned refugees, people affected 
by HIV/Aids, orphans and the elderly.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect project impacts include increased use of agro-chemicals (although the project 
supported crops will targets the organic market niche, therefore, agro-chemical use 
increase is expected to be modest), and social changes associated with shift to irrigated 
agriculture and consolidation of farming and catchment management efforts in target 
areas.  
 
Long term impacts include water abstraction and changes to the hydrological regime, 
and changes in land use and land cover in the catchment and the command area (e.g. 
afforestation in the catchment, and shift to high value crops in the command area).  
 
Cumulative impacts, particularly on hydrology, are possible through future development 
of other hillside irrigation schemes within the same watershed, and through development 
of irrigated agriculture in downstream lowland marshes. The cumulative impacts under 
the LWH project itself, are expected to be negligible due to (i) wide distribution of the 
selected pilot sites, (ii) small size of the irrigation schemes, (iii) low levels of water 
abstraction, (iv) and environmental management measures for ensuring adequate 
outflows, limiting agro-chemical pollution, soil erosion and water losses.  
 
Cumulative impacts of hillside and lowland irrigation schemes on downstream wetlands 
and marshlands are of concern since marshlands in Rwanda have been extensively 
converted to agricultural uses. Based on official statistics, 94,000 ha of the total 168,000 
ha of marshlands have been converted (US AID 2008). Adverse cumulative impacts on 
downstream marshlands will be considered when screening and selecting proposed sites 
for development under the project.  The potential types of cumulative impacts are largely 
manageable at the site level, making the sound adherence to the mitigation measures 
described below essential. To this end, the adoption of the ESMF as part of the 
Governments' Common Framework of Engagement for all potential financiers of the 
LWH will be strongly instrumental in the mitigation of cumulative effects across the 
Government's larger program.   
 
Page  8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Infrastructure-only alternative: The original GoR design of the LWH program centered 
almost exclusively on the infrastructure (hardware) aspect of hillside intensification and 
only modest attention was given to farmer group formation and institutional capacity 
building. This alternative was rejected as the preliminary technical mission in November 
2008 concluded that the transformational nature of the land husbandry and irrigation 
activities called for a holistic approach, involving extensive participatory processes 
addressing the potential social impacts of the project (see Component A as well).  
 
Micro-irrigation alternative: Although not part of the Government's original design, the 
Project considered numerous micro- scale (pump) irrigation models as an alternative to 
the dam-reservoir-conduit model.  This alternative was rejected during the technical 
mission and ensuing discussions with Government, as they would not help meet the 
objectives of the LWH. Namely, commercialized horticultural production requires year-
round production and hence storage of water. The current situation in much of Rwanda 
does not allow for year-round production as there is no water in the dry season. 
Furthermore, such a highly decentralized approach and large number of schemes would 
also limit the opportunities for environmental oversight. Finally, the micro schemes could 
not have the same flood-control benefits as the reservoir model.  
 
Supply-only focus: The original LWH model proposed by Government did not consider 
marketing and post-harvest activities in its design. This alternative was rejected in favor 
of the current design that addresses the critical constraints to marketing the envisioned 
output under LWH land husbandry and irrigation activities, since the gaps in the 
downstream value chain would render the LWH upstream investments unprofitable and 
unsustainable (with corresponding adverse environmental and social impacts).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The salient safeguard measures for the Project include:  
 
OP4.01, OP4.04, OP4.36 and OP4.11  
 
The environmental safeguards policy and cultural resources issues will be managed 
through preparation and implementation of the following instruments (i) overall 
Environmental Assessment which includes consideration of cumulative impacts and 
framework EMP; an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which 
guides the screening of project investments for potential adverse environmental and 
social impacts and triggering of other safeguard policies, as well as guiding preparation 
of site specific environment assessments and management plans; specific  site 
(catchment)  Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) (which will be cleared and 
disclosed once completed during implementation), and a Pest Management Plan (PMP), 
disclosed at the Infoshop on 7 August 2009. The ESMF also provides guidance on the 
mitigation and handling of chance finds of physical cultural resources during earthworks 
for dam and irrigation infrastructure. In addition, as part of the Project support for the 
development of the Government's Common Framework for Engagement (CFE) for LWH 
Page  9
financiers, the ESMF will be incorporated into  the CFE. That is, in addition to its use by 
the Project in the event of site selection changes during or after appraisal, it will guide 
other financiers in their social and environmental site management.  
 
OP4.09  
 
A
pest management plan (PMP) has been prepared, cleared by  ASPEN and disclosed in 
the Infoshop on 7 August 2009.  
 
OP4.12  
 
The social safeguards issues including involuntary resettlement will be managed 
through preparation and implementation of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), 
which has been prepared and cleared by ASPEN.  It was disclosed on 7 August 2009. 
Site-specific Resettlement Action Plans will be cleared and disclosed once they are 
prepared during project implementation.  
 
OP4.37  
 
With the confirmation of site selection and preparation of sites early in implementation, 
site-specific Dam Safety Plans will be prepared and disclosed. Like the ESMF, dam 
safety plan guidelines from the Bank will be used by the Government's Common 
Framework for Engagement (CFE) for LWH financiers in the larger Government 
Program.  
 
OP7.50  
 
A
Riparian Notification has been prepared, cleared and issued by 10 August 2009.  
 
Borrower Capacity  
 
Borrower capacity for both environmental and social safeguards implementation is 
moderately effective, with some weaknesses that the project will address. Rwanda has a 
dynamic and professionally staffed environmental regulatory agency (REMA) with 
politically astute leadership and instances of demonstrated effective enforcement of 
environmental regulations. REMA works closely with the District Environmental 
Officers who are responsible for site level environmental management of project 
activities, along with the MINAGRI environmental specialist.  
 
However, while the environmental regulatory framework is modern, it is also young and 
some elements of it are yet to be developed. REMA has been in existence only since 
2003, the Organic Law (No 4/2005) on environmental protection since 2005, and the 
general EIA guidelines since 2006. Sector specific environmental guidelines, e.g. for 
agriculture, are not yet in place. Demand for REMA services outstrips its staffing, and 
both REMA and district level environmental staff lack robust implementation experience 
and technical training specific to dam construction, irrigation development, watershed 
management, and other technical aspects of LWH, although requisite expertise exists in 
the consulting sector and academia and can be tapped into for knowledge transfer. 
Logistical support for adequate implementation and monitoring of environmental 
safeguards measures also requires strengthening.  
 
Page  10
In addition, REMA has been only recently (early 2009) reorganized in conjunction with 
the establishment of the Rwanda Development Board (RDB) which took over the EA 
function (and human and technical resources) from REMA. A detail study of potential 
implications of this institutional arrangement as well as other aspect of environmental 
institutions in Rwanda was recently commissioned as part of the LWH and is ongoing,  
however, preliminary indications do not suggest a significant impact on the EA function.  
 
The project will includes training and other environmental management capacity 
development measures under Component A. In addition, MINAGRI is hiring an 
Environmental Officer to support implementation of environmental safeguards measures.  
 
Borrower capacity for social safeguards implementation is constrained, as limited 
technical capacity and understanding exist to implement the project consistently with the 
Bank resettlement policy. Close technical support is being provided by the Bank social 
specialist during preparation and implementation to ensure compliance with not only 
domestic but also international good resettlement practice. In addition, MINAGRI is 
gaining first-hand experience with social safeguards implementation through an ongoing 
Bank operation (RSSP 2) and these activities were rated Satisfactory in a recent 
implementation support mission.  MINAGRI will hire a rural sociologist and other 
strengthening measures will be outlined in the project safeguards documents and 
integrated in the project budget, implementation and monitoring plan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations with communities at the LWH sites, local authorities and national 
stakeholders were launched in 2008 parallel with the Government's preliminary site 
identification and pre-feasibility studies, taken place during the development of the LWH 
concept and funding proposal. Consultations were carried out by a Consultant, whose 
social specialist and rural sociologist, working alongside  engineering and environmental 
staff . These consultations took the form of community meetings, individual interviews 
and focus groups. The feedback from the consultations was used to inform project design. 
Additional consultations took  place as a part of preparing the LWH Environmental 
Assessment, ESMF and Strategic Social Assessment during the remainder of project 
preparation. The consultations revealed that while the community members are keen to 
see the project implementation to begin, their understanding of the project and resulting 
changes is limited, and continuous liaison with the affected communities will be 
necessary to disseminate information, collect feedback, and manage expectations.  This 
observation led to an increase in resources and planned activities under Component A in 
terms of community mobilization and communication.  
 
All environmental safeguards documents are cleared by the Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority (REMA) and the Bank. They were disclosed at the World Bank's 
Infoshop on 13 August, 2009; and in country 12 August, 2009. The proposed mitigation 
measures and their monitoring plans are an integral part of the project design and costs. 
Site-specific Environmental Assessments, Environmental Management Plans, Dam 
Safety Plans and Resettlement Action Plans will be disclosed once they are prepared 
during project implementation.   
Page  11
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/13/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/10/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/10/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
Page  12
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  13
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Loraine Ronchi 
08/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Martin Fodor 
08/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
08/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/24/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/24/2009 
Comments:   
