Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3525 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P106978 
Project Name: Rwanda Competitiveness and Enterprise Dev Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Amadou Dem 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (25%);Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and contractual savings 
(25%);Capital markets (25%);General finance sector (25%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The CEDP project’s overall objective is to establish an enabling environment for growth and 
development of the private sector that would help reduce poverty in Rwanda. The project is 
designed to promote a competitive climate by: (i) streamlining the business environment; (ii) 
reducing costs and increasing the efficiency of telecommunications, water & electric utilities, 
and the tea industry; and (iii) improving access to financial and support services to local 
entrepreneurs. The project’s objective, design and scope remain unchanged under the 
additionalfinancing.  
 
The proposed additional grant would help finance scaled-up activities to enhance the impact of 
the successful financial reform program started under the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional financing will support Rwanda’s Financial Sector and DevelopmentPlan (FSDP) 
in five high priority areas: (i) improving access to credit and financial services; (ii) improving 
accounting and auditing standards; (iii) enhancing NBFI regulation and supervision; (iv) 
Page  2
strengthening the national pension fund, Caisse Sociale de Rwanda (CSR); and (v) modernizing 
payments systems. Within these areas, the project will focus more specifically on the following:  
 
Access to Credit and financial services.  The additional financing will support the Microfinance 
industry in mainly two areas. It will provide support to strengthen and build capacity in the 
microfinance industry, and will provide institution-building support to the nascent professional 
association, the Association of Microfinance Institutions in Rwanda (AMIR). It will also provide 
technical assistance to the central bank’s MFI Supervision Division to enable it to better regulate 
and supervise microfinance institutions..  
 
Accounting and Auditing Standards.  The project will provide support to: (i) review the legal 
framework for accounting and auditing standards, (ii) build capacity for the newly established 
Rwanda Institute of Certified Public Accountants, (iii) implement International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) and International Standards of Auditing, and (v) improving the 
curricula and quality of teaching of accounting and auditing.  
 
NBFI Supervision and Regulation.  The CEDP will provide funding for capacity building for 
the Central Bank NBFI supervision and regulation department. It will also provide funding to 
partially finance full financial audits of the four established insurance companies and, where 
justified, managerial and actuarial audits. The results of these audits will provide BNR with a 
baseline analysis of the insurance industry.  
 
Strengthening Caisse Sociale du Rwanda (CSR).  A rough design for a comprehensive program 
to modernize CSR has been recently prepared, but needs support to refine it, establish priorities 
within the program, and implement it. The CEDP will provide an advisor to the CEO for one 
year to assist in refining and implementing the modernization program, including developing and 
implementing a new investment strategy.  
 
Modernizing the payments Systems.  The CEDP will finance the technical design, purchase of 
equipment, and installation of an Automated Clearing House (ACH) and Real Time Gross 
Settlement system (RTGS), capacity building to BNR to implement the payment system, and 
legal and regulatory support for the new payment products being developed.  
 
Support to the Executive Secretariat of the FSDP. In addition to the five components described 
above, the additional financing will also strengthen the capacity of the Executive Secretariat of 
the FSDP which has been recently established within the Ministry of Finance to supervise the 
overall implementation of the plan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kigali, Rwanda   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
n/a   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/20/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amadou Dem 
03/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
03/20/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
