Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4019 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P111567 
Project Name: Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Project - Sector-wide Approach 
Task Team Leader: Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (60%);Renewable energy (20%);Power (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives are two-fold: (i) increasing electricity access to households 
and priority institutions at a scale consistent with the targets of the EDPRS and ; (ii) assisting the 
GOR  mainstream the energy sector wide approach (SWAp) and process by establishing a 
functioning donor partnership framework for sustained financing of investment and capacity 
strengthening, aligned with national priorities and results.  
 
Specifically, the key outcome indicators for the project objectives, and that are aligned with the 
Africa Action  Plan, are proposed as follows: Objective 1 
–
number of new connections HH, 
institutions; Objective 2 - share of sector financing from donors (for investment and capacity 
strengthening), that is aligned with the Government’s sector investment prospectus.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components  
 
Page  2
The project has three components (a) Grid Roll-
out; (b)”Green connections”; and(c) Technical 
assistance, capacity strengthening, and implementation support.  
 
(a) Grid rollout  - The project will finance MV and LV grid reticulation, distribution grid 
strengthening and rehabilitation to reach the required transfer capacity to the targeted areas and 
customer connections including partial subsidies of connection costs for qualifying households, 
and priority institutions. The activities will likely include (i) new medium and low voltage 
distribution lines as well as rehabilitation and increase in capacity of existing grid lines; (ii) low 
voltage line drops, fuse boxes and meters for individual households and institutions;(iii) 
distribution switchgear and pole mounted transformers; and (iv) new and extensions of existing 
distribution substations.  
 
(b) “Green connections” - The project will finance a range of activities to improve affordability 
for the consumers and reduce the need for additional generation resources. The program would 
include energy efficient CFLs, incentives to promote the use of solar hot water heaters sold 
through private dealers and specific initiatives to buy down connection costs for the poorest 
households including mainstreaming of the use of low cost “ready boards” in homes  
 
(c) Technical assistance, capacity strengthening, and implementation support – This component 
will support components (a) and (b) outlined above that are linked to the first project 
development objective. Additionally, this component will support the second development 
objective of mainstreaming the SWAp framework and process. To enhance the impact of the 
program on poor and vulnerable groups the project will undertake an affordability survey, 
including social analysis, during the first year of implementation.  
 
Off-grid electrification - A unit within NEDA will oversee, supervise and monitor coordinated 
implementation of the off-grid component implementation activities under the sector-wide 
approach. There are already several multilateral and bilateral donors active in the subsector 
including EU, Belgium, Netherlands and Germany. Under a separate stand alone GEF project 
(Rwanda Sustainable Energy Development (SED) Project, FY09), that will complement this 
project, Bank will support the increasing investments in off-grid renewable energy generation 
and energy efficiency by financing a program of TA and policy related activities required to 
make these investments long term sustainable. The program will focus on building capacity in 
the local private sector to build, operate and maintain these installations while establishing 
national standards and guidelines to assure adequate quality and facilitate maintenance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The National Electricity Access Roll-out Program (NERP) that the proposed project is 
supporting will fund a series of investments with varying sizes and types in various places across 
the Rwandan territory whose details may not be known by Appraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under ongoing UERP project a functioning safeguards framework and mitigation procedures 
have been established. For the proposed project a key requirement for the formulation, 
implementation and monitoring of the safeguards instruments is the availability of staff with the 
relevant skills and experience in the PCU, Electrogaz, and Ministry of Infrastructure to follow up 
agreed actions and avoid delays in implementation. The project will increase capacity by hiring 
full time environmental and social safeguard specialists to the Electrogaz Project Management 
Page  3
department. The local staff will be supported during the first 6 months by a resident Safeguards 
advisor.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Limited potential adverse environmental impacts are possible due to rehabilitation and 
extension of the distribution network.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Project target areas are expected to be in places with high population density, extensive land 
cultivation for agriculture, and settlements. Project is not expected to affect natural habitats. 
ESMF will screen proposed project activities to ensure avoidance of impacts on natural habitats.  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Ditto as above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Project will not include pest management related activities.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Project limited earth works associated with rehabilitation and construction of distribution 
network may include chance finds of physical cultural artifacts. Change finds procedures will be 
mandated by the ESMF and included in the earth works (civil works) contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
There are no known ethnic groups categorized as IP in project area. During Implementation, 
the project will identify and mitigate adverse effects on any vulnerable groups of people in the 
project area.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project may involve limited displacement of people due to construction activities, right 
of way and way leave acquisition, etc. A RPF will be prepared to guide the resettlement and 
compensation of PAPs.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not support activities associated with construction or use of dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not result in changes to quality or quantity of surface (or ground) water 
categorized as international waters.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project will not take place in disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/28/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Disclosure of Safeguard reporting Instruments: 30 December 2008.  
 
The entire reporting instrument will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal, 
in the country and in the World Bank's Infoshop.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
12/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
12/24/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
