Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3526
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P106978 
Project Name:  Rwanda Competitiveness and Enterprise Dev Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Amadou Dem 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Banking (25%);Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and contractual savings 
(25%);Capital markets (25%);General finance sector (25%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The CEDP project’s overall objective is to establish an enabling environment for growth 
and development of the private sector that would help reduce poverty in Rwanda. The 
project is designed to promote a competitive climate by: (i) streamlining the business 
environment; (ii) reducing costs and increasing the efficiency of telecommunications, 
water & electric utilities, and the tea industry; and (iii) improving access to financial and 
support services to local entrepreneurs. The project’s objective, design and scope remain 
unchanged under the additionalfinancing.  
 
The proposed additional grant would help finance scaled-up activities to enhance the 
impact of the successful financial reform program started under the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will support Rwanda’s Financial Sector and DevelopmentPlan 
(FSDP) in five high priority areas: (i) improving access to credit and financial services; 
(ii) improving accounting and auditing standards; (iii) enhancing NBFI regulation and 
supervision; (iv) strengthening the national pension fund, Caisse Sociale de Rwanda 
Page  2
(CSR); and (v) modernizing payments systems. Within these areas, the project will focus 
more specifically on the following:  
 
Access to Credit and financial services.  The additional financing will support the 
Microfinance industry in mainly two areas. It will provide support to strengthen and build 
capacity in the microfinance industry, and will provide institution-building support to the 
nascent professional association, the Association of Microfinance Institutions in Rwanda 
(AMIR). It will also provide technical assistance to the central bank’s MFI Supervision 
Division to enable it to better regulate and supervise microfinance institutions..  
 
Accounting and Auditing Standards.  The project will provide support to: (i) review the 
legal framework for accounting and auditing standards, (ii) build capacity for the newly 
established Rwanda Institute of Certified Public Accountants, (iii) implement 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and International Standards of 
Auditing, and (v) improving the curricula and quality of teaching of accounting and 
auditing.  
 
NBFI Supervision and Regulation.  The CEDP will provide funding for capacity 
building for the Central Bank NBFI supervision and regulation department. It will also 
provide funding to partially finance full financial audits of the four established insurance 
companies and, where justified, managerial and actuarial audits. The results of these 
audits will provide BNR with a baseline analysis of the insurance industry.  
 
Strengthening Caisse Sociale du Rwanda (CSR).  A rough design for a comprehensive 
program to modernize CSR has been recently prepared, but needs support to refine it, 
establish priorities within the program, and implement it. The CEDP will provide an 
advisor to the CEO for one year to assist in refining and implementing the modernization 
program, including developing and implementing a new investment strategy.  
 
Modernizing the payments Systems.  The CEDP will finance the technical design, 
purchase of equipment, and installation of an Automated Clearing House (ACH) and 
Real Time Gross Settlement system (RTGS), capacity building to BNR to implement the 
payment system, and legal and regulatory support for the new payment products being 
developed.  
 
Support to the Executive Secretariat of the FSDP. In addition to the five components 
described above, the additional financing will also strengthen the capacity of the 
Executive Secretariat of the FSDP which has been recently established within the 
Ministry of Finance to supervise the overall implementation of the plan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kigali, Rwanda   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Most of the activities to be financed under the additional IDA-Grant funds will be 
focused on technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of the Central Bank, the NBFIs 
and MFIs to operate more efficiently and effectively. This is ultimately aimed at 
strengthening the financial sector. As such there are no environmental or safeguards that 
would be triggered by these actions. The initial “B” categorization of the parent project 
was justified by the privatization program supported by the project in the infrastructure 
and tea sectors. The additional Financing will not support the privatization program.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
N/A 
Page  5
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amadou Dem 
03/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/20/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
03/20/2008 
Comments:   
