Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC2475
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P097818 
Project Name:  Rw:  Sustainable Energy Development Project (GEF) 
Task Team Leader:  Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (70%);General energy sector (30%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
3.80
3.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen capacity and establish policy and 
national standards for the renewable energy sector. The project’s global environmental 
objective is to achieve greenhouse gas emissions through use of renewable energy in 
rural areas for provision of electricity as well as through increased end-efficiency in the 
energy sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The GEF Sustainable Energy Development Project is an US$ 8.3 million grant to the 
Government of Rwanda to support renewable energy development. A key mechanism for 
sustainable development comprises the emphasis on the private sector as the main 
delivery vehicle. The GEF scope of intervention was identified in a participatory process 
in which main stakeholders have been consulted. The scope consists of five sub-
components; 1) policy, strategy, and management, 2) efficient utilization of biomass 
resources, 3) sustainable development of micro hydro resources, 4) solar energy (PV & 
SWH) and 5) energy efficiency.  
 
Page  2
Component A: Strengthening of Renewable Energy Policy, Strategy and Management
–
addresses the execution of policies into strategies and projects. The main objective is to 
help the MININFRA streamline and coordinate activities by supporting the development 
of operational guidelines for project design and implementation. An important sub-
objective comprises the integration of the private sector in the process. More specifically 
the GEF sub-component contains the four following parts: policy, strategy, M&E 
(Renewable Energy Sector M&E and Scientific monitoring for Lake Kivu), and an 
Incubation Program for RE SMEs.  
 
Component B: Efficient utilization of biomass resources –– addresses the unsustainable 
use of firewood and charcoal as demand is outgrowing supply threatening scarce natural 
resources and biodiversity. The aim is to increase the efficiency in the charcoal value 
chain by promoting more efficient stoves and charcoal production methods.  
 
Component C: Sustainable development of micro hydro resources –– addresses the issue 
of private sector participation, which has only recently been introduced. The scope of the 
component is to provide transparent market regulation and guidelines to facilitate small 
distributed power production and distribution services while building local private sector 
capacity that can plan, design, implement and operate the plants.  
 
Component D: Solar Energy  –– focuses on promoting the current weak private sector. 
This will be accomplished three core measures: 1) Developing national standards for 
institutional PV applications, 2) Building capacity and conducive frameworks to allow 
local private firms to participate in international tendering for the Rwandan market, 3) 
developing a commercial SHS (solar Home System) market for rural areas. The project 
will also provide initial support to develop the market for solar water heaters (SWH) in 
Rwanda.  
 
Component E: Energy efficiency and demand side management (DSM) –– Will focus 
on reducing the technical losses in the Electrogaz grid, and energy efficiency in larger 
buildings.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be national in scope. Most renewable energy investments are expected to 
be in rural areas. Energy efficiency investments are likely to be in urban areas, or in 
connection with institutional or industrial facilities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project seeks to promote sustainable use of renewable energy resources, including 
biomass, hydro, and solar energy. Significant negative impacts are not anticipated. If 
successfully implemented, the project will have a substantial positive impact, especially 
in lowering the depletion of biomass resources given that firewood and charcoal  usage  
is currently growing at unsustainable levels.  
 
Although the project does not include investment components, the technical assistance 
and guidance provided under the project may incur certain downstream risks.  For 
instance, in the case of the sustainable development of micro-hydros the Project will 
provide a national operational framework for investments made by small Independent 
Power Producers(IPPs), and such investments may have environmental and social 
implications. Also, the “industrialization” of efficient stoves and kilns could have some 
adverse environmental implications if not sustainable implemented. It is to address these 
potential downstream risks that the project has been rated Category B under the World 
Bank Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP4.01), requiring a partial Environmental 
Assessment (EA). A World Bank Category B project is equivalent to the Government of 
Rwanda’s Schedule 2 projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower plans to utilize the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which have already been adopted for 
the Urgent Electricity Rehabilitation Project.  
 
The overall responsibility for management of the bio-physical environment throughout 
Rwanda lies with the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), which was 
legally established in November 2003.  
 
The SED project will benefit from the experience built within the existing Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) created for the IDA UER project. The unit has an established 
track record in project implementation, safeguard mitigation and fiduciary oversight. It is 
expected, as part of the implementation of the NERP and SWAp, that the UERP PCU 
will be integrated into a new Electrogaz Projects Management Department (PMD) that 
will consolidate within the company all existing project-specific PCUs and that will also 
manage and oversee the national grid rollout and connections program. The capacities of 
the UERP PCU will be fully transferred and further improved by additional capacity 
building and TA support included in the NERP and proposed IDA Electricity Access 
scale-up project (P111567). The project management department will bear 
implementation oversight responsibility for the full project with component level 
execution done by the MinInfra, Electrogaz and NEDA. The unit organization will 
include dedicated safeguard specialists for both Environmental and Social safeguards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The bulk of the GEF project interventions are aimed at: i) enhancing the sustainable use 
of renewable energy resources (as for micro-hydro and solar); ii) promoting more 
sustainable use of limited biomass resources; and iii) encouraging efficient use of 
electricity.  As such the main stakeholders/beneficiaries are Rwanda households and 
businesses in both urban and rural areas.  As indicated above, the GEF interventions are 
not anticipated to result in negative impacts.  Nonetheless, the ESMF and RPF are 
available in-country and in the Bank's infoshop for public review.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/13/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/13/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Note that since the existing documents will be re-disclosed without changes, it is not 
necessary to review these again internally.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
04/29/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
04/29/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
04/29/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
04/29/2009 
Comments:   
