Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3569
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Samoa 
Project ID:  P086313 
Project Name:  SAMOA HEALTH SECTOR MANAGEMENT PRPGRAM 
Task Team Leader:  Muhammad Ali Pate 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Injuries and non-communicable diseases 
(S);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.50 
 
NEW ZEALAND: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2.40
8.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The aim of the health SWAp is to provide a mechanism to improve sector performance, 
increase resource flows, as well as its effective use through agreed programs.  The 
Program’s development objective in the medium-term (2008-2012) is to improve access 
to, and utilization of effective, efficient and quality health services to improve the health 
status of the Samoan population.   
 
3. Project Description 
The SWAp will support MOH in implementing its health sector plan through a 
framework which addresses roles, responsibilities, and performance.  The framework will 
follow the structure of the Samoan health system as outlined in the Health Sector Plan 
(HSP), Ministry of Health (MOH) and National Health Services (NHS) corporate plans, 
and the corporate plans of other stakeholders in the sector.  Consistent with the HSP and 
corporate plans, the SWAp will have three broad components, which are directly aligned 
with the development objectives of improving access, and utilization, of efficient, 
effective and quality health services.  The Program components are:  
Page  2
Component 1: Health Promotion and Prevention.  This component aims to support the 
transformation of the health sector towards a health and wellness model from a narrower 
medical orientation.  
 
Component 2:  Enhance quality health care service delivery.  This component aims to 
improve various dimensions of the quality of health care, particularly at the primary care 
level.  
 
Component 3: Strengthen policy and regulatory oversight of the health system.  This 
component aims to support the MOH’s role of coordination, policy development and 
regulation in the health sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Program will support the first five years (FY2009-2013) of the Government’sHealth 
Sector Plan, in the two islands that make up Western Samoa -Upolu and Savaii islands.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mark Hodges (EASHD) 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (EAPCO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During the first IDA-financed project in the health sector, Health Sector Management 
Project (P064926), which closed on December 31, 2006, IDA financed the development 
of a Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) Policy and Plan.  The Plan was 
implemented successfully during that first project, and aspects covered included: (i) 
medical waste segregation, (ii) training of health workers on waste management, and (iii) 
procurement of vehicle and equipment for transportation of medical waste from facilities 
to a centralized incineration facility.  The project also invested in improving the Waste 
Page  3
Water Treatment Facility at the Tupua Tamasese Meaole Hospital (TTMH) and carried 
out an environmental impact assessment to show positive impact of that investment.  
 
In preparation of the SWAp Program, and following recommendation of the Safeguards 
Review, the Government of Samoa conducted an update of the HCWM Plan.  The Plan 
was updated to provide guidance and standards for management of health care waste as 
required by the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and 
Meteorology.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has demonstrable capacity in implementing environment health related 
safeguards policies.  During the previous IDA-financed project, the Borrower developed, 
approved and implemented a Health Care Waste Management Policy and Plan.  The 
Borrower also implemented a rehabilitation of the Hospital Water Treatment Facility and 
carried out an Environmental Impact Assessment.  The legislative base for environmental 
health and waste management is being updated as part of the new Public Health Bill 
currently under preparation and scheduled to be considered by Government.  Hospital 
waste procedures are being implemented according to the Policy, including collection of 
medical waste from the private hospital.  MOH continues to undertake periodic training 
and supervision according to the Policy based on a training manual prepared under the 
previous Bank-financed project.  The detailed data base of all sources of medical and 
other potentially hazardous waste is being expanded by MOH in cooperation with WHO, 
which also maintains a web site listing hazardous waste sites.  Proposals under the 
Program have been prepared to expand and support waste management, paying particular 
attention to private health facilities and to public facilities in Savaii.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The implementation of the HWCM Plan has been mainstreamed into the activities of the 
MOH, NHS and private sector providers.  MOH, as the regulator of the health sector, has 
oversight responsibility for the management of medical waste.  MOH has a Principal 
Health Care Waste Management Officer in the Division of Health Promotion and 
Prevention.  The National Health Services, as the major health service provider has 
operational responsibility for implementing waste segregation at source, collection, 
transportation and disposal.  Private sector providers are participating in the medical 
waste management system through a public-private partnership arrangement.  
Operational costs for HCW activities are provided through the Government’s NHS 
Page  4
budget. Additional activities based on the plan that have been identified for support in the 
first year of the health SWAp include:  
 
(i) 
Training and retraining of health care workers at the two public hospitals and 
rural health facilities on medical waste issues,   
 
(ii) 
Protective equipment for collectors,  
 
(iii) 
Waste segregation bins and transport containers,  
 
(iv) 
Feasibility assessment of a Medical Waste disposal site in the Savaii Island to 
eliminate the need for transportation of medical waste to Upolu for disposal.  This work 
is already being financed during preparation of the SWAp,  
 
(v) 
Implementation of the Savaii medical waste disposal plan after completion of the 
feasibility study, and  
 
(vi) 
Additional aspects of the HCWM Plan that emerge as unfunded during the SWAp 
would be eligible for funding by the pool partners under the Program.  
 
The implementation of the HCWM Plan is a covenant in the Financing Agreement.  The 
Government has agreed to continue implementing the Plan.  As with the rest of the 
Program, decisions on funding allocations would be made on an annual basis based on 
the Program of Work and aligned with the HSP priorities.  As part of the annual review, 
the supervision of the Program would cover the medical waste management aspects and 
include medical waste management specialists as may be necessary.  
 
During formulation of the HCWM Plan by the Ministry of Health, briefing meetings and 
workshops were held in-country to obtain the views of all relevant parties.  The first 
consultative workshop with stakeholders was held at the MOH in January 2003.  The first 
draft of the HCWM Plan was distributed to relevant stakeholders for comment in 
February 2003.  After receiving comments and further consultation the final draft 
HCWM Plan was submitted to the Director General of Lands, Survey and Environment 
under the delegated authority of the Minister for Lands, Survey and Environment.  
Subsequent versions of the Plan were discussed by the MOH and the World Bank team, 
who provided feedback.  The Updated Plan has been disclosed in-country at the MOH 
Website and the Government has authorized the World Bank to disclose the Plan publicly 
at its InfoShop. It was subsequently submitted to InfoShop on April 3, 2008.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/28/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  6
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Muhammad Ali Pate 
04/06/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mark Hodges 
04/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
04/15/2008 
Comments:   
