Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2971 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Samoa 
Project ID: P086313 
Project Name: SAMOA HEALTH SECTOR MANAGEMENT PROJECT II 
Task Team Leader: Muhammad Ali Pate 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Injuries and non-communicable diseases 
(S);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed health sector program?s development objective in the medium-term (2008-2012) 
would be to improve access to, and utilization of effective, efficient and quality health services to 
improve the health status of the Samoan population.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The HSMP will support the MOH in implementing its health sector plan through a framework 
which addresses roles, responsibilities, and performance. The framework will follow the 
structure of the Samoan health system as outlined in the Health Sector Plan, MOH Corporate 
Plan, NHS Corporate Plan, and the development plans of other stakeholders in the sector.  
Consistent with the Health Sector Plan and Corporate Plans, there is a preliminary agreement 
that the SWAP will have three broad components:  
 
Component 1: Health Promotion and Prevention. This component would aim at supporting: (i) 
strengthening of healthy public policies; (ii) improving environmental health; (iii) strengthening 
community action to improve health; and (iv) promoting healthy lifestyles, particularly targeted 
at the rising non-communicable diseases.  The component would also focus on the surveillance, 
Page  2
case detection and reporting of communicable diseases and prevention.  Reduction of the 
transmission of typhoid, tuberculosis, leprosy, and filariasis in the context of the public health 
program will be prioritized. In addition, the component would focus on developing a sustainable 
immunization program that is able to reach every child and woman of reproductive age, and 
strengthen the response to increasing rates of sexually transmitted infections.  Food safety 
measures and quarantine program would also be enhanced.  
 
Component 2: Enhance Quality Health Care Service Delivery.  This component would support: 
(i) improving customer service and patient care information; (ii) provision of quality integrated 
community health services; (iii) improving access to primary care and rationalized referral for 
secondary and tertiary care services; (iv) improving health services infrastructure, equipment and 
supplies; (v) strengthening financial and management systems; and (vi) strengthen front-line 
human resource development and management.  Strategies to be supported under this component 
would include further development of service standards, improvements in patient information 
and customer service in the sector, adopting multi-disciplinary team approaches and outreach 
programs, development of clinical standards and protocols, improvement in diagnostic services, 
efficient referral system, better facilities planning and management of procurement and logistics.  
 
Component 3:  Strengthen Policy and Regulatory Oversight of the Health System. This 
component would aim to strengthen the stewardship role of the Ministry of Health in the health 
sector.  It would support: (i) strengthening the budget, planning and monitoring function of the 
MOH, including periodic NHA and development of the sector MTEF that meets MoF and 
development partner requirements; (ii) implementation of already approved policies and 
legislations through the development of administrative guidelines and regulations; (iii) 
development of a human resource strategy for the health sector in consultation with all partners 
and providers; (iv) capacity building for improving sector performance; and (v) procurement, 
financial management and Program coordination functions.  In addition, the component would 
support the development of a comprehensive sector-wide performance framework, a monitoring 
and evaluation system that is a key building block for the SWAp.  This would include agreement 
on common sector input, output, process and outcome indicators, which would form the basis for 
periodic joint-reviews and reporting for all sector partners.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented as part of overall health sector program, in the two islands that 
make up Western Samoa-Upolu and Savaii islands.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has demonstrable capacity in implementing environment health related safeguards 
policies.  During the previous IDA-financed project, the Borrower developed, approved and 
implemented a Health Care Waste Management Policy and Plan.  The Borrower also 
implemented a rehabilitation of the Hospital Water Treatment Facility and carried out an 
Environmental Impact Assessment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (EAPCO) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
brief update on the implementation of the medical waste management policy and plan 
developed under the previous project will be required.  The update should outline what was 
achieved in policy and implementation, current institutional arrangements, supervision and 
monitoring plans, and summary financing plan for continuation of the medical waste 
management activities in the SWAp.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
It is not clear at this time whether any land will be acquired or not.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
note summarizing current state of medical waste management, gaps and workplan for 
inclusion into the SWAp program would be developed prior to appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Muhammad Ali Pate 
05/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
11/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
12/20/2007 
Comments:   
