Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3610 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/04/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P093825 
Project Name: Syr Darya Control and Northern Aral Sea Project - Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(40%);Irrigation and drainage (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other 
environment and natural resources management (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
140.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
160.00
160.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) of the proposed Syr Darya Control and Northern Aral 
Sea Project - Phase 2 (SYNAS-2) would be to improve water resources management in the 
Kazakh part of the Syr Darya Basin.  The achievement of the PDO would increase the timely 
irrigation water supply to agricultural areas, increase fisheries production, and enhance human 
safety, the environment, and the general well-being of the population living around the NAS.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed SYNAS-2 would be designed to improve further the environmental and economic 
conditions along the Syr Darya and the NAS.  It would build on the work done under SYNAS-1.  
This would be achieved by focusing more on integrated water resources management in the 
basin, which would require a number of structural interventions and strengthening the 
institutional and management capacity for integrated water resources management in the basin.  
Page  2
The proposed components, with a total project cost estimated at US$300 million (including 
contingencies), are described below.  
 
-- Component A - Rehabilitation of Northern Aral Sea and Delta Lakes.  Preliminary studies 
have indicated that given the available water resources in the Syr Darya the NAS can be enlarged 
further.  This would fit into government’s objective of increasing the fisheries potential in the 
NAS and having water return to the city of Aralsk and nearby fishing villages.  The latter would 
require a NAS water level of at least 46 m or four meter higher than the Kok-Aral Dike.  There 
are two options: (i) increasing the height of the Kok-Aral Dike; or (ii) constructing a new dike 
(Saryshiganak Dike) near Aralsk with a length of about 10 km.  Considering the limited long-
term volume of guaranteed water availability, the second option seems to be the preferred one, 
but this will need to be confirmed by hydraulic modeling of the river basin, using almost 100 
year of actual river flow data. Besides the new dike, a 35 km adduction canal would have to be 
constructed to take water from the Syr Darya, a dredged channel to realize a navigable access to 
Aralsk harbor, as well as ship locks in the new dike.  The preliminary base cost for all these 
works is estimated at US$60 million.  
 
Several delta lakes, including Aksay Kunvandarya, Kamyshilbash, Akstatau, Lokhalinks, and 
Zhansai, would be rehabilitated.  The revival of these water bodies would be instrumental in 
improving ecology and biodiversity of the river delta, and in increasing income of people 
through fish production and other products with economic use such as reeds that are used for 
fodder and house construction.  In order to maintain an adequate replenishment of water to keep 
salinity and oxygen levels at a biologically adequate level, intermittent supplies of water to the 
lakes are needed.  At present a large number of intakes and semi-natural canals are regulated in a 
crude and laborious fashion.  The project would provide proper hydromechanical regulating 
structures and channels in order to manage the water as required.  The preliminary estimated 
base cost is US$25 million.  
 
-- Component B - Improving Conveyance Capacity of the Syr Darya.  SYNAS-1 removed 
several of the worst constraints to river flow, yet there are other sections of the river that need 
attention in order to increase the flow capacity further up to 700 m3/sec in winter, which would 
be needed in order to reduce the water losses in the basin and sustainably operate the structures 
under Component A.  The proposed interventions include: (i) construction of flood protection 
dikes, including up to 18 km of new dikes and rehabilitation and heightening of up to 108 km 
existing dikes, together with the necessary road overpasses, while up to 6 km of river channel 
straightening maybe be included.  The preliminary base costs are estimated at US$27 million; (ii) 
rehabilitation of Kyzylorda left bank irrigation canal offtake to ensure its stability during high 
river flows (US$3 million base cost); (iii) replacement of two pontoon bridges with proper 
bridges to remove constrictions to river flows, especially ice-jams (US$40 million base cost); 
and (iv) construction of a small run-of-the-river hydropower plant at the Aklak Control Structure, 
which is currently being completed under SYNAS-1.  Although the hydropower plant would not 
directly improve the river conveyance capacity, it would make use of the increased and more 
dependable flows that has to be discharged through the Aklak structure in any case (It is noted 
that there would be no impoundment behind the Aklak Structure).  The optimum installed 
capacity is estimated at 8 MW, producing about 30 million kWh per year, which would be a 
Page  3
significant contribution to reliable energy supply during the winter to one of the poorest regions 
of the country (US$22 million base cost).  
 
-- Component C - Improving Safety of Chardara Dam.  Several safety issues at Chardara Dam 
have been addressed under SYNAS-1, but the issue of safely releasing extreme floods remains.  
In order to release high floods in the past, water would be released through one of the Chardara 
Dam emergency spillways into the Arnasai depression in Uzbekistan.  The Uzbeks constructed 
several years ago a number of dikes to avoid flooding from the depression as a result of which 
the capacity of the emergency spillway reduced from 2,160 m3/sec to 600 m3/sec as the free 
outflow in case of emergency was eliminated.  An additional spillway would be constructed in 
the Chardara Dam with an outflow into the Syr Darya in order to allow the dam to pass at least a 
flood with a 1:1,000 probability of occurrence.  A SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition system) would be installed to optimize the operation of the various dam components.  
The estimated base cost of the spillway and auxiliary activities is US$33 million.  
 
-- Component D - Improving Water Resources Management in the Syr Darya.  This component 
would aim at enhancing institutional capacity to improve water management in the Kazakh part 
of the Syr Darya.  This would cover: (i) development of water resources management simulation 
and optimization models and making them operational for day-to-day use, along with training of 
staff; (ii) upgrading of the hydrological network for accurate water flow and water quality 
measurements, with connection through a modern system of communication; and (iii) 
establishment of operation centers at the NAS, Kzylorda, Chardara Dam, and CWR headquarters 
in Astana, linked through a modern communication system, with possibility of communication to 
upper riparian countries.  The base cost of the component is estimated at US$5 million.  
 
-- Component E 
–
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Audits and 
Training.  The component would cover the incremental cost for CWR, including the hiring of 
consultants to provide day-to-day management support.  It would also finance consultants to 
provide M&E support for specific studies and data collection and carry out independent audits.  
Finally, it would provide funds for training to strengthen the capacity of CWR and other related 
agencies.  The total base cost is estimated at US$5 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project area comprises the Syr Darya basin from the Chardara Reservoir on the Uzbekistan 
border to and including the Northern Aral Sea (NAS).  Administratively, the project includes 
parts of Kzyzlorda and South Kazakhstan Oblasts within the drainage basin of the Syr Darya.  
The Syr Darya is considered to originate at the confluence of the Naryn and Kara Darya, in the 
Ferghana Valley. The project area is estimated at 230,000 km2.  Land acquisition is not expected 
under the project as the structures that would be constructed with project funds will be located in 
remote public lands.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementation of SYNAS-1 has shown that Kazakhstan has adequate environmental 
legislation, institutional capacity, and mechanisms to deal with any environmental issues during 
project preparation or implementation.  This includes an environmental assessment procedure for 
projects, including a State Environment Expertise Review. Under SYNAS-1, most 
Page  4
environmental issues were related to construction activities.  CWR and its design engineers have 
incorporated environmental clauses in the bidding documents and have ensured that contractors 
adhered to these clauses to ensure that implementation of the works were carried out without 
causing environmental damage.  Such activities were monitored by the construction supervision 
engineers and CWR.  The same will be institutionalized under SYNAS-2 and World Bank 
reviews will confirm that the EMP for SYNAS-2 will be implemented satisfactorily.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSSD) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) of the project and of the various works that have to be 
undertaken under the project will be carried out as part of the project preparation studies.  The 
EA will be consistent with procedures for completing the Kazakh Environmental Expertise 
Review and the World Bank Operational Policies 4.01 on Environmental Assessment.  The EA 
will include the Environment Management Plan (EMP) for any adverse impact of the 
construction activities as well as of the operation of the project may have on the environment.  
The EMP will consist of mitigation measures, a monitoring program, and an institutional 
development/strengthening program for implementation of the EMP.  Good environmental 
documents and procedures have been prepared under SYNAS-1 and these will be used for 
SYNAS-2 as well.  The EA will also have to outline the possible environmental and social issues 
that may occur if government proceeds with the construction of Koksarai Dam, using its own 
funds.  The Koksarai Reservoir would be located about 140 km downstream of Chardara Dam 
and would improve the management of excessive winter flows, as well as aid late spring/early 
summer irrigation supplies to the Kyzylorda region and environmental uses.  The storage would 
be about 3 billion m3.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Under SYNAS-1, following a dam safety review prepared for the Chardara Dam included in 
the project, an independent panel of experts (IPOE) consisting of international and national 
experts reviewed the design and oversaw the implementation of mitigating measures to ensure 
dam safety.  Further work will be carried out on Chardara Dam under SYNAS-2 and an IPOE 
will remain in place, as needed.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Under SYNAS-1, the riparian states (the Kyrgyz Republic, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan) were 
notified about the project details.  The Government of Kazakhstan will be requested to notify the 
riparian countries for the proposed SYNAS-2 as well.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/16/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA and related documents will be prepared between June and October 2008.  Similarly, 
technical preparation reports, including one for the Chardara Dam improvements, will be 
prepared during the same period.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
06/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
06/03/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
