Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4243 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P115938 
Project Name: Rapid Response Child-Focused Social Cash Transfer and Nutrition 
Security Project 
Task Team Leader: Menno Mulder-Sibanda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 9, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S);Social safety nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
8.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to mitigate the negative impacts of the food price crisis on 
young children in vulnerable households.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Senegal proposes two sets of appropriate cost-effective programs: (i) one that offsets the income 
effect of the shock directly through cash transfers; and (ii) one that seeks to mitigate its 
consequences on human development outcomes such as the health and nutrition status of 
children (GFRP framework document 2008). The project ($18m) will build on the achievements 
of the successful Nutrition Enhancement Program (PRN) and support: (i) the scaling up of the 
Nutrition Enhancement Program; Part 1 (Community-based Nutrition), Part 2 (Multisectoral 
support for Nutrition); and Part 3 (Support to the Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation of 
the Nutrition Developemtn Policy) and introduce a new component, Part 4 (Child-Focused 
Social Cash Transfers).  The community nutrition component provides for monthly growth 
monitoring for children under two, nutrition education for mothers, and the provision of vitamin 
Page  2
A
supplements and deworming.  The behavior change communication strategy focuses on infant 
and young child feeding practices as recommended by WHO and UNICEF, disease preventive 
measures, home-based care, recognition of danger signs, and care seeking for sick children and 
incorporates not only mothers but other influential caregivers such as grandmothers.  In addition, 
arrangements have been secured to incorporate support from UNICEF and WFP for the 
management of acute malnutrition which is being rolled out in all the intervention areas, which 
includes the use of ready to use therapeutic foods for the recuperation of severe acute 
malnourished children.  A communication strategy addressing proper disposal and recycling of 
the plastic wrapping is already in place as part of the program.  Multisectoral support for 
nutrition results largely focuses on health for supervision and delivery of key nutrition services; 
education for school-based distribution of vitamin A supplements and deworming; and 
acceleration of the national food fortification strategy.  
 
As for the Cash Transfer, the project does not do any investments, civil works, purchase or sale 
of land. The money is only intended for increasing consumption of basic needs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will take place in 14 regions of Senegal, with a focus on rural communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/23/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Menno Mulder-Sibanda 
03/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/11/2009 
Comments:  No SGP Specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
