Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4408 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/20/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P116783 
Project Name: Senegal EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund 
Task Team Leader: Meskerem Mulatu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 21, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (90%);General education sector (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (67%);Gender (33%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund 
81.50
81.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This CF grant aims to contribute to the Government's goal of attaining universal primary 
education by 2015, though construction, extension and equipment of classrooms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have three components:  
 
Component 1:  Construction and equipment of classrooms  
 
The FTI CF would finance the construction and equipping of about 4,000 classrooms, 
including:  
 
(a)  additional classrooms built to extend existing schools in those areas where schools are over 
capacity;  
 
(b)  classrooms to replace temporary structures put up by communities to accommodate 
growing demand.  
 
(c)  new schools, each containing a 3-classroom block, a water point, an administrative 
building, a toilet block and a wall fence, including Franco-Arabic schools in the regions of 
Diourbel, Louga and Kaolack that offer the official curriculum.  
 
Page  2
Component 2:  Construction/extension of auxiliary facilities in existing schools  In order to 
bring existing schools up to standard, the CF would finance: water points, toilet blocks of 4 
cabins each (2 each for girls and boys); and administrative buildings each with a headmaster's 
office and a storeroom in elementary schools.  
 
Component 3:  Coordination and monitoring/evaluation.  
 
Under this component, the CF would finance the activities necessary to coordinate the 
construction under Components 1 and 2, and the monitoring and evaluation mechanisms 
consistent with the Government's overall ten-
year sector program, the Programme Décennal de 
l'Education et de la Formation (PDEF).  It will also provide capacity development assistance to 
the directorate charged with school construction (Direction des Constructions Scolaires - DCS).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country-wide, both urban and rural.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Environment (and more specifically the Directorate of Classified 
Establishments) have a well-established team, and mechanisms for assuring safeguards that are 
acceptable to IDA.  The IDA task team will, therefore, work closely with their experts to make 
sure all safeguards policies are consistent with Bank guidelines.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 was triggered due to the construction and extension of schools to be funded under 
the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP 4.12 was triggered due to the potential need for land acquisition which might lead to the 
loss of assets, loss of shelter, loss of access to economic assets or loss of livelihood, requiring 
that affected persons be compensated and/or resettled.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/21/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The existing IDA operation, the Senegal Quality Education for All, Phase 2 credit, has the 
necessary framework documents to address the environmental and resettlement issues noted 
above, and those framework documents are still in force.  The Government has already 
redisclosed these documents for the purposes of this EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund operation; a 
separate cover letter that indicates that the documents apply to the Senegal EFA-FTI 
Catalytic Fund operation will be included in the redisclosure package, to be verified before 
negotiations.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Mulatu 
05/19/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
05/19/2009 
Comments:  The sector unit has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
