Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4410
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P116783 
Project Name:  Senegal EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund 
Task Team Leader:  Meskerem Mulatu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (90%);General education sector (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (67%);Gender (33%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund 
81.50
81.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
This CF grant aims to contribute to the Government's goal of attaining universal primary 
education by 2015, though construction, extension and equipment of classrooms.   
 
3. Project Description 
The CF program has three components, each of which is discussed in detail in Annex 1.  
They complement the activities financed with other sources by building additional 
education facilities that have not been funded; none of the CF classes will be built on 
sites or on buildings also financed by other donors..  
 
Component 1:  Construction and equipment of classrooms  
 
The FTI CF would finance the construction and equipping of 4,360 classrooms, 
including:  
 
(a) 
2,010 additional classrooms (46 percent of the total construction under the CF) 
would be built to extend existing schools in those areas where schools are over capacity;  
 
Page  2
(b) 
1,900 classrooms (44 percent) would replace temporary structures put up by 
communities to accommodate growing demand.  
 
(c) 
450 new classrooms (10 percent) would be built as part of 150 new schools, each 
containing a 3-classroom block, a water point, an administrative building, a toilet block 
and a wall fence.  Of these new schools, 100 schools (300 classrooms, constituting 7 
percent of all classrooms) would be for Franco-Arabic schools in the regions of Diourbel, 
Louga and Kaolack that offer the official curriculum.  
 
These classrooms will be built in areas where there is a problem of access due either to 
the unavailability of adequate classrooms or to the disconnect between community 
demand and the type of school currently offered.  The CF would complement funding for 
school/classroom construction under the Government budget, and from other donors 
including AFD, AfDB, IsDB, JICA and KfW, among others; none of the CF classes will 
be built on sites or on buildings also financed by other donors.  Classrooms would be 
built in those areas where enrollments are low; the various regions and sites are selected 
based on the demand expressed by the regional and district education offices (IA/IDEN) 
relative to the objectives set for each region and taking into account the planned activities 
under other donor programs.  A micro-planning exercise that brought together central and 
regional education officers as well as local government authorities and parents was 
carried out to specifically identify the school sites where these classrooms would be built. 
The selection criteria and the allocations by region are provided in Annex 1A.  
 
Component 2:  Construction of auxiliary facilities in existing schools  
 
This component would use the same criteria as Component 1 above to select the sites 
where these facilities would be built in order to bring the schools up to a minimum 
standard:  
 
In order to bring existing schools up to standard, the CF would finance:  
 
(a) 
814 water points in elementary schools,  
 
(b) 
814 toilet blocks of 4 cabins each (2 each for girls and boys); and  
 
(c) 
500 administrative buildings each with a headmaster's office and a storeroom;  
 
Component 3:  Coordination and monitoring/evaluation.  
 
Page  3
Under this component, the CF would finance the activities necessary to coordinate the 
construction under Components 1 and 2, and the monitoring and evaluation mechanisms 
consistent with the Government's overall ten-year sector program, the Programme 
Décennal de l'Education et de la Formation (PDEF).  It will also provide capacity 
development assistance to the directorate charged with school construction (Direction des 
Constructions Scolaires - DCS).  Activities would include:  
 
(a) 
Coordination meetings for the diverse set of actors involved in construction, 
including the Ministry of Education at central, regional and district levels, the Ministry of 
Urbanism (within which is housed the Directorate for the Construction of Schools or 
DCS), the local government authorities, the delegated management agency, and parents, 
teachers and students.  
 
(b) 
Technical monitoring and supervision visits by the DCS as well as the activities 
and missions of the entity charged with environmental and safeguard issues, the Direction 
de l'Environnement et des Etablissements classés (DEEC) within the Ministry of the 
Environment.  
 
(d) 
Communications, especially with local partners and actors;  
 
(e) 
Capacity development activities for the DCS, and  
 
(f) 
Technical and financial audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will operate country-wide; no other physical characteristics are salient to the 
safeguard analysis, to the best of the IDA team's knowledge.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.12 (Involuntary 
Resettlement) due to potential negative environmental and social impacts related to the 
construction of schools.  The safeguard screening category is S2, and the environmental 
screening category is B.  To address potential negative impacts consistent with the 
requirements of these safeguard policies, the project has prepared the relevant framework 
documents (the Environment and Social Management Framework and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework).  In addition to describing the environmental and social screening 
process, the ESMF makes recommendations regarding capacity building needs to ensure 
its effective implementation, and consultations with potentially affected persons as part of 
the screening process that will take place at the time construction plans are prepared.  The 
two documents were re-disclosed in-country, as noted above, prior to negotiations.  There 
are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the relative simplicity of the civil works planned under this operation 
(construction/extension classrooms, school latrines, administrative blocks and water 
points, all in elementary schools), there are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts 
identified that may be due to anticipated future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project design selected is the one best adapted to minimize adverse impacts, which 
are expected to be modest.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The MEPEM conducted an environmental and social evaluation and prepared the 
relevant framework documents.  An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were disclosed to the public when 
the QEFA 2 project was appraised in FY07.  These documents were intended to find 
solution to identified safeguard problems and provide directives and guidelines to those 
enterprises involved in school construction.  The planned construction in the CF program 
is the same as that under QEFA2.  The framework documents are included in the 
Procedures Manual of the QEFA project and financing for the monitoring and evaluation 
have been included in the PAD, including the participation of key actors such as the 
Ministry of Environment's Direction de l'Environnement et des Etablissements Clas
sés or 
DEEC.  The delegated management agency will make the safeguard documents available 
on its website, and will include a chapter on environmental and social safeguard issues in 
its progress reports.  All schools will be constructed using the technical specifications and 
quality norms already prepared by the MEPEM during the first phase of the IDA project, 
with the modifications discussed during preparation and appraisal.   
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities (especially parents and students), teachers, 
local government authorities, regional and district education officers, and central 
ministries of education and environment, as well as the AGETIP.  A micro-planning 
exercise has already been carried out to identify the communities within which the civil 
works will be built with the involvement of all the key local stakeholders noted above, 
and the same stakeholders will be consulted as the environment and social framework 
document procedures are applied in the context of the upcoming construction/extension 
activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/22/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/22/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Mulatu 
05/21/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
05/22/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
05/22/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/22/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
05/22/2009 
Comments:  The safeguards responsibilities have been transferred to the Sector Management Unit. 
