Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3757
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P105881 
Project Name:  Sustainable Management of Fish Resources 
Task Team Leader:  John Virdin 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P092062 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 
EC: European Development Fund (EDF) 
8.00 
 
FRANCE:  Govt. of  [MOFA and AFD (C2D)] 
0.40 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
0.50
9.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to contribute to the restoration of the fish 
stocks supporting the central coastal fisheries of Senegal (from the Cap Vert Peninsula to 
the Saloum River Delta), by (i) promoting co-management of the coastal fisheries, (ii) 
contributing to the rehabilitation of the essential ecosystems for the coastal fisheries, and 
(iii) supporting alternative livelihoods and accompanying poverty reduction measures in 
targeted poor fishing communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support the following components and sub-components.  
 
(A)  Co-management of Coastal Fisheries. The objective of this component is to 
implement co-management systems to improve the governance of the coastal fisheries for 
a
more sustainable use of the resources. This component will support the following sub-
components: (1) Promotion of Local Co-Management Initiatives in Pilot Sites; (2) 
Page  2
Consolidation and Strengthening of Coastal Fisheries Co-management; (3) Institutional 
Support for a System of Local Fisheries Governance; and (4) Registration of Small-Scale 
Fishing Vessels.  
 
(B)  Rehabilitation of Ecosystems Essential for Coastal Fisheries.  The objective of this 
component is to contribute to the rehabilitation of ecosystems essential to the coastal 
fisheries, by implementing a network of fisheries conservation areas to help regenerate 
the resources, implementing artificial reefs, improving practices and technologies in the 
industrial shrimp fisheries operating in coastal ecosystems, and creating market 
mechanisms to encourage sustainable management of the ecosystems. This component 
will support the following sub-components: (1) Fisheries Conservation Areas (ACPs); (2) 
Artificial Reefs; (3) Introduction of Access Rights to ACPs and Artificial Reefs; (4) 
Improved Practices and Technologies in the Coastal Industrial Shrimp Fisheries to 
Protect the Ecosystems; and (5) Market Incentives for Sustainable Management for 
Targeted Fisheries.  
 
(C)  Alternative Livelihoods and Accompanying Social Measures.  The objective of this 
component is to establish and strengthen revenue-generating activities in targeted fishing 
communities, in particular for fishers and their families. This component will support the 
following sub-components: (1) Activities to Support Targeted Communities; (2) Support 
for Alternative Livelihoods to Fishing; and (3) Monitoring and Evaluation of the Fund for 
Alternative Livelihoods.  
 
(D) Institutional Strengthening for Fisheries Management, and Monitoring and 
Evaluation.  The objective of this component is to support the Ministry of Maritime 
Economy to manage and implement the project in the context of the Letter of Sector 
Policy, and to monitor and evaluate results. This component will support the following 
sub-components: (1) Development of a Fisheries Code and Support for the 
Implementation of Fisheries Management Plans, including research, policies, regulations 
and management measures; (2) Project Management; and (3) Monitoring and Evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is concentrated in the central coastal region of Senegal, where there are 
numerous communities heavily utilizing the fisheries resources. The safeguard analysis 
therefore takes into account the current situation of overexploitation of the resources and 
excess fishing effort by these communities in this region, and the possible social  
ramifications of reducing fishing effort to allow the fish stocks to rebuild.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Carolyn Winter (AFTCS) 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The key safeguard issue is the potential restriction of traditional access to coastal and fish 
resources that may be introduced by the project in targeted communities, in order to 
reduce fishing effort to allow the stocks to rebuild. Currently, the resources are utilized 
through a system of open access that has allowed essentially more fishers and fishing 
pressure than the resources can sustain. The project addresses this in the central coastal 
region by supporting co-management of the coastal fisheries, as a precursor to a 
community level rights-based system. It is from this transition away from open access to 
more regulated fisheries, that the key risks are created. These risks are largely social, 
because the implementation of co-management and rights-based systems imply that 
access to specific areas or types of fisheries will be restricted. The project-wide 
instrument to address this risk is the fishers' reconversion fund in component three of the 
project, which will compensate fishers for potential losses as a result of reduced fishing 
effort. This instrument will address these risks wherever they may emerge in local project 
sites. From a safeguards standpoint, the reconversion fund will utilize a process 
framework prepared by the project, to ensure that decisions concerning restriction of 
access to fish resources are decided on the basis of consensus of stakeholders. The fund 
will also utilize the Environmental Management Plan (including an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework) prepared through the EA, as a framework to ensure 
individual sub-projects are screened for any potential impacts under the natural habitats 
safeguard (OP/BP 4.04). This safeguard was triggered because the project is oriented 
towards the conservation of natural habitats. However, the project is expected to have 
beneficial impacts on targeted natural habitats, and any activities with potential negative 
impacts would not be financed by component 3.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts could include the reduction of fishers in the targeted area, as a result 
of increased resource management and the encouragement of alternative livelihoods to 
fishing.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project considered an approach to help rehabilitate the coastal fisheries based on the 
establishment of a national network of large-scale marine protected areas. This option 
was rejected due to the lack of an appropriate legal framework in Senegal to support such 
protected areas, and because of the 'top-down' nature of such large instruments. Rather, 
the project opted for an approach based on community-level management and marine 
reserves, in order to rebuild the resource base from the bottom up.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As mentioned previously, the Borrower will implement a social fund as component 3 of 
the project, to compensante any losses that fishers or communities might suffer as a result 
of strengthened resource management and loss of access to fisheries. The resource 
management measures and reductions in fishing effort will be decided by communities in 
a
consensus-based effort, that will be informed by a Process Framework prepared by the 
Borrower.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project are the fishing communities in the central coastal 
region of the country, as well as those fishers that utilize these resources. The 
Government conducted consultations on the draft EA and EMP in a sample of these 
communities, including Foundiougne, Joal, Cayar, Ngaparou and Ouakam. Community 
facilitators working in targeted communities will work together with the Department of 
Marine Fisheries to ensure that compliance with safeguards issues are monitored 
throughout the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/05/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/07/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/05/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/07/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
07/11/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
07/11/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Carolyn Winter 
07/11/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Herbert Acquay 
07/11/2008 
Comments:   
