Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3930 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P109986 
Project Name: Water and Sanitation Millennium Program 
Task Team Leader: Matar Fall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 6, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(S);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.20 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
1.80
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project is to contribute to the achievement of the water and sanitation 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by increasing sustainable access to water and 
sanitation services in rural and urban areas.  This will be pursued by: (a) improving water 
production and distribution systems and providing affordable onsite sanitation services in rural 
areas; (b) expanding water services in peri-urban areas; and (c) supporting further institutional 
reforms and capacity building in the sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have 3 components.  
 
Component 1 - Access to water (US$30.8 million): includes two subcomponents.  
 
Subcomponent 1 - Rural water (US$ 23.6 million):  This subcomponent to be implemented by 
the Department of Rural Water in the Ministry of Rural Water (MRW) will help to: (i) increase 
the number of multi-village systems (build 15 new systems); (ii) expand and reinforce the water 
Page  2
production and storage capacity (rehabilitating 30 catchment boreholes, construction of 25 new 
water reservoirs and rehabilitating 20 existing ones and upgrading 100 pumping systems); and 
(iii) provide improved water services through the installation of 10, 000 household connections.  
 
Subcomponent 2 - Urban water (US$7.2 million):  This subcomponent to be implemented by 
SONES will include: (i) the provision and installation of 22,000 household water connections in 
peri-urban areas; and (ii) the rehabilitation of 50 km of secondary and tertiary distribution pipes 
to contribute to the reduction of water losses.  
 
Component 2 - Access to sanitation (US$21.4 million): includes two subcomponents.  
 
Subcomponent 1 - Rural sanitation (US$ 12.9 million):  This subcomponent will be 
implemented by AGETIP under an agreement with the Department of Sanitation in the Ministry 
of Water and Sanitation (MUWS).  It will provide grant to communities and households in rural 
areas to improve their sanitation facilities through the construction of (i) 17,000 household 
latrines (13,600 VIPs + 3,400 manual flush toilets); and (ii) 400 public toilets, 17,000 washing 
facilities.  
 
Subcomponent 2 - Urban sanitation subcomponent (US$8.5 million):  This subcomponent to be 
implemented by the ONAS (the urban sanitation utility) will help to: (i) build a semi-collective 
sanitation system for the city of Joal including a stabilization pond for wastewater treatment and 
a
sludge treatment facility, and (ii) construct 4,500 improved latrines for the rest of the 
population not connected to the sewage system.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional support and capacity building (US$ 4.8M)  
 
This component will be implemented jointly by MUWS, MRW, SONES and ONAS.  It will 
help to: (i) increase the efficiency of public entities involved in the development of the water and 
sanitation sector by strengthening their capacity in planning and management of the sector; (ii) 
strengthen stakeholders and communities in carrying out their respective roles in the new rural 
water sector management strategy defined under the WSMP; and (iii) assist the Government in 
revising the urban water and sanitation institutional set-up in view of the end of the current lease 
contract by 2011, and in the implementation of the new rural water management strategy based 
on the full delegation of the maintenance of motorized boreholes to the private sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The focus of the project in rural water and sanitation will be in the regions of Matam, 
Tambacounda, Saint-Louis and Kaolack. For urban water, the project will focus on the peri-
urban areas of urban cities and for sanitation on the commune of Joal in the region of Thies.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has successfully implemented the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the 
Long Term Water Sector Project (LTWSP), including a comprehensive review of EMP 
implementation in September 2008. The Borrower also has experience in implementing a RPF 
under the LTWSP.  The proposed project will rely on the same institutional framework.  The 
Page  3
PCU will monitor overall implementaiton of the EMP, while each implementing agency will be 
responsible for implementing and monitoring applicable portions of the EMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project includes physical works in rural areas.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will avoid all cultural property resources, and if necessary reroute the distribution 
network   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will include rights of way for the distribution network, and minimal land grab for 
water production, distribution and sanitation facilities. For that purpose a resettlement policy 
framework will be prepared by the project in order to identify the social issues at stake 
(resettlement, restriction of access, land tenure, etc...). The Borrower's experience in this area is a 
strong plus.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
Since specific rural areas of intervention cannot be confirmed prior to appraisal, the 
Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and acceptable to the Bank before project appraisal. 
The ESMF and RPF will be prepared in accordance to World Bank safeguard policies, as 
well as national environmental policies. On completion and approval by the Bank, it will be 
disclosed in-
country and at the Bank’s Infoshop before project appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matar Fall 
11/17/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/17/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
11/17/2008 
Comments:   
