Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3419 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia 
Project ID: P109999 
Project Name: Resavica Restructuring and Local Economic Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Aurora Ferrari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (30%);General industry and trade sector (25%);Other 
social services (22%);General public administration sector (12%);Micro- and SME 
finance (11%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Small and medium 
enterprise support (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Improving 
labor markets (P);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s objectives are to facilitate the resolution of Resavica company in a financially, 
environmentally and socially responsible manner and to improve the governance of state and 
municipally owned enterprises.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project (USD 40 million CPS base scenario) will have the following components.  
 
Component I: Facilitation of Resavica resolution in a financially, environmentally and socially 
responsible manner (USD 32 million).  
 
This component will have three sub-components:  
 
Page  2
A. Assistance with financial and social legacy issues (USD 2 million). This sub-component 
includes TA to hire financial advisors with an international profile and a retrenchment specialist 
to assist the Serbian Privatization Agency in designing the restructuring program. The 
retrenchment specialist will assist in designing severance schemes that provide incentives to seek 
new employment and/or relocation from the region. The scheme will seek to ensure that any 
retrenchment packages are designed so as to ensure better long-term protection against poverty. 
The retrenchment specialist will also assist in the implementation of a public information 
campaign for the miners during the severance process.  
 
B. Assistance with environmental remediation (USD 13 million). Based on EIA/ feasibility 
study findings, this sub-component will finance: (i) TA to develop strategies for emergency 
clean-up of immediate environmental hazards and the remediation of environmentally damaged 
areas; and (ii) targeted financial assistance in form of “catalytic” investments to implement 
physical remediation and risk intervention works at prioritized sites.  Such investments would 
mainly address stabilization, reshaping and re-cultivation of waste tips and open pits, general 
cleaning of degraded sites from derelict buildings, contaminations and waste deposits, upgrading 
or establishment of wastewater treatment systems, the remediation of damage by subsidence and 
ground deformation.  
 
C. Promotion of alternative sources of private-led economic growth in the municipalities where 
Resavica operates. (USD 17 million). This sub-component will finance TA and a line of credit to 
mitigate the impact of Resavica’s restructuring. 
 
The TA will include capacity building of the regional National Employment Service Office and 
the development of a labor assistance package. This package will help Resavica's qualified 
mining personnel find employment in new mining operations and related industries, and also re-
train individuals seeking employment in the region’s established and prospective industries. 
Additionally, the TA will assist selected financial institutions to increase outreach in remote 
towns of the municipality. Finally, the TA will assist selected municipalities to develop and 
implement strategies to attract private investment.  
 
The line of credit would support small and micro-entrepreneurs (the large majority of 
businesses in the concerned municipalities) with loans ranging from EUR 1,000 to 30,000 to 
improve and expand their businesses.  
 
Component II: Improvement of the overall corporate governance framework for state and 
municipally owned enterprises and assistance to selected companies in implementing such 
changes (USD 8 million).  
 
This component will include the provision of TA to improve the overall governance framework 
for the state and municipally-owned enterprise sector (e.g. appointment of directors to the 
companies’ boards and of audit committees of these boards, implementation of the governance 
recommendations of the municipal transformation strategy); setting policies and monitoring of 
wages, controlled prices, subsidies and dividend distribution for non-local public service 
companies; prepare audited financial statements as per international standards for selected 
companies; train the management of selected enterprises in corporate governance and 
Page  3
management; assist GoS in preparing the IPO of selected companies; and implement a public 
information campaign to appraise the public at large of the progress being made under this 
component and improve their financial literacy as potential shareholders of these companies .  
 
The proposed implementing agency for the project is the Ministry of Economy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Physical interventions under the project’s environmental component will cover 9mine locations 
distributed over SE and SW parts of Serbia. None of the locations is situated in a formally 
protected area and at most locations mining activities have been ongoing for several decades, in 
some > 150 years. A map of Serbia with the mines considered under the project is attached to 
this ISDS.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
On national / ministerial scale there are several institutions (e.g. Ministry for Energy and Mines, 
Privatization Agency) which have acquired considerable experience on environmental 
remediation in the mining sector, and have sufficient capabilities and capacities among their staff 
to plan and supervise environmental projects. There is specific sector experience in Serbia, e.g. 
the World Bank has been working with the Serbian Government for several years on a similar, 
yet larger and more complex mine remediation project in Bor, which has created and enhanced 
regulatory and professional capacities. One exception is the Ministry for Environmental 
Protection which was only recently created and will likely need technical assistance, 
strengthening and capacity building.  
 
On the local level environmental authorities appear to have low capacities, and environmental 
compliance at the mines has been poorly enforced throughout their operational life. While 
Serbian legislation and standards provide a sufficient regulatory framework, enforcement 
capacities and practice will have to be strengthened considerably.  
 
The Resavica Mines group has in the past operated with crude environmental standards, 
however basic environmental regulations and guidelines were followed and when 
technologically and financially possible environmental impacts were as a rule kept to a 
minimum. Most of the mines face scrutiny and vocal criticism by local residents and have often 
been obliged to compensate (financially and with remediative action) for environmental damage. 
Thus a basis of both awareness and skills for environmental management exists in the mines on a 
technical level. Management has recently become increasingly aware of environmental issues 
and has commissioned a Serbian consultant with a corporate environmental assessment and 
strategy.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Most investments in concrete physical works will be undertaken within the environmental 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project component, specifically designed to remediate and mitigate negative impacts from the 
legacies of past mining operations. The project will assist the remediation of environmental 
liabilities such as unsecured waste dumps, ground- and surface water contaminations, surface 
deformations, degraded land and poor waste management. The project is expected to have a 
significant overall positive environmental effect; negative impacts will be restricted to 
construction activities during project implementation and thus are expected to be temporary, 
localized and manageable in nature.  
 
There are no toxic or hazardous substances involved in the project, as both the product 
(lignite, brown and hard coal) and the host rock are chemically inert under atmospheric 
conditions and do not react to produce harmful substances (e.g. no ARD is generated on waste 
dumps).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
None of the project locations is situated within a formally protected area, such as natural 
parks, wetlands or sites protected under international conventions. The project will strive to 
reduce the areas of existing land degradation and negative impact, thus sensitive habitats, even if 
not formally protected, will not be negatively affected.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
There are no large dams or tailings management facilities in the project which on first sight 
would trigger this safeguards policy. However, there is one accumulated small lake behind a 
cross-valley type waste dump, which wil
l
be
presented to the Bank’s dam safety specialist to 
determine if any further action is warranted (which is not expected).   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/14/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
In January 2008 an environmental specialist carried out a fact-finding mission, visiting 8 out 
of 9 mines affected by the project. The results of this mission have been used to categorize 
the project and define further steps. During further project preparation a Consultant will be 
contracted to (i) identify, prioritize and quantify legacy of past environmental hazards and 
liabilities; (ii) audit corporate environmental policies and practices of ongoing mining 
operations; (iii) review the legal and regulatory framework in Serbia and the wider region 
(EU legislation), its enforcement and effectiveness. The Consultant will, in close cooperation 
with Resavica Mines and local Serbian Consultants (see section below), develop and 
environmental impact assessment (EIA), environmental management plan (EMP) and a 
feasibility study (FS), which will address the following key issues: (iv) development of 
strategies and designs for emergency clean-up of key environmental impacts and the 
remediation of environmentally damaged and degraded areas; and (v) develop targeted pilot 
projects to absorb financial assistance in form of “catalytic” investments to implement 
physical remediation and risk intervention works at prioritized sites. The deliverables are 
expected by July 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aurora Ferrari 
02/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
