Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3469 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia 
Project ID: P110593 
Project Name: SERBIA HEALTH Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Michele Gragnolati 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original development objective under the Serbia Health Project (SHP) is still considered 
highly relevant, and is proposed to remain unchanged for the Additional Financing, which is: to 
build capacity to develop a sustainable, performance-oriented health care system where providers 
are rewarded for quality and efficiency and where health insurance coverage ensures access to 
affordable and effective care.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional Funds would finance:  
 
1.
Health management information technology.  Hospital payment reforms requires (i) 
investment in Serbian Health IT network that will link 400 health care providers into the single 
communication body, thus allowing testing of new discharge forms; (ii) investment in the 
implementation of servers, hardware and LAN (network within hospital) in hospitals based on 
the experience of 4 hospitals that were equipped under the Serbia Health Project (SHP); (iii) 
investment in hospital management software, including upgrade two hospital software currently 
used in 4 hospitals to have one hospital management information system which will be remapped 
to include and process additional data on finance and accounting, expenditures, production 
Page  2
factors (HR etc), ICD-10 update (from 3 to 4 digits), procedure coding, case-mix information of 
patients, ABC costing, and license fee for DRG software and replicate upgraded hospital 
management software into hospitals equipped with necessary hardware; and (iv) investment in 
upgrading databases of the HIF and Institute of Public Health (IPH) including members, claims 
and provider databases, such that data can be used by the provider performance analysis 
department for monitoring and evaluation of payment effect on HIF expenditures.  
 
2.  Technical assistance to build capacity on hospital management and quality improvement 
activities.  To ensure that providers can react to the new incentives set through the payment 
system, there is a need for technical assistance provided to the Chamber of Health Care 
Institutions to implement institutional and organizational reforms that lead to financial and 
management autonomy in hospitals, and ensure improved quality and productivity in care.  This 
includes capacity building in order to institutionalize health management as a profession in 
Serbia. Furthermore it includes supporting hospitals in staff-mix adjustments as proposed in the 
human resource strategy of the Ministry of Health, and creating a staff payment merit system to 
reward staff for better performance and patient satisfaction.  It also includes supporting health 
facilities in adjusting department (day care and day surgery) and bed structure following the 
health sector restructuring strategy, including partnerships with private providers to improve 
hospital productivity. Such reforms will lead to a situation where all hospital staff will be hired, 
fired and paid through the hospital whose budget is defined by DRGs.  This may involve legal 
changes for hospitals to become public firms with financial and management autonomy, clearly 
defined responsibilities and accountabilities, including annual external audits.  It will result in the 
devolution of financial and management responsibility for staff and all other production factors 
to the director of health facility. Technical assistance is also needed for the development and 
implementation of clinical pathways in hospitals, which will build upon the clinical practice 
guidelines produced under the Health Technology Assessment component of the Serbia Health 
Project. At the same time, the accreditation process started under the Serbia Health Project will 
be replicated to the selected hospitals in order to improve quality of health care services.  
 
3. Technical assistance to build capacity on monitoring and evaluation.  To monitor and 
evaluate the impact of the payment change on overall health policy goals, technical assistance is 
needs to be provided to: (i) health care facilities for monitoring and evaluation and fine-tuning of 
DRGs in hospitals; (ii) the HIF to build analytical capacity and support the creation of a provider 
performance analysis department in charge of data analysis, auditing of provider results to detect 
misreporting of DRGs, and presenting results to the HIF director and hospitals; (iii) the Ministry 
of Health to create a central overview body responsible for overall monitoring and evaluation the 
DRG implementation, detect and correct adverse effects, quality and pricing; and (iv) National 
Health Account team at the Institute of Public Health, who will be monitoring and evaluating the 
sector-wide effect of DRGs and its impact on total health expenditures. This component also 
includes specific capacity building such as international training courses and conferences related 
to payment reforms; study tours on DRGs for example to Ireland, Tuzla Canton in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina and Hungary; and the national flagship course offered by the World Bank Institute 
on health financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
to be determined.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Additional Financing will invest in information technology and technical assistance.  No 
safeguard policies are envisaged to be triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/22/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michele Gragnolati 
02/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
03/10/2008 
Comments:   
