Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3561
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P110593 
Project Name:  SERBIA HEALTH Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Michele Gragnolati 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
16.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original development objective under the Serbia Health Project (SHP) is still 
considered highly relevant, and is proposed to remain unchanged for the Additional 
Financing, which is: to build capacity to develop a sustainable, performance-oriented 
health care system where providers are rewarded for quality and efficiency and where 
health insurance coverage ensures access to affordable and effective care.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional loan will finance scaling up activities that were supported by the original 
project mostly under Component 2 (Health Finance, Policy and Management and Quality 
Improvement) and in particular in Subcomponent 2.1 (Health Finance), Subcomponent 
2.2 (Quality Improvement), Subcomponent 2.3 (Health Information System) and 
Subcomponent 2.4 (Capacity Building and Communication of the Ministry of Health 
(MOH)). Information on the individual sub-components of the additional financing is 
provided in the following paragraphs:  
 
(i) Health management information technology.  Hospital payment reforms requires: (a) 
investment in Serbian Health IT network that will link 400 health care providers into the 
Page  2
single communication body, thus allowing testing of new discharge forms; (b) investment 
in the implementation of servers, hardware and LAN (network within hospital) in 
hospitals based on the experience of 4 hospitals that were equipped under the SHP; (c) 
investment in hospital management software, including upgrading of hospital software 
currently used in 4 hospitals to include additional data on finance and accounting, 
expenditures, production factors, ICD-10 update (from 3 to 4 digits), procedure coding, 
case-mix information of patients, ABC costing, and license fee for Diagnosis-Related 
Group (DRG) software and replicating the upgraded hospital software in 5 additional 
hospitals; and (d) investment in upgrading databases of the Health Insurance Fund (HIF) 
and the Institute of Public Health (IPH) including members, claims and provider 
databases so that data can be used by the provider performance analysis department in the 
HIF for monitoring and evaluation of payment effect on HIF expenditures.  
 
(ii) Activities to build capacity for hospital management and to improve quality.  To 
ensure that providers can react to the new incentives set through the payment system, 
there is a need for technical assistance to be provided to the Chamber of Health Care 
Institutions to implement institutional and organizational changes that can produce more 
financial and management autonomy in hospitals, and ensure improved quality and 
productivity in care.  This includes capacity building in order to institutionalize health 
management as a profession in Serbia.  Furthermore it includes supporting hospitals in 
staff-mix adjustments as proposed in the human resource strategy of the MOH, and 
creating a staff payment merit system to reward staff for better performance and patient 
satisfaction.  It also includes supporting health facilities in adjusting department (day care 
and day surgery) and bed structure following the health sector restructuring strategy, 
including partnerships with private providers to improve hospital productivity. Legal 
changes for hospitals to become public firms with more autonomy and clearly defined 
responsibilities and accountabilities are also necessary so that financial and management 
responsibility for staff and all other production factors can be devolved to the directors of 
health facilities.  Technical assistance is also needed for the development and 
implementation of clinical pathways in hospitals, which will build upon the clinical 
practice guidelines produced under the Health Technology Assessment component of the 
SHP.  At the same time, the accreditation process started under the SHP will be replicated 
to the selected hospitals in order to improve quality of health care services.  
 
(iii) Technical assistance to build capacity on monitoring and evaluation:  To build 
capacity to monitor and evaluate the impact of the payment change on overall health 
policy goals, technical assistance is planned to be provided to: (a) health care facilities for 
monitoring and evaluation and fine-tuning of DRGs in hospitals; (b) the HIF to build 
analytical capacity and support the creation of a provider performance analysis 
department in charge of data analysis, auditing of provider results to detect misreporting 
of DRGs, and presenting results to the HIF director and hospitals; (c) the Ministry of 
Health to be able to use all information that is generated to steer implementation of 
provider payment reform and (d) the National Health Account team at the Institute of 
Public Health, who will be monitoring and evaluating the sector-wide effect of DRGs and 
its impact on total health expenditures. This sub-component also includes specific 
capacity building activities such as international training courses and conferences related 
Page  3
to payment reforms; study tours on DRGs for example to Ireland, Tuzla Canton in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina and Hungary; and the national flagship course offered by the World 
Bank Institute on health financing.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During concept stage, it was determined that the project will solely finance information 
technology equipment and technical assistance.  Hence, no safeguards policies are 
envisaged to be triggered.  Environmental Category for this Additional Financing has 
been rated C.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
Page  5
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michele Gragnolati 
04/01/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
