Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4046 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/12/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia 
Project ID: P108005 
Project Name: CORRIDOR X HIGHWAY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
388.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12.00
12.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase transport efficiency and improve 
traffic safety on the two sections of Corridor X, between Nis and Dimitrovgrad and Leskovac 
and Presevo respectively, and strengthen the management of road safety in Serbia.   The 
improvement of these two road corridors through the construction of two sections of motorway 
will ultimately support local and regional socio-economic development, which is a key objective 
for the Government.  The benefits of the proposed project are expected to include transport 
efficiency gains from a reduction of transport cost and travel times for people and goods along 
the corridor, increase in reliability of transport services, reduction of the share of domestic 
transport costs and non-factor services in the total value of commodities transported along the 
corridor, and traffic safety improvements, both in the corridor and more broadly across Serbia.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following provisional components have been identified for the project:  
 
Component 1 - The M-1 road to FYR Macedonia (E75) 
ñ
Corridor Xd.  This component 
involves the construction or upgrading of the existing road to motorway for a length of 74.5km 
Page  2
kilometers running between Leskovac and Levosoje 20 km north of the border with the FYR of 
Macedonia (Corridor Xd). The proposed intervention involves the construction of a motorway on 
a
new alignment for about half the length and a widening of the existing road for the remaining 
half.  
 
Component 2 - The M 1-12 Road to Bulgaria (E80) 
ñ
Ni≈°  ñ Dimitrovgrad - Corridor Xc.  
This component involves the construction of a motorway on a new alignment for a length of 
83km kilometers from Prosek to the Bulgarian border.  
 
Component 3 - Road Safety: This component will support plans for: (i) road safety capacity 
building in the establishment of a Lead Agency for Road Safety; (ii) creation of a road safety 
performance framework; (iii) developing and launching a national road safety strategy; and (iv) 
preparation and piloting of multi-sectoral road safety pilots.  
 
Component 4 - Institutional Capacity Building and Implementation Assistance: This component 
will include consultant services for the supervision of the civil works on the two sections of 
motorway, and other necessary institutional capacity building and implementation assistance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project involves the preparation of and provision to the financing of the construction of the 
two southern sections of Corridor X in Serbia within a larger program: (i) The construction of a 
motorway on the corridor between Leskovac and Levosoje near the Macedonian border 
(Corridor Xd) at a provisional cost estimate of ‚Ç¨600 million (US$800 million); and  (ii) the 
construction of a motorway onthe section of corridor between Ni≈° and the border with Bulgaria 
at Dimitrovgrad(Corridor branch-Xc) at an estimated provisional cost of ‚Ç¨600 million 
(US$800 million).   
 
E.  Borrowerís Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has proven capacity to fulfil their responsibilities in the preparation and 
implementation stages of the project, but experience has been gained on projects of lessor scale 
and complexity.  The Public Enterprise Putevi Srbije (PEPS) has been implementing an earlier 
project (albeit Category B) in the sector in a satisfactory manner. The Implementing Agency for 
this project will be a dedicated daughter company under PEPS.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
As the project involves widening and construction of roads.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
As the project involves significant and sustained environmental impacts on a new alignment, 
on one section close to a National Park.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project team will assess whether the proposed project impacts on forests near the 
Bulgarian border, or elsewhere.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The project team will assess whether herbicides are used to clear or maintain vegetation.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
As the project involves significant and sustained environmental impacts on a new alignment, 
project preparation will determine whether there is likelihood of impacts on physical cultural 
resources.  If not, the usual provision for handling of chance finds will apply.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As the project involves significant land take on a new alignment.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project team will be assessing whether there are transboundary effects that could trigger 
the requirements of the ESPOO convention. It is as yet unclear whether cross border rivers 
would be affected.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EIAs at preliminary design stage have been commissioned for all sections and are 
expected to be completed by the end of December 2008.  An overall strategic EIA for each 
corridor section is being prepared and will be available by the scheduled time of appraisal 
(March 2009).   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
01/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
01/06/2009 
Comments:   
