Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/14/2008 
Report No.:  42570
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P096823 
Project Name:  Delivery of Improved Local Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Truman G. Packard 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (34%);Health (33%);General education sector (33%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Decentralization (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Education for all (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
46.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Delivery of Integrated Local Services (DILS) project will increase the capacity of 
institutional actors and beneficiaries in order to improve access to and the efficiency, 
equity and quality of local delivery of health, education and social protection services, in 
a
decentralizing environment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The objective of the project is to increase the capacity of institutional actors and 
beneficiaries in order to improve access to and the efficiency, equity and quality of local 
delivery of health, education and social protection services, in a decentralizing 
environment. The project components are:  
 
Component I: Making Fiscal Decentralization Work. (Total Costs, including 
Contingencies: US$7.0 million; Bank financing: US$7.0 million.) This component will 
support the development of a public financing framework that increases efficiency and 
compensates for inequities across municipalities  
 
Page  2
Component II: Improving Outreach and Access through Development and Expansion of 
Innovations in Service Delivery(Total Costs, including Contingencies: US$12.2 million; 
Bank financing: US$12.2 million.). This component will support LSGs and non-
government service providers to identify new approaches and models for delivering 
services to vulnerable and excluded groups.  
 
Component III: Supporting a New Regulatory, Oversight and Quality-Assurance Role 
for line Ministries(Total Costs, including Contingencies: US$7.4 million; Bank 
financing: US$7.4 million.). This component will support capacity building measures for 
the Central government ministries to enable them to undertake an institutional shift out of 
direct provision of services into regulation, oversight and quality assurance. This 
component will also finance, through grants, renovations to existing primary health care 
centers, if such are requested as part of grant proposals.  
 
Component IV: Improving Capacity of LSGs and other local Service Providers (Total 
Costs, including Contingencies: US$16.5 million; Bank financing: US$16.5 million.). 
This component will support the improvement of knowledge, skills and information and 
communications technology at the disposal of LSG staff and service providers, to enable 
them to make informed decisions in management, strategic planning, needs assessment 
and budgeting, service delivery and monitoring and evaluation. This component will also 
finance, through grants, renovations to existing schools, if such are requested as part of 
grant proposals.  
 
In addition, to the activities under each of the components above the loan will provide 
support for a Fiduciary Services Unit (FSU) of the stakeholder ministries, as well as 
implementation support for Project Administration Teams (PATs), but excluding the 
salaries of government officials and civil servants. (Total Costs, including Contingencies, 
of this support for project implementation are US$3.2 million; Bank financing: US$3.2 
million.)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in municipalities across the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tijen Arin (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Prior to when the project was originally appraised (April 2007), it was determined that 
DILS would solely finance knowledge-transfer and investments in information / 
communications technology.  The Bank team and its counterparts decided that minor 
civil works critical to supporting the project development objective, would be financed 
separately under the Government's own National Investment Plan (NIP). Hence, the 
Environmental Assessment Safeguards Policy was not triggered.For the same reason, no 
potential impact on Physical Cultural Properties was envisaged.  Prior to appraisal, the 
design of DILS justified the categorization of the Project as C.  
 
However, since appraisal, a new government has taken office.  The DILS project now 
includes new activities deemed important by the new government authorities, particularly 
the refurbishment of existing schools and primary health care centers.  Therefore, the 
DILS project is now expected to pose limited environmental risks associated with this 
rehabilitation of existing schools and primary health care facilities.  Environmental and 
Physical and Cultural Resources safeguard policies are now triggered.  
 
The principal environmental risks of the minor building rehabilitation works concern (i) 
air quality (from debris and dust occurring during construction), (ii) noise (from general 
construction activities and equipment used during construction), (iii) water quality (from 
sediments moving off site to nearby watercourses), (iv) solid waste (from improperly 
stored and disposed of construction waste;); (v) asbestos (from improper removal, 
containment, treatment and disposal),  (vi) toxic and hazardous wastes (from and 
improper separation, treatment, transportation and disposal of hazardous/toxic materials, 
or use of lead-based paint), and (vii) medical waste (from lack of special facilities fro 
handling and disposal). Larger construction activities may lead to direct or indirect 
hazards to public traffic and pedestrians. Construction activities may also constitute a risk 
to cultural heritage if the to be rehabilitated building is a historical structure or close to 
such a structure or located in a designated historic district.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant indirect or long term impacts are expected provided that EMPs (see below) 
are adequately implemented.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative would have been not to include these civil works in the project and for the 
Government to finance them separately under its National Investment Plan. However, 
after appraisal the Government requested their inclusion, which prompted the 
recategorization of the project from C to B. Hence the alternative would likley not have 
addressed likely adverse impacts in an as systematic manner as under the current project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and 
disclosed it to the general public for comments.  The EMF entails environmental 
management plans (NMPs) with a checklist to be applied to each sub-project which 
includes rehabilitation works. The checklist also includes provisions for historic 
buildings. The EMP will be annexed to all civil works contracts and financed by the 
project.  The authorities charged with safeguarding Physical Cultural 
Properties/Resources in Serbia will be consulted prior to any rehabilitation of schools and 
primary health care facilities. The Fiduciary Services Unit (FSU) on behalf of the project 
implementing agencies will retain a consultant environmental specialist to ensure 
adequate application of the EMP-checklist to sub-projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As the specific location of the envisaged minor civil works is not known a priori, no 
specific population can be identified that would be affected. These works will be financed 
as a part of grant schemes established and financed by the project at the Ministry of 
Education and the Ministry of Health.  To be awarded a grant, schools and primary health 
care centers will need to submit a detailed proposal of activities to be financed that would 
have to include mention of any civil works.  These proposals will be drawn up by local 
service providers in consultation with local community stakeholders.  For example, in the 
case of schools, successful proposals must be consistent with School Development Plans 
(SDPs).  By law, SDPs have to be renewed every five years, in consultation with a local 
School Board, where community members are represented.  
 
As individual sub-projects are determined, EMPs will be prepared and disclosed in the 
respective municipality and a stakeholder consultation meeting will be held.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/13/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Truman G. Packard 
01/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tijen Arin 
02/13/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arup Banerji 
02/14/2008 
Comments:   
