Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC4252
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P108005 
Project Name:  CORRIDOR X HIGHWAY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Trade facilitation 
and market access (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
388.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
44.00
44.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to increase transport efficiency and improve traffic 
safety on the three project sections of Corridor X, between Nis and Dimitrovgrad and 
Leskovac and Donji Neradovac respectively, and to improve road management and road 
safety in Serbia.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 - The M-1 road to FYR Macedonia (E-75) 
–
Corridor Xd.  This component 
involves the construction of two sections of motorway totaling 31.9 km between 
Grabovnica and Gradelica, and between Vladicin Han and Donji Neradovac (Corridor 
Xd);  
 
Component 2 - The M 1-12 Road to Bulgaria (E-80) Nis to“ Dimitrovgrad - Corridor 
Xc.  This component the construction of 8.67 km of motorway on a section of the 
corridor between Dimitrovgrad and the border with Bulgaria;  
 
Component 3 - Road Safety: This component will support, inter alia, plans for: (i) road 
safety capacity building to support the establishment of a Lead Agency in the form of the 
Page  2
National Road Safety Council (NRSC); (ii) creation of a road safety performance 
framework; (iii) developing and launching a national road safety strategy; and  
 
Component 4 - Implementation Assistance and Institutional Support: This component 
will include, inter alia, the following sub-components: (i) independent environmental and 
social supervision directly reporting to the client; (ii) project managerial support to 
CXLLC to assist in the implementation of the project; (iii) independent technical audit of 
the civil works; (iv) procurement assistance, and other necessary technical assistance, in 
the form of individual consultants to CXLLC; and (vi) technical assistance to support 
institutional strengthening in PEPS through the development of a Reform Action Plan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The main civil works in components 1 and 2 are to take place on the road corridors to the 
south and south east of Nis in Southern Serbia.  
 
Component 1 involves the construction of two sections of motorway, as part of a larger 
parallel financed operation, along the Morava river valley broadly follows the alignment 
of the existing E-75 road. The entire program involves the construction of a new 
motorway on 74.03km between Grabovnica and Levosoje.  
 
The World Bank will be financing the first section of 5.6km between Grabovnica and 
Grdelicia, and the section of 26.3 km between Vladicin Han and Donji Neradovac. The 
EIB will be financing the middle section, and the final section of 15.8 km between Dinji 
Neredovac and Levosoje will be financed by HiPERB and the Serbian Government The 
ending point in Levosoje corresponds to the starting point of the motorway section whose 
works are ongoing and domestically financed from Levosoje to FYR Macedonia border  
 
The valley is very narrow between Grabovnica and Vladicin Han (Grdelica gorges), a 
length of about 35 km, and all infrastructures have to share the same valley along this 
section: the railway, the national road and the new motorway. In addition the valley is 
curved and is partly occupied by villages or towns (Predejane).  Between Vladicin Han 
and Levosoje the valley becomes wider and the motorway does not include any tunnel. 
Wherever it is possible, the motorway reuses the access controlled existing road for one 
carriageway with another carriageway built along it. However some new alignments are 
needed for avoiding urban areas (Vranje, Bujanovac) or making the alignment straighter 
(at one location between Vladicin Han and Vranje). In locations where the existing M1 
highway is reused as one carriageway of the future motorway, a parallel regional road is 
restored for accommodating the local traffic.  
 
Component 2 involves the construction of one section of motorway of 8.9km around 
Dimitrovgrad, as part of larger parallel financed operation to construct 83.45km of new 
motorway on a section of the E-80 corridor south of Nis, near the town of Prosek, to the 
border with Bulgaria at Dimitrovgrad. The proposed new motorway will be built on a 
new alignment all the way, with the exception of a 5 km long section between Pirot and 
Dimitrovgrad where the existing road is used as one carriageway of the motorway. 
Page  3
Dimitrovgrad will be bypassed by a new alignment to the North of the city, and it is this 
latter section of 8.67km that will be financed from the World Bank Loan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The section 5 of the main Corridor Level EIA Reports deals with environmental impacts 
associated with the project, while chapters 6 and 7 deal with mitigation and monitoring 
measures.  
 
The environment along the proposed road alignment along the E-80 corridor is not 
classified as sensitive or particularly valuable in terms of biodiversity and ecological 
significance, except within the vicinity of Sicevo George (which is protected as,an area of 
exceptional biological diversity and as a remarkable example of the occurrence and 
interaction of geological, geomorphological and hydrological phenomena, and containing 
two monasteries and remains of several medieval fortifications as well as parts of a 
famous Roman road Via Militaris), the Jela#nica Gorge (a special nature reserve) 
Jelasnica  and the Grdelica Canyon (not a protected area but with ecological and 
biodiversity significance as a refuge for tertiary vegetation where significant populations 
of some endangered plant and animal species are known or likely to be found).  
 
The new highway alignment passes some 300 m away from the border of the Nature 
Park, through the Jela#nica gorge (following the existing regional road) and through the 
Grdelica Gorge. Based on requirements identified by the Institute for Nature Protection 
and the results of further site investigations to be undertaken as part of detailed design, 
appropriate measures will be taken to avoid possible negative impacts during the 
construction and operation phase.   Soil pollution and degradation in the project area is 
not considered as major problem during the construction phase and adequate protection 
Page  4
measures have been included in the Framework EMP and will be elaborated further in the 
site-specific EMPs. Locations of the possible borrow-pits will be determined by the 
contractor implementation plan and standard engineering measures will be used to close, 
restate and re-cultivate those areas after decommissioning.  The analysis of noise levels 
show that during the project operation the prescribed noise levels will be exceeded 
outside the highway corridor at certain places. For those areas the installation of 
approximately 4738 kilometers of roadside noise-proof structures will be installed 
together with passive measures (e.g. sound proof windows) where necessary. There are 
no potential large scale negative impacts on water quality, as the project includes 
engineering measures to prevent temporary pollution from the road construction (by dust, 
physical damage to river banks and accidental spills) and during operation through 
collection of run-off and retention areas in sensitive locations.  
 
The only potentially significant negative impact on fauna would relate to the prevention 
of migration due to construction of a fenced highway.  This will be mitigated by the 
introduction of  designated box culverts and piped underpasses to serve as especially 
designed crossings for animals in areas where the larger animal groups exist, as well as 
along the already observed routes. OP 4.11 is not triggered because, in accordance with 
Croatian law the alignment was selected to avoid negative impacts on known cultural 
heritage sites.  In the vicinity of the new highway, there are over 30 objects that belong to 
category of cultural monument.  Additional site investigations will be carried out and 
mitigation measures will be included in the site-specific EMPs as needed to ensure there 
are no negative indirect impacts on these sites.  In addition,  a set of preventive protection 
measures has been designed to apply to chance finds. Those measures include immediate 
stop of all works in progress around the new finds, adequate fencing to prevent 
unauthorized access and immediate notification of the Serbian Institute for Protection of 
Cultural Monuments.  
 
There will be some land acquisition and resettlement associated with the project. There 
is no major or irreversible impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect, cumulative and long term impacts in the project area relate to existing 
and/or future development of new facilities (motels, hotels, petrol stations, restaurants 
etc) along the route.  Existing significant facilities were taken into account in the analysis 
and modeling (of noise, air pollution) in the EIAs.  Impacts of future facilities cannot be 
defined at present, but the above activities will be subject to EIA according to Serbian 
legislation, which in this area is aligned with EU legislation. The number of facilities and 
business alongside the current road is relatively modest and includes one stone quarry 
(Momin Kamen), around a dozen small motels, several road maintenance bases (with 
garages for highway maintenance vehicles).  
 
The majority of the areas through which the E-75 and E-80 highways are routed are 
rural in nature and continue to suffer from out-migration, as people move to the larger 
cities and towns in search of work etc. It is not anticipated that large scale developments 
Page  5
or large in-migrations will occur simply due to the presence of an improved highway 
connection.  
 
The only potential negative long-term impact could arise from increased number of 
vehicles on the highway and corresponding increased emission of green-house gases. 
However, the actual impact cannot be determined at the moment, but is estimated to be 
negligible to modest due to increased use of more fuel-economic vehicles and non-leaded 
fuel in future.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project design considered several options as early as 1996 (to the level of feasibility 
stage). During the general design stage, 6 different options were considered (3 for E-75 
and 3 for E-80) based on several design criteria, including design speeds, curve radii and 
inclines and were feasible alternatives existed.  
 
As part of the evaluation of alternative components of the Project, environmental and 
social aspects were considered alongside engineering and cost parameters, as part of a 
multi-criteria evaluation. These included avoiding protected areas and cultural heritage 
sites and minimizing disruption or fragmentation of settlements.  Maximum priority has 
been given to the construction costs, traffic safety and environmental and social issues 
during route selection and design. The final options have been selected and legally 
adopted by the Government of Serbia. These options have been formalized and adopted, 
after public consultation, in the Republic of Serbia Spatial Development Plan.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In respect to environmental safeguard issues, PEPS, on behalf of the K10DOO, has 
already prepared 12 sub-section EIAs on preliminary designs that comply with Serbian 
legislation. The national disclosure process encompassed four rounds of public 
consultations for each sub-section (on TOR for environmental consultant, on scope of 
environmental assessment, on draft EIA and on draft final EIA) and were carried out in 
period from 2006 to 2009. The sub-section EIAs have been approved by the Serbian 
Ministry of Environment. In accordance with OP/BP 4.01 the Client has engaged an 
independent consultant to prepare two Corridor Level EIAs (one for E-75 and one for E-
80). Besides consolidating the sub-section EIAs, the Corridor Level EIAs also addressed 
the cumulative, induced, indirect and transboundary impacts. The draft EIA has been 
received by the Bank and commented upon. The Client subsequently updated the 
Corridor Level EIAs and prepared a final version of the document.  
 
PEPS capability and capacity to plan and implement the environmental protection and 
mitigation measures is considered high. PEPS have a separate, well staffed and trained 
environmental department that has already been involved in environmental supervision of 
the Bank financed projects in Serbia.  
 
Page  6
The project triggers OP 4.12.  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared 
by the borrower as a condition for appraisal which complies with OP 4.12.  The reason 
for preparing a RPF instead of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was that the main designs 
were not finalized at the time of scheduled appraisal for all the IFI funded sub-sections in 
the program, therefore the full impact not known. PEPS is responsible, on behalf of 
Koridor 10 Limited Liability Company (K10DOO), of the preparation and 
implementation of both the RPF and the subsequent RAP. The RAPs are prepared in 
conjunction with the main design for each section.   PEPS has been involved with land 
acquisition and resettlement issues in Serbia with enough capacity within the legal 
Department to implement the RAP. The expropriation laws in Serbia are very detailed 
and comparable to the WB Policy of Resettlement.  As result, the institutional setting is 
in place for implementation of the RAP. At the local level municipalities assist with the 
consultation and information dissemination, working closely with PEPS.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
PEPS is in charge of the implementation of the RAP on behalf of K10DOO, the 
implementing agency, the Ministry of Finance, which oversees the land acquisition for all 
projects in Serbia, the municipalities and the property department within the 
municipalities, who are in charge of processes at the local level related to land 
acquisition, and the affected communities and people. At the proejct design stage, the 
affected municiplaities are informed and consulted. Then , the consultation in regards to 
impact on the lands and properties takes place in each affected municipality, where 
affected communities and people are contacted for information dissemination, 
consultation and valuation. In the case where only a few people are affected in a given 
village or town, they are invited individually, through written correspondence, to the 
municipality and informed in person and thier options are discussed. If their numbers are 
more than two or three families they are invited as a groups and are given detailed 
information about the project, the impact on their lands or properties and their 
entitlements.  A copy of the entitlement matrix of the RAP is given to all affected people.  
The RPF has been disclosed in draft in country on the PEPS website on the April 3, 2009, 
and replaced by the final version May 20, 2009. The draft was disclosed to Infoshop on 
April 3, 2009, and replaced by the final version May 28, 2009. A copy of the RPF has 
been displayed in all relevant municipalities.  
 
In respect to environmental safeguards - The in-country disclosure of draft Corridor 
Level EIAs was carried out in period from February 25 (when the documents were made 
publicly available on site and at the Client’s web site) to March 11 and 12 (when the 
public meetings were held in Bela Palanka (for e-80) and Vranje (for E-75). The Final 
EIA document was received on April 7, 2009. The final EIA document remains available 
at the Client’s web site. Comments on draft and finalEIA document can be sent to the 
Client’s environmental unit from February 25, 2009 onwards.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  7
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
06/03/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/28/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  8
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
06/02/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Nikola Ille 
06/02/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
06/02/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/02/2009 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
06/02/2009 
Comments:  Cleared 
