Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC4127
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P108069 
Project Name:  Sierra Leone Public Financial Management 
Task Team Leader:  Vivek Srivastava 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
7.50 
 
EC: European Commission 
10.70
18.20 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The project development objective (PDO) is to support GoSL in sustainably 
improving the credibility, control and transparency in fiscal and budget management. The 
key recipients of the project benefits include many parts of MoFED, Cabinet, NPPA, the 
Parliamentary Budget and Finance and Public Accounts Committees, and other MDAs.  
 
2. 
The project will adopt the following key indicators for measuring progress:  
 
o
Variance between liabilities paid and commitments approved  
 
o
Variance in expenditure composition for the 20 largest budget heads  
 
o
Variance in budget deficit (excluding grants)  
 
o
The share of actual to budgeted spending on HIPC/PRSP priorities compared to 
the ratio of actual to budget expenditures for all other discretionary primary expenditures  
 
o
Payment arrears (excluding interest and donor-financed project expenditure)  
 
o
Number of financial and procurement documents listed in PEFA 10 published 
through gazette and website.  
Page  2
o
Timely audited Public Accounts with no material qualifications concerning basic 
control system failures  
 
o
Percentage of MDA contracts in compliance with plans/approved revisions  
 
--------------------  
 
N.B. The DFID and EC contributions have been estimated at current exchange rates less 
ad hoc estimates of TF administration fees (under negotiation).  To hedge against 
exchange rate risks, actual amount that can be committed in the grant agreement will be 
less than US$22.2 million. The current costing of the project is based on an amount of 
US$20 million.   
 
3. Project Description 
1.    A technical assistance IDA grant of US$4.0 million will be used over a period of 
four years from June 2009 to May 2013. The IDA grant will be pooled with DFID and 
EC (referred to as “DPs”) grant resources to support the implementation of the GoSL’s 
Integrated PFM Reform Program (IPFMRP). The DFID and EC resources will be 
channeled through a Bank-administered Trust Fund and will be pooled with IDA 
resources to finance project activities.  The IDA contribution will be USD 4 million and 
commitments from DFID and EC are GBP 5 million and Euro 8 million, respectively. 
The African Development Bank (ADB) will use its budget support operation (currently 
under preparation) to support this project by using prior actions and triggers that 
complement the objectives of this project.  
 
2. 
The implementation will be undertaken in two phases separated by a detailed mid-
term review: (i) Phase 1: June 2009 – May 2011, and (ii) Phase 2: June 2011 – May 2013. 
Annual work plans will ensure that Platform 1 activities will be given priority in the 
initial phase. A mid-term review will take place at the end of Phase 1, to review progress 
and to develop and adapt the design of Phase 2 accordingly.  
 
3. 
The long term vision of the GoSL is a PFM system that supports the achievement 
of fiscal discipline; strategic, efficient and effective allocation and use of funds; and value 
for money, and probity in the use of public funds.  
 
4. 
The GoSL IPFMRP is a comprehensive sector program for PFM, which builds 
upon its existing National Action Plan for PFM reform and on the progress achieved to 
date. It includes three main parts - Core PFM components, Strengthening of revenue 
administration and Strengthening of external audit - the first of which will be supported 
by this project:  
 
5. 
A number of strategic priorities for the core IPFMRP have been identified by 
GoSL, drawing in part from the analysis provided by the IMF Fiscal Affairs Department 
(FAD) mission of March 2008 as well as GoSL analysis and the PEFA assessment.  The 
priorities identified are the need to restore budget credibility and supplier confidence, 
improve cash management, increase adherence to the legal framework (with amendments 
as needed) and build PFM capacity in MDAs (ministries, departments and agencies).  
Ongoing reforms supported by the IRCBP will continue to be supported by the IPFMRP 
Page  3
so that the present momentum will be maintained and the benefits fully realized. These 
reforms include the rollout of the Integrated Financial Management Information Systems 
(IFMIS) to remaining MDAs, the verification of government payrolls, improved 
procurement, the extension and deepening of internal audit, strengthening local 
government financial management, and legal and regulatory reform.  
 
6. 
The project adopts an integrated approach in that it provides joint DP support to 
the MoFED and other PFM actors in the implementation of the GoSL’s integrated reform 
program. [Footnote: With the exception of the components for the National Revenue 
Authority and the Audit Service which are being funded separately]. The project support 
builds on the developments made to date in the core areas of budget management, 
accounting and control. It draws on the FAD report recommendations, the PEFA 
assessment and consultancies in budget management, capacity building and the phasing 
out of DP support for MoFED staff.  
 
7. 
Prioritization is guided by a set of three conceptual “platforms”.  The desired 
Platform 1 outcome is one in which budgets are credible and transparent so as to enhance 
the confidence of all stakeholders that the Government can translate an approved budget 
into actual revenue and expenditure, both in aggregate and at the agency level. Building 
on the budget discipline achieved in the first platform, Platform 2 interventions focus on 
improved allocation of all available resources in accordance with sectoral strategies and 
reallocations arising from changes in cash flow projections. Platform 3 activities should 
see a strong effort to achieve greater efficiency and probity in resource use leading to 
improved service delivery. This outcome logically follows on from the predictable 
funding achieved in platform 1 and the improved allocation of resources achieved in 
platform. This is shown in figure 1.  
 
8. 
The phasing of activities is not dictated solely by their attribution to platforms. 
The programming over 2009-2013 takes into account the need to complete and 
consolidate ongoing reforms, and to initiate major reforms that have a long lead time, 
such as capacity building.  
 
Project interventions are organized under the following five components. Components 1 
and 2 address different stages of the budget cycle; component 3 addresses cross-cutting 
issues, component 4 supports demand side accountability arrangements and component 5 
is for project management.  
 
Component 1 - Strengthening Macrofiscal Coordination and Budget Management (USD 
2.07 million)  
 
The key outcomes of this component will include improved budget credibility 
associated with a more appropriately developed and managed aggregate fiscal position, 
delivery by the MoFED of predictable funding in accordance with budgets, constrained 
MDA budgets and control of the in year position contributing to Platform 1 objectives, 
and improved strategic prioritization contributing to Platform 2 objectives.  
 
Page  4
Component 2 
–
Reinforcing Key Aspects of the Control System to Support 
ImprovedService Delivery (USD 3.17 million)  
 
The key outcomes of this component include an updated legal framework, robust public 
procurement practices, tightened payroll controls, strengthened internal audit, improved 
accounting procedures operating in the MoFED and MDAs, and further publication of 
PETS contributing to an effective control environment in MDAs. Striving for these 
internal controls will be reinforced through strengthened scrutiny of public finances by 
Parliament. More effective internal controls support Platforms 1 and 3 objectives.  
 
Component 3 – Establishing and Maintaining Sustainable and Capable Central Finance 
Functions  (USD 11.36 million)  
 
This component will undertake various cross-cutting activities including all aspects of 
training and HR capacity development that are required to support the main PFM 
functions that are being strengthened in the other three components. This component will 
be undertaken by the Capacity Building Sub-Committee of the PFM Oversight 
Committee.  
 
Component 4 - Assisting Non-state Actors’ Scrutiny (USD 1.0 million)  
 
This component will assist the development of the analytic and dissemination capacity 
of non-state actors in exercising scrutiny of the use of public resources, as well as 
building a constituency for reform of the PFM system across an array of non-state actors.  
 
Component 5 – Project Coordination and Administration (USD 1.5 million)  
 
A
project administration unit will be established within the MoFED within the 
Directorate of PFM Reforms and will be staffed with a Project Manager who will also 
have monitoring and evaluation responsibilities for the IPFMRP, a Procurement 
Specialist and a Project Accountant. The tasks of this unit will include administration of 
grant agreements, management of bank accounts, fiduciary management and monitoring 
and evaluation.  
 
9. 
The project will finance consulting services, workshops, training, study tours, IT 
equipment, vehicles, office equipment, operating expenses and salaries (on a declining 
basis).  
 
10. 
Overall oversight will be provided by an existing PFM Oversight Committee and 
its sub-committees. Day to day implementation will be coordinated and led by a Director 
for PFM Reform to be recruited into the MoFED. The Director for PFM Reform will be 
supported by a Project Administration Unit including a Project Administrator, a Project 
Accountant and a Procurement Specialist.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a national program that will focus on core PFM institutions and systems 
throughout Sierra Leone.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N.A  
 
As indicated in the Decision Meeting Memo, no formal ASPEN clearance is required as 
the project design remains unchanged and the Category is unchanged from 'C'.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N.A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N.A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N.A   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project does not trigger any safeguard policies.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Page  7
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vivek Srivastava 
02/02/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/21/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helene Grandvoinnet 
02/02/2009 
Comments:   
