Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/13/2008 
Report No.:  AC550
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P078613 
Project Name:   INSTITUTIONAL REFORM & CAPACITY BUILDING 
Task Team Leader:  Vivek Srivastava 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 11, 2004 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (65%);Central government 
administration (35%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(S);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.12 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.07
3.07 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to help the post-conflict Government of Sierra 
Leone (GoSL) establish a functioning local government system and improve 
inclusiveness, transparency and accountability of public financial management at all 
levels of government.   
 
3. Project Description 
The restructured project (restructuring approved by RVP on 01/30/08 and ISDS 
revised)has three components, as follows.  
 
Component 1: Decentralization and Capacity Building. This component supports: 
strengthening policy and implementation capacity for the decentralization program; start-
up investment in local governance administrative infrastructure; capacity building to 
support decentralization; implementation of the Local Governance Development Grant; 
Page  2
consultation, information, education and communication for decentralization; and 
building monitoring and evaluation capacity.  
 
Component 2 : Public Financial Management reform. This component supports : 
improvement to the legal and regulatory framework for public financial management; 
implementation of an integrated financial management information system; 
implementation of interim financial management systems for local governments; 
strengthening the medium term expenditure framework; procurement reform; and 
monitoring and evaluation of public financial management performance.  
 
Component 4 : IRCBP coordination. This component supports the coordination of all 
activities under the IRCBP, ensures that IRCBP implementation complies with the World 
Bank Financial Management Guidelines and the Procurement Guidelines, and operates 
the monitoring and evaluation system for IRCBP.  
 
As a result of the restructuring, Component 3 : Establishment of the Development 
Learning Center of the original project has been terminated. The objective of the 
component was to establish and operationalize a DLC within the life of the Project. The 
Mid-Term Review concluded that the lack of progress in commencing the establishment 
of the DLC, due to the considerable delay in passing the enabling legislation, and recent 
experience from other African Development Learning Centers had put the financial 
sustainability of the DLC in serious doubt. As a consequence, cancellation of this 
component has been approved, and funds reallocated to the other three components.  The 
DLC component does not directly impact the achievement of the PDOs or the outcome 
targets, which relate to establishing functioning local councils and the management of 
public resources, but was an intermediate activity contributing to these other components 
through the provision of training to public servants for which alternative serve providers 
now exist.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Decentalization and Capacity Building component involves investment in office 
buildings, and investment financed by the Local Government Development Grant. These 
takes place in urban and rural centers throughout Sierra Leone.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Devinder Sood (AFTPR) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The project does not envisage displacing any settler within the locations chosen for the 
office buildings for local councils, or the investment sites financed under the Local 
Government Development Grant. Availability of land without any form of encumbrances 
is one of the prerequisites for project site selection and implementation.  
 
Infrastructure investments under the Local Government Development Grant may have 
some environmental impact, which is unlikely to be significant and is readily 
manageable. The investments under this component fall under various sectors such as 
water supply, drainage, sanitation, solid waste management, access roads, construction of 
schools and health facilities. The potential environmental and social effects of these 
common community development projects, however, are well understood, unlikely to be 
significant, and readily manageable.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Government prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in accordance to OP 4.12 
and received ASPEN approval for the RPF. The RPF has established the resettlement and 
compensation principles, organizational arrangements and design criteria to be applied to 
Page  4
meet the needs of the people who may be affected by the project activities requiring land 
acquisition and/or denial, restriction or loss of access to economic resources. If land 
taking is necessary for a sub-project, then a resettlement plan will be prepared and 
presented for ASPEN approval.  
 
Government also prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and received ASPEN approval. The ESMF  
 
•
developed an environmental checklist for sub-projects, so as to assist local 
governments to carry out environmental appraisal of investments they make;  
 
•
prescribed a set of mitigation and monitoring measures during implementation 
and operation of the subprojects to eliminate adverse environmental and social impacts, 
offset them or reduce them to acceptable levels;  
 
•
established a screening process for sub-projects so as to enable local government 
staff to identify potential environmental and social impacts of sub-projects and to address 
them by incorporating the relevant mitigation measures into the designs of the sub-
projects.  
 
Local governments are required to apply the environmental checklists for appraising 
their investments and comply with relevant mitigation measures. In addition, routine 
checks are made to ensure that individual investments also conform to nationally 
applicable environmental standards.  
 
The borrower capacity in this area is weak. Under the project, an environmental and 
resettlement training module has been developed as part of the standardized training 
module for local governments.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include local councils, local communities, and the national 
Environment Protection Board. All sub-projects financed under the proposed projects are 
identified through a participatory planning mechanism implemented by the local 
councils. A screening mechanism designed in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework is applied to identify environmental and social impact. Mitigating measures 
are applied if negative impact is identified.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework and the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework have been disclosed by Government. The local councils have received 
training on how to apply the framework. They also make public the screening mechanism 
and any mitigation measures.  
 
During the implementation of IRCBP, the monitoring of the application of the 
Resettlement Policy Framework and the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework has been undertaken by the IRCBP project team on behalf of the 
Government. Dave Sood, Bank Environmental Safeguards consultant, undertook a review 
in July 2008 of the application of the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
and Resettlement Policy Framework and whether amendment was required to either of 
Page  5
the Frameworks. His report concluded that the requirements of the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework have been met, the Resettlement Policy Framework has 
not been triggered, and the existing Frameworks are adequate for the purposes of the 
restructured project and require no update.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/18/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/18/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2004 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  6
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nicola J. Smithers 
07/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Devinder Sood 
07/22/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
03/29/2004 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
07/23/2008 
Comments:  The original was signed by the various staff identified above on the dates indicated and 
is available on file. This on line version has been prepared subsequently for InfoShop. 
