Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/17/2009 
Report No.:  AC4651
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P118226 
Project Name:  Second Additional Financing to NSAP - Food Crisis Response 
Task Team Leader:  Mirey Ovadiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 22, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTSP 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
1.00 
 Special 
Financing 
3.00
4.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective for the National Social Action Project would remain 
unchanged, i.e. to assist war-affected or otherwise vulnerable communities to restore 
infrastructure and services, build local capacity for collective action, and assist vulnerable 
households to access temporary employment opportunities, with priority given to areas 
not previously serviced by the government, newly accessible areas (those which were 
under rebel control until January 2002), food insecure areas, and the most vulnerable 
population groups within those areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed grant (which will be the second round of additional financing provided 
under the GFRP initiative to support 'cash for work' (CfW) activities in NSAP) will seek 
to respond to continued high food prices by financing the continuation and expansion of 
the CfW program under the National Social Action Project (NSAP).  The CfW program 
is designed to ease the burden of the price increases on the most vulnerable populations 
and provide households with incremental resources to cope, helping them to avoid 
reverting to adverse mechanisms that would diminish their asset and human capital base.  
Page  2
The National Social Action Project (US$35 million credit approved in April 2003) was 
designed to support activities in three components: (i) community-led infrastructure and 
basic services sub-projects; (ii) employment-generating labor-based public works (roads 
and other rural infrastructure) and the construction of housing units for vulnerable 
groups; and (iii) project management and innovative activities at the community level.  
 
The first round of GFRP support for Sierra Leone (US$4 million) was approved in 
August 2008.  Given NSAP's experience working with communities, civil society, and 
local government, this grant was processed as additional financing to that project, and the 
project was restructured to add a new CfW component, make minor revisions in the PDO, 
and expand the results framework.  The CfW component consists of small labor-intensive 
public works sub-projects in rural, peri-urban, and urban areas in seven priority districts. 
All works are demand-driven, with specific requests for labor intensive small works 
projects originating from and/or confirmed with relevant communities, chiefdoms, 
districts, or other local government authorities. Participating workers receive weekly 
payment, in cash, for their labor. In addition, each CfW sub-project must (a) dedicate at 
least 60% of its budget to labor costs, and (b) employ 30% women.  The majority of the 
sub-projects will be minor road repairs including drainage work; in suitable geographic 
areas, land reclamation, swamp development, and reforestation programs are also 
supported.  
 
In the second round of additional financing under the GFRP initiative, implementation 
arrangements will remain largely unchanged. The primary change proposed is the 
expansion of the project to all fourteen districts # scaling the coverage up from the 
current seven districts.  The expansion will enable affected populations in areas 
determined based on WFP assessments to benefit from the program.The closing date will 
also be extended to December 31, 2010.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The geographical area covered by the CfW component will expand to all fourteen 
districts of Sierra Leone - scaling the coverage up from the current seven districts.  All 
areas of intervention are covered under the original NSAP ESMF.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing triggers the Bank's policy on environmental assessment due to 
the public works that will be supported as part of the cash for work program.  The 
original NSAP program included a pilot road rehabilitation/public works program which 
was covered under the original environmental assessment.  As such, the initial CfW grant 
did not require any additional assessment, and neither will this expansion. No new type of 
works will be introduced which were not included under the existing program.  
 
Given that this additional financing will support an expansion in the geographical area 
in which cash for work activities are supported, care will be taken to ensure that this 
expansion does not involve works that may adversely affect environmentally sensitive 
areas.  The approach in this regard will be twofold.  First, the environmental management 
framework for the original NSAP includes procedures for screening proposed activities 
and mitigating any possible environmental risks.  These procedures will apply to all 
public works supported by the second Additional Financing, and the Environment 
Assessment will be re-disclosed both in Washington and in country.  Second, since the 
exact sites in which the expanded CfW program will operate are currently undefined, the 
supervision strategy for the project will include analysis to determine if any activities 
might be located in or near environmentally sensitive areas.  This analysis will be 
undertaken for the first batch of supported activities in the next supervision mission 
(planned for October 2009) and on an ongoing basis for future supported activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect and/or long term impacts are not expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental management framework was prepared under NSAP to identify 
mitigation measures and a specific action plan for each type of sub-project eligible for 
financing in order to reduce or eliminate environmental impacts.  All public works will 
follow the environmental safety and mitigation guidelines developed under NSAP.  
Performance by the implementing agency, the National Commission for Social Action 
(NaCSA) on safeguards has consistently been rated 'satisfactory' under the project. 
NaCSA staff has had ongoing support from Bank safeguards staff over the course of the 
project, including help organizing a workshop in 2005 concerning the environmental 
toolkit for monitoring of safeguards in projects with multiple sub-projects prepared by the 
Africa region.  In the new areas of intervention, the works contractors will receive a 
general training to include environmental mitigation measures to be taken before the 
launch of projects.  In addition, NACSA and Sierra Leone Roads Authority technicians 
will provide on-site supervision and quality control for the duration of the works.  This 
will include ensuring basic environmental guidelines (as per the EA) are adhered to as 
part of project implementation.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was also prepared for the original NSAP. 
While no resettlement is anticipated, the RPF will be amended to be redisclosed within 
six (06) months.  
 
Although the original ESMF covers all of Sierra Leone and includes all areas of 
intervention relevant for the  additional financing, there will be an addendum prepared to 
the existing ESMF and RPF within one month of effectiveness which will include an 
assessment of sensitive environmental and social issues in the new areas of intervention 
as well as preventive measures. Although no resettlement is expected as a result of the 
works, the preventive measures will be stated in the addendum.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The 'Cash for Work' program will target the most affected poorest groups including 
women, youth and children and follow the community driven development methodology 
(CDD) which is currently being used under the NSAP program allowing communities 
and beneficiaries to participate in program implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2002 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  5
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/29/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  6
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mirey Ovadiya 
08/14/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 
08/14/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab 
08/14/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Azedine Ouerghi 
08/14/2009 
Comments:  The SMU has agreed to the transfer of safeguards responsibility. 
