Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3795 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P113141 
Project Name: Additional Financing to NSAP - Food Crisis Response 
Task Team Leader: Mirey Ovadiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: August 12, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(25%);Roads and highways (25%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
4.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
4.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PDO of the National Social Action Project (P079335) will be revised as follows: the 
project’s development objective is to assist war-affected or otherwise vulnerable communities to 
restore infrastructure and services, build local capacity for collective action, and assist vulnerable 
households to access temporary employment opportunities, with priority given to areas not 
previously serviced by the government, newly accessible areas (those which were under rebel 
control until January 2002), food insecure areas, and the most vulnerable population groups 
within those areas. The new wording of the PDO would reflect both that the additional activities 
will target vulnerable communities regardless of war-affectedness and that they will expand the 
project’s focus to address the rising cost of food.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Building on NSAP’s ongoing program of employment-generating public works (roadsand other 
infrastructure), the new financing will fund a cash for work program. The cash for work program 
will involve labor-intensive public works in rural, peri-urban, and urban areas as a mechanism to 
Page  2
provide cash to vulnerable individuals and households. As is
 the case with NSAP’s ongoing rural 
labor-based public works component, all works would be demand-driven, with specific requests 
for small works projects originating from relevant communities, chiefdoms, districts, or other 
local government authorities. In rural areas, works would probably focus on rural road 
rehabilitation, in which case the Sierra Leone Roads Authority (SLRA) would be brought in at 
the identification stage to ensure a coherent approach.  Works could also include small irrigation 
schemes, tree planting and others to be identified by farmers’ organizations as priority needs. In 
urban and peri-urban areas, works could include street cleaning, grass cutting, minor spot repairs 
on roads, cleaning open drains, and others.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Urban and rural areas, throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The ongoing NSAP program already has a pilot road rehabilitation/public works program which 
was covered under the original environmental assessment.  No new type of works will be 
introduced which was not included under the existing program.  All public works will follow the 
environmental safety and mitigation and guidelines and the resettlement action plan developed 
under NSAP. It is of note that NaCSA staff has had ongoing support from Bank safeguards staff 
over the course of the project, including help organizing a workshop in 2005 concerning the 
environmental toolkit for monitoring of safeguards in projects with multiple sub-projects 
prepared by the Africa region.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Triggered due to the small public works activities planned.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ongoing project's environment and mitigation measures will suffice for the additional 
financing. As such, the existing EA and RPF will be re-disclosed by August 29, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mirey Ovadiya 
07/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/30/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
07/30/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
