Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  48776 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P108069 
Project Name: Integraded Public Financial Management Reform 
Task Team Leader: Vivek Srivastava 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
6.61 
 
EC: European Commission 
8.32
16.93 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective for the project is improvement in the transparency, 
accountability and effectiveness of core PFM institutions and systems in Sierra Leone, at central 
and local levels, from the baseline recorded in the PEFA report dated August 2007.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The GoSL IPFMRP is a comprehensive sector program for PFM, which builds upon its existing 
National Action Plan and on the progress achieved to date.  Jointly with DFID and EU, the 
project will support the core components of IPFRMP including further strengthening and 
development of budget formulation, budget execution and control, accounting and reporting, 
debt management, IFMIS rollout, payroll, public procurement, capacity development at central 
and local government, and monitoring by non-state actors.  This will involve consolidating the 
gains in PFM achieved to date, which are predominantly in the MoFED, and rolling reforms in 
budgeting, accounting, internal audit and procurement out to the MDAs.  The roll out will 
include the delegation of some responsibilities to line ministries from MoFED, including 
Page  2
processing of expenditure transactions and reporting, to both empower MDAs and make them 
more accountable for the use of resources. It will also involve continued support for 
strengthening budgeting, financial management and procurement in local governments.  
 
The GoSL recognizes the need to prioritize and sequence reform efforts to reflect capacity and 
resource constraints and is addressing this requirement in the finalization of the IPFMRP. In so 
doing account will be taken of those areas identified by the PEFA assessment as performing 
more poorly which undermine the overall budget cycle, while ensuring that gains achieved to 
date are consolidated and fully embedded.  The PEFA assessment, as well as MDBS and IRCBP 
engagement, identify weaknesses in a number of critical areas which include budget credibility 
and predictability in budget execution, control mechanisms, and transparency in the use of public 
resources. These will guide the prioritization of the IPFMRP, and will be the subject of 
discussion at the joint GoSL-DP preparation mission in early February 2008, as will the need to 
deepen the engagement of civil society and the private sector in the oversight of the use of public 
resources. It is hoped that a technical assistance mission by the IMF on budgetary control and 
reporting will coincide with the preparation mission.  
 
In order to start to address the issues of long term sustainability of reform, the IPFMRP will 
involve development of a strategy to meet the future public finance professional staff needs of 
government, building on the initiative of the Accountant General that is underway to recruit, 
train and advance accounting graduates. It will also commence a transition process towards 
greater involvement of civil servants in reform implementation.  
 
The IPFMRP will be directed by the PFM Oversight Committee, while the core components 
will be managed by the MoFED and NPPA and coordinated through one MoFED unit. The 
proposed arrangements for managing the reform and its different parts, and for arranging and 
coordinating DP support, will be assessed during the preparation mission. The aim is to provide 
pooled funding, or IDA/multi-donor trust fund co-financing managed by the Bank, in order that 
support to the core elements of the IPFMRP is fully coordinated, and the transactions costs for 
GoSL are minimized. Under the umbrella of the IPFMRP and the PFM Oversight Committee, 
the pooled fund could be overseen by a committee of government and contributing DPs, with one 
set of fiduciary and reporting mechanisms.  Consideration will also be given to the involvement 
of stakeholders from other MDAs as well as those outside government in the oversight and 
monitoring of the program.  
 
The GoSL has adopted the PEFA framework for the overall monitoring of PFM performance. 
The independent 2007 PEFA assessment was preceded by the GoSL self-assessment, which will 
be updated on an annual basis. It is expected that the independent PEFA assessment is to be 
repeated every two years. The PEFA indicators will guide the development of a common 
framework of objectives, indicators and targets to phase and monitor the IPFMRP. Consistency 
with the PFM dimensions of Multi-Donor Budget Support will be a key consideration. 
Furthermore, the IPFMRP includes a monitoring and evaluation component to strengthen the 
MoFED’s capacity to track and monitor impact of spending, including through regular Public 
Expenditure Tracking Surveys.  
 
Page  3
The support will be provided over a four year period commencing January 2008. The Bank’s 
contribution to the joint support arrangement is estimated at $3m.  The indicative figures for 
DFID and EU are $8m and $10m respectively, but these are likely to change, once their internal 
allocations are firmed up in early 2008.  
 
It is proposed that the IDA contribution to the joint support arrangement for PFM reform to be 
provided through a repeater project in the form of a technical assistance grant/credit.   This 
would allow a well-focused project with clear objectives, and straightforward implementation 
arrangements.  In this case, the Bank’s support for Decentralization would continue through a 
parallel project funded by the Bank-managed DFID/EU multi-donor trust fund of approximately 
$25m which is in place for the period to June 2011. Consideration has also been given to 
expanding the current IRCBP technical assistance grant/credit through Additional Financing and 
extending the end date from June 2008 to 2011. This would then also incorporate the 
Decentralization component of IRCBP funded by the DFID/EU MDTF. This however would 
contradict an earlier decision to close the IDA IRCBP as planned to facilitate assessment of 
impact, and would involve a project with multiple agencies and separate joint support 
arrangements for PFM and Decentralization.  The first option is therefore preferred.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national program that will focus on core PFM institutions and systems throughout 
Sierra Leone.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Implementation capacity has been demonstrated through the existing IRCBP project. Similar 
arrangements will be used for implementation of the new project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/08/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nicola J. Smithers 
12/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/18/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
12/18/2007 
Comments:  Approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
