Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4033 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P113757 
Project Name: SL-Decentralized Service Delivery Program 
Task Team Leader: Mirey Ovadiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 21, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (50%);General education sector 
(15%);Other social services (15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(15%);General public administration sector (5%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Other human development (P);Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Phase I of the program is to ensure that local councils have 
predictable and increased resources and carry out their devolved functions to improve 
availability of selected basic services   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The preliminary project design envisages the following components:  
 
1) 
Grants to Local Councils to support decentralized service delivery  (US$12.5 million)  
 
The project will support two types of grants, which will supplement the existing transfers to 
local councils.  
 
(a) 
Recurrent grants: The project will provide financial support for local recurrent 
expenditures, ensuring allocation and disbursement of predictable and increased resources on a 
regular basis.  Resources will be released quarterly to local councils on the basis of district 
annual work plans, utilizing the existing intergovernmental fiscal transfer system. LCs will be 
Page  2
expected to utilize these grants to achieve a set of agreed results. Eligible expenditures will be 
summarized in a positive menu of sector specific priority areas of recurrent and general 
administrative expenditures, including provision of incentives to facility level staff. 
Administrative expenditures and expenditures on equipment and vehicles will be capped as a 
percentage of the total grant (10-15 percent).  
 
The LCs, Ministry of Finance and Development Planning and Ministry of Local Government 
will enter into annual contracts around an agreed set of performance targets on planning and 
budget execution and service delivery improvements. The LCs’ performance will be assessed bi-
annually during the program.  Those LCs that are assessed as having met the performance 
targets/results will receive a bonus of 10 percent for the following year. The bonus will be 
utilized partly for staff incentives, and partly for further implementation of the district annual 
work plan.  
 
(b) Capacity Development Grants: The program will provide capacity development support 
tailored to each council’s specific needs. The funding will cater for avariety of services including 
training, hiring contractual staff for priority LC functions, equipment, study visits, and other.  
Each LC will have the option to submit a plan outlining their capacity development needs in 
order to achieve the agreed annual results/targets.  Capacity development plan will need to be 
closely linked to the performance targets each LC has committed to. Each council will receive a 
grant up to US$50,000 for this purpose.  
 
2) 
 Technical Assistance to Support Decentralized Service Delivery : (US$2.0 million)  
 
(a) 
Support to central ministries and agencies: The project will provide support to key central 
ministries and agencies to assist them in the development and/or improvement of basic service 
standards, costing of basic service packages, strategic planning, and supervision and quality 
control.  
 
(b) 
Support to LCs: In addition to the capacity development grants for needs specific to 
particular councils, the project will provide capacity development support to all LCs in results-
based planning, budgeting, and monitoring, as well as technical assistance regarding the 
development of fiduciary and other accountability mechanisms and service delivery options 
(public-private partnerships, community/civil society partnerships and other). At the outset of the 
program, the LC planning process will be oriented towards ensuring better linkage between 
planning, financing and monitoring of service delivery results.  
 
3) 
Program Management: (US$0.5 million)  
 
This component will finance the administrative requirements such as program coordination, 
monitoring and financial reporting related to the program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide, urban and rural.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Government of Sierra Leone has a long experience with World Bank safeguard policies, 
notably under the ongoing National Social Action Project (NSAP). However, it is of note that the 
Basic Services Delivery Support Operation does not trigger any safeguard policies. In particular, 
in relation to OP 4.01, the project is not expected to have any environmental impact.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/05/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mirey Ovadiya 
12/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/12/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
12/12/2008 
Comments:   
