Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/15/2008 
Report No.:  AC3567
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P099357 
Project Name:  Sierra Leone:  Mineral Sector Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael C. Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
(i) increase efficiency and transparency of mining sector management by the 
Government; and (ii) facilitate contribution of mining sector into local economic 
development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is expected to be financed through IDA Grant of US$7 million equivalent.  
The project will focus on:  
 
Component A. Increasing Extractive Industries Revenues  
 
This component would assist the government of Sierra Leone with preparatory work for 
mining concessions review and building negotiations capacity building.  The project will 
finance preparation of procedures and development of model mineral development 
agreements and capacity building of the National Revenue Authority (NRA) large tax-
payers unit to verify payments.  This component will be leveraged by a new proposed 
Page  2
UNDP Capacity Development for Investment Contract Negotiations which will focus on 
transaction level advice.  Key activities to be supported under the component include:  
 
-
Preparation for mineral agreements review:  
 
o
finalizing changes to applicable laws and regulations on fiscal terms and 
conditions for mining projects, including review of fiscal terms for selected major 
operations  
 
o
designing a road-map for concessions review and negotiations (including 
procedures, benchmarks, criteria and transparency)  
 
-
Developing model mineral development agreements;  
 
-
Strengthening revenue collection (through NRA and regional offices housed 
within MMR regional offices) including:  
 
o
develop and implement financial models to estimate various rents and taxes due 
from the mining operations;  
 
o
build capacity of tax offices for technical audit of mining royalties and taxes and 
assessment / collection of revenues  
 
Component B. Increasing Extractive Industries Benefits  
 
Using mining as a catalyst for regional economic growth, strong pro-poor mining policy 
reforms are needed, such that mining stimulates shared road, rail, power and ports that 
can in-turn facilitate other sustainable land-use developments.This component will build 
government’s capacity (i) to approach large-scale mining projects and facilitate dialogue 
between private sector and the government in developing private-public partnerships 
(PPPs) around large-scale mining development; and (ii) assess potential and start 
developing a roadmap for “growth poles”around mining areas.  The main outputs will be 
(a) at least one shared infrastructure agreement around mine development under 
negotiations; and (b) at least one growth-pole concept around at least one mining area 
being developed.  
 
The project will assist in setting up and making operational a PPP team at the MMR 
which will be tasked with facilitation and carrying through infrastructure related projects 
around large-scale mining development; in coordination with other relevant ministries.  
This will include engaging consultants’ services to develop legal framework for PPPs 
around mining, framework for undertaking such projects in cooperation with the National 
Committee for Privatization and other infrastructure-related ministries, and procedures 
for developing such projects; and building capacity of PPP team to manage the process, 
coordinate between the stakeholders, and monitor project development.  
 
The project will assess potential and propose strategy for increasing benefits from 
mining and boost local economic growth around proposed large-scale mining 
developments, with initial consideration being given to candidate resource corridors in 
Port Loko/ Marampa area and Sierra Rutile Limited mining area.  The PPP team in MMR 
will develop new approaches and procedures in developing candidate projects.  The 
MTAP project will be treated as a pilot for Sierra Leone and based on the frameworks 
developed under this project and taking into account lessons learnt, the government 
Page  3
would be positioned for consideration of a “growth poles” approach to further facilitate 
regional development.  
 
In addition, this component will finance environmental and social safeguard 
assessments for a selected shared infrastructure project, including public consultations, as 
well as assist with setting up a community development fund (CDF) as a benefit sharing 
mechanism for selected areas.  While the CDF(s) will be fully funded through private 
sector (initially, the mining companies operating in the area), the project will assist with 
setting up their structure based on the experience in Sierra Leone (DACDF) and other 
countries (for example, Madagascar and Guinea where such funds are operated), carry 
out public consultations and develop transparent operating and disbursement procedures.  
 
Component C.  Regulatory Capacity Building for Growth  
 
To ensure good sector governance such that mining activities are implemented in 
sustainable manner and promote growth and development, this component will focus on 
building government’s capacity to regulate mining sector, including issuance, renewal 
and revocation of licenses, and monitoring compliance of operations with regulations 
(operational, health, safety, environmental and social).  
 
The project will finance development of mining regulations and further strengthening of 
the licensing regime by (i) finalizing the roll-out of the mining cadastre system nation-
wide; (ii) making operational a transparent, non-discretionary mining cadastre (mineral 
licensing) office; and (iii) building capacity and providing equipment for the regional 
mining offices to carry out inspections and monitor compliance.  This component will 
build on the work completed through the UNDP project (pilot mining cadastre system in 
Kono district).  
 
In addition the component will support implementation of key recommendations of the 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and the Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) which include strengthening: (i) the regulations related 
to the ESIA process, (ii) monitoring and enforcement of environmental and social 
compliance of operations through building capacity in the government (MMR and 
Environmental Regulator) for technical review of Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIAs) and Social Impact Assessments (SIAs) for mining projects, and mine closure 
regulations/ requirements and monitoring; and (iii) and strengthening the ability of local 
governments and civil society to investigate and motivate legal procedures against 
mining operations with poor environmental and social performance.  An awareness 
raising initiatives in regards to local benefits sharing will also be supported.  
 
Component D. National Coordination and Project Management  
 
This component will finance activities required to (i) provide national policy level 
support and coordination in regards to the mining sector reform and its linkage with 
broader economic reforms and other sectors development; and (ii) implement the project 
activities in accordance with the Bank guidelines.  
Page  4
(i) National Policy Coordination.  Given that the mining sector development is closely 
interlinked with other sectors such as infrastructure development, private sector 
development and community driven development, it requires national level policy 
coordination.  An inter-ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) will provide policy 
level decisions on the activities that are planned under the project or emerging needs 
around the mining sector.  Coordination of donor-funded activities will be an integral part 
of this work to ensure that activities compliment each other and are implemented in the 
holistic manner.  
 
(ii) Project Implementation Support.  This sub-component will assist in ensuring proper 
implementation and coordination of the Project activities, including financial 
management, disbursements, procurement, safeguards and monitoring and evaluation 
requirements.  To this end, the Project Support Team (PST) has been established within 
the MMR and is staffed by the Ministry’s employees.  
 
The project will finance costs associated with operations and incremental costs of PSC 
and PST.  The component will also provide funding for required capacity building to 
manage implementation and coordination of project activities.  It will finance training 
and workshops to improve implementation and project management capacity, as well as 
to raise awareness about the project activities and results.  The monitoring and evaluation 
system will be maintained as a part of this component.  
 
Component E. Emerging Needs Facility  
 
The project will keep a provision for emerging needs around sector development.  
Eligible activities will include consultants’ services, goods, training and consultations to 
assist the government with ensuring broad economic impact of mining sector reform. 
This will primarily focus on stimulating other sectors growth linked with growth of 
mining activities, such as private sector development, infrastructure and community 
driven development.  
 
The PSC will be in charge of selection and approval of activities to be funded under the 
Emerging Needs Facility.  The proposal for funding emerging needs will need to be 
developed to include description, justification for use of the Facility, cost estimates and 
responsible for monitoring and supervision of such activity entity.  The PSC will review 
such proposals and upon approval, will submit, through PSC, for the Bank for review and 
no objection.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Urban and rural mining areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Peter Kristensen (AFTEN) 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The Project will not involve direct investment in mining activities, but through its policy 
and regulatory strengthening could have indirect environmental impacts by encouraging 
increased industrial scale mining and artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) activities.  
Mining activities are expected to increase as a result of the project towards the end of 
project implementation period (until 2012) and therefore the GoSL is developing 
framework at this stage to address safeguards related issues (such as environmental and 
social impacts of mining and possible resettlements of local communities as a result of 
mining projects) in advance of the increase of mining in the country.  Although the 
project will not involve any direct investment in mining activities, and is primarily 
technical assistance for policy and regulations, potential social impacts, which may refer 
to displacement of households' incomes and livelihoods, especially after mine closure 
will be covered in a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  The RPF covers issues 
related to tripartite mining agreements between mining companies, government, and 
communities; community development and benefit sharing; and resolution of past social 
issues.  
 
The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) have been prepared by the Government and will be disclosed in-
country and InfoShop prior to appraisal.  The Letter of Mineral Sector Development 
Policy is under preparation and will include government’s strategy in managing 
environmental and social aspects.  During Project implementation further consultation 
will take place with NGOs, landowners, and industry representatives regarding mining 
sector environmental issues.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
There are both opportunities and risks for local communities affected by both large-scale 
mining (LSM) and artisanal and small scale mining (ASM) activities.  The opportunities 
relate to the benefits of mining which typically consist of direct and indirect LSM and 
ASM employment, mining-related financial transfers, and improved access to 
employment opportunities and services including in particular health and education 
services.  The risks relate to environmental harm, loss of gardens and land for subsistence 
agriculture, loss of traditional livelihoods, social disruption, increased crime, domestic 
violence, and cultural harm.  
 
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of the mining sector was 
completed in mid 2007 and its recommendations have informed the project design.  The 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Resettlement Policy Framework 
further deepen this analysis by outlining the Government’s response to the need to 
mitigate and manage impacts of mining, both of current operations and those that will 
commence in the future under new regulations. The program is expected to play a pivotal 
role in ensuring that the trends for specific parameters are tracked and it will provide 
information on compliance with legislative norms, set guidelines or desirable operational 
limits; and form the basis for corrective actions and modification of activities if 
necessary. GOSL will ensure that part of the cost is borne by the Mining agencies.  
 
Current arrangements for management of environmental and social impacts of mining 
activities are considered inadequate in Sierra Leone.  Capacity to implement regulations 
and monitor the environmental performance of the mining sector remain limited mostly 
due to financial and human resources constraints; this also weakens the overall 
institutional setting, which already suffers from limited coordination among the relevant 
agencies. However, given the Government’s commitment to strengthen the overall 
performance of the mining sector, capacity building programs to address these 
shortcomings in the mining sector are being launched, and will include assistance to the 
Ministry of Mineral Resources and Environmental Protection Agency to (i) develop 
regulations for social and environmental management for mining sector; (ii) build 
capacity to review and monitor compliance of mining operations with these regulations; 
and (iii) build capacity at local level including local authorities and communities in 
understanding and monitoring EIAs/SIAs for mining projects. The government is 
committed to address these deficiencies through MTAP.  
 
Page  7
MTAP is expected to lead to a positive social impact by empowering mining 
communities’ interaction with government. This will include increased capacities in 
government for implementing the RPF, as applicable. This will work to improve trust in 
government and increase civic engagement in public decision making processes.  
 
The Project will assist community empowerment, local governance and policy reforms 
through frameworks for community consultation (including conflict mechanisms) and 
policies for community. To improve benefits for the community resulting from the 
development of infrastructure by using public-private partnership (PPP’s)frameworks for 
shared infrastructure in order to facilitate improved access to export facilities for local 
communities to sell their products. In large-scale mining and related infrastructure 
development, the project will ensure that local communities benefit from the activities. 
Consultations and meaningful community participation will be achieved through such 
instruments as legal and regulatory frameworks (including model Mineral Development 
Agreements and PPPs frameworks), and through development and enforcement of the 
RPF in line with World Bank and international good practices. To assist in providing for 
future generations and support sustainable economic development the project will assist 
in setting up community development fund for at least one selected area and thus 
developing framework and appropriate regulations for other similar benefit sharing 
schemes.  This will work to improve trust in government and increase civic engagement 
in public decision making process.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are Ministry of Mineral Resources, newly established 
Environmental Protection Agency, Ministry of Lands, Country Planning and 
Environment,  Forestry Agency, local non-governmental organizations (National 
Coalition on the Extractives), civil society groups (Network Movement for Justice and 
Development, Community Advocacy for Development Management, and others), and 
local governments and communities.  The results of consultations and the concerns of the 
communities affected by mining activities and potential future developments and of local 
non-governmental organizations are included in the ESIA and RPF to ensure detailed 
knowledge about the local situation and provide guidance for obtaining the informed 
views of affected communities and NGO’s.  
 
Safeguards documents – ESIA and RPF - will be disclosed on August 15, 2008 at the 
locations of the Ministry of Mineral Resources which is in charge of sector specific EIAs 
and SIAs reviews, with the participation of the Ministry of Lands, Country Planning and 
Environment.  The reports will be posted in public domain and key elements of the 
safeguards documents will be disclosed in major national newspapers, and also by radio 
in areas that are expected to be influenced by the project.  Stakeholders will be requested 
to comment and provide input for ESIA and RPF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  8
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  9
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael C. Stanley 
08/13/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peter Kristensen 
07/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Naima A Hasci 
07/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
08/15/2008 
Comments:   
