Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2415 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Solomon Islands 
Project ID: P100311 
Project Name: Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy 
Task Team Leader: Antonie De Wilde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.09 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00
13.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial 
sustainability of SIEA through: improved financial and operational management, reduction of 
losses, and increased revenue collection.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would consist of the following tasks: (a) employment of two expatriate line 
managers (an expatriate General Manager with a technical background and a Commercialization 
Manager) and an overseas director to the Board; (b) implementation of a commercialization 
program for the Finance Department, including a new financial system and billing system and 
preparation and implementation of a new finance accounting policies and procedures manual 
with a staff training program; (c) design and implementation of a losses reduction program 
including both network and non-technical losses and a collections improvement program, 
including reconnection of households in Honiara; (d) implementation of a planned maintenance 
program to Honiara generation and a distribution reinforcement program to increase availability 
of existing generation and improve system reliability and allow deferment of new capacity 
additions; and (e) assistance to the SIEA to support the above activities through the provision of 
Page  2
technical consultancy support and a technical training program for engineering staff, and 
establishment of a partnership agreement with the Fiji Electricity Authority.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
In Honiara   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The capacity of the SIEA to implement safeguards policies is estimated to be limited   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (EASTE) 
Ms Marieke van der Zon (EASTE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
With the exception of the replacement of 12 pole mounted small distribution transformers, 
there are no other environmental issues. While the replacement transformers will not contain any 
PCBs, the team will need to verify that the transformers that will be replaced do not contain any 
PCBs.  If it is determined that PCBs are present, SIEA and the contractors hired by SIEA will be 
required to apply the Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council 
(ANZECC) guidelines for the Safe Handling, Storage and Disposal of PCBs ( ANZECC: 
Identification of PCB Containing Transformers and Capacitors, 1977)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project’s Environmental Category is C, which reflects the fact that the proposed 
investments are essentially funding of replacement of distribution feeders, upgrading of other 
network distribution elements including transformers to reduce network losses,  spare parts 
and replacing existing meters with prepaid meters.   Existing generation facilities are being 
provided with the necessary spare parts to improve the reliability and efficiency. The 
operation also focuses on institutional strengthening, technical assistance and 
commercialization through improved financial management, improved accounting systems 
and operational IT support.  
 
The project will replace some twelve small pole mounted distribution transformers, which 
were installedd 35 to 40 years ago, which at that time complied with ANZECC standards.  
The likelihood of these containing PCBs is small.  However during appraisal the team will 
determine if these transformers might contain PCBs and then will add the required 
safeguards conditions for handling these PCBs.  Pending confirmation during appraisal no 
environmental or safeguard policies are triggered by investments proposed in this project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonie De Wilde 
03/31/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Robert P. Taylor 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
