Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC3395
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Solomon Islands 
Project ID:  P100311 
Project Name:  Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy 
Task Team Leader:  Antonie De Wilde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and 
financial sustainability of SIEA through: improved financial and operational 
management, reduction of losses, and increased revenue collection.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would consist of the following tasks: (a) employment of two expatriate line 
managers (an expatriate General Manager with a technical background and a 
Commercialization Manager) and an overseas director to the Board; (b) implementation 
of a commercialization program for the Finance Department, including a new financial 
system and billing system and preparation and implementation of a new finance 
accounting policies and procedures manual with a staff training program; (c) design and 
implementation of a losses reduction program including both network and non-technical 
losses and a collections improvement program, including reconnection of households in 
Honiara; (d) implementation of a planned maintenance program to Honiara generation 
and a distribution reinforcement program to increase availability of existing generation 
and improve system reliability and allow deferment of new capacity additions; and (e) 
assistance to the SIEA to support the above activities through the provision of technical 
Page  2
consultancy support and a technical training program for engineering staff, and 
establishment of a partnership agreement with the Fiji Electricity Authority.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project is located in Solomon Islands. Safeguard Analysis is not applicable to the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (EASTE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no Safeguards issues associated with the project. The project’s Environmental 
Category is C, which reflects the fact that the proposed investments are essentially 
funding of replacement of distribution feeders, upgrading of other network distribution 
elements including transformers to reduce network losses, spare parts and replacing 
existing meters with prepaid meters.   Existing generation facilities are being provided 
with the necessary spare parts to improve the reliability and efficiency. The operation 
also focuses on institutional strengthening, technical assistance and commercialization 
through improved financial management, improved accounting systems and operational 
IT support systems.  
 
During appraisal, it was determined that none of the 12 transformers to be replaced in 
this project contain PCBs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonie De Wilde 
05/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
05/05/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
05/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Robert P. Taylor 
05/06/2008 
Comments:   
