Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4185 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P107847 
Project Name: Provincial Roads Project 
Task Team Leader: Tawia Addo-Ashong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project is aimed at improving the connectivity of people and goods in the 
provinces to markets thus enhancing welfare and economic growth by (a) rehabilitation of 
provincial road infrastructure in selected prioritized areas; and (b) Supporting development of 
technical capacity at the provincial level to improve their ability to manage and maintain their 
assets.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
There are three components to the project:  
 
Component 1:   Rehabilitation of Provincial Roads.  This component will support:  
 
1a: the upgrading, rehabilitation of about 330km of provincial roads and other road 
infrastructure in selected, prioritized geographical areas in the Uva Provinces.  
 
1b:
the upgrading, rehabilitation of provincial roads and other road infrastructure in selected, 
prioritized, areas in the Ampara District of the Eastern Province.  
 
Page  2
The project activities will comply with safeguard and fiduciary requirements and will 
accommodate cross-cutting social issues such as gender and HIV/AIDS.  
 
Component 2:   Maintenance program.   Provinces will be assisted to develop and perform an 
effective maintenance strategy on the portion of their paved network currently in good or fair 
condition, and the roads to be rehabilitated under the project.  Funds will be provided from the 
Credit and the program as designed will ensure that during the project implementation period, 
the provinces will keep the parts of the network already in good and fair condition to a standard 
which matches to a reasonable extent the part of the network to be improved by the credit.  
During project implementation, an annual maintenance plan will be prepared, outlining activities 
to be carried out and funding required.  The concept of long term performance based 
maintenance contracts will be introduced, allowing for local community participation in the 
localized routine maintenance program. Agreements will be reached with the provinces to ensure 
that most critical road safety requirements such as road markings, signage etc are restored.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. This component will finance 
the strengthening of the capacity of the Provincial Council Road Departments in planning and 
budget management within a framework of fiscal constraints.   The capacity of the roads 
departments is weak and experience in management of development partner funded projects is 
limited.  The Project will provide (i) consulting services for design and supervision of civil 
works; (ii) technical assistance to the road departments in the areas of financial management, 
environmental and social management, procurement and contract management to improve 
systems and procedures for the management of the road network under their responsibility; (iii) 
office and laboratory equipment  and vehicles to  assist in project implementation and 
maintenance of the road network; (iv) coordination and monitoring of project activities; (v) 
training; and ( vi) capacity development for the local construction industry.  Strengthening of 
these functions/areas of the Road Departments or Agencies should lead to (a) progress towards a 
guarantee of adequate maintenance of the provincial road network; (b) an increase in general 
efficiency of the use of resources; and (iii) an increase in the transparency and accountability of 
outcomes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in prioritized Provincial roads in Eastern Uva and Northern 
Provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) process in Sri Lanka is well established with the 
environmental regulatory agency, the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) having 
substantive Environmental Impact Assessment experience.  The CEA has also provided at the 
Divisional levels Divisional Environmental Officers (DEOs). However, it has been noted that 
DEOs are not fully mainstreamed at the local level to be beneficial for development projects and 
they are required to be strengthened in capacity to supervise the implementation of 
environmental management plans (EMPs). In addition, the post approval monitoring of the 
country’s EA process is still weak. Therefore, the project is required to address these weaknesses 
including (1) each Provincial Council (PC) should have a qualified Environmental Specialist to 
guide the contractors and to monitor the implementation of the EMPs; (2) the project 
Page  3
management unit should also have a qualified Environmental and social Specialist to coordinate 
with the PC level Environmental /social Specialists, to prepare consolidated reports based on 
monitoring inputs, coordinate with other government agencies for clearances, etc; and (3) should 
make the contractors responsible for implementation of the EMPs with conditions clearly defined 
in the contract agreements. The contractors will be responsible for obtaining necessary 
government clearances and licenses and the CEA and respective PCs will need to ensure that 
these conditions are met. The Ministry of Home Affairs, Provincial Councils and Local 
Government will require hiring an Environmental and Social Impact Advisor during the project 
preparatory stage. The Environmental Specialists of the project should engage closely with the 
Environmental and Social Cell of the RDA whose capacity has been strengthened through the 
Road Sector Assistance Project (RSAP), as well as from the Environmental Specialist of RSAP 
Project Management Unit.  
 
The project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework prior to Project 
Appraisal and will ensure the Provincial Road specific EAs are carried out and EMPs developed 
and incorporated in the contract documents.  
 
Although Sri Lanka has a National Resettlement Policy, social development and social 
safeguards issues are not normally mainstreamed at the project level. There is thus a need to 
ensure that all social issues are addressed at project level through recruitment of staff and 
strengthening of capacity at the Project Management Unit and PC level. This will enable the 
Project to implement the Social Impact Management Framework and Resettlement Plans 
(if/where required) of the Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is required to prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) providing the necessary background for the environmental and social considerations to 
be built in to the design of the project. The ESMF will be used as a guide and template to 
undertake road-specific environmental and social assessments, as well as to ensure the 
compliance with the World Bank's environmental and social safeguards policies and relevant 
provisions under the National Environmental Act and other regulations. Road-specific 
environmental and social assessments and mitigation measures will be required and should be 
integrated in to the road rehabilitation designs, as well as to the maintenance plans.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although Sri Lanka has a National Resettlement Policy, social development and social 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
safeguards issues are not normally mainstreamed at the project level. There is thus a need to 
ensure that all social issues are addressed at project level through recruitment of staff and 
strengthening of capacity at the Project Management Unit and PC level. This will enable the 
Project to implement the Social Impact Management Framework and Resettlement Plans 
(if/where required) of the Project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/14/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/13/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework - prepared and disclosed prior to 
Appraisal;  
 
Road specific Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Plans - prepared 
during the road-specific engineering design stage or prior to award of contracts.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tawia Addo-Ashong 
03/26/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/06/2009 
Comments:  cleared endorsing category B. Categorization to be revisited before QER. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
04/08/2009 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
