Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3466 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P110317 
Project Name: Sri Lanka: Second North East Housing Reconstruction Program 
Task Team Leader: Naresha Duraiswamy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Housing construction (100%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
43.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed IDA Additional Financing to supplement the North East Housing Reconstruction 
Program (NEHRP) is intended to provide the poorest conflict-affected families in the North East 
that meet accepted vulnerability criteria with rebuilt housing units. This would entail a cash grant 
paid in installments to 14,580 most vulnerable families to help reconstruct their homes destroyed 
by the civil conflict. In so doing, this segment of the population would be better positioned to 
reintegrate into the economic mainstream. The activities would be implemented in two phases 
over two years. A district would have to complete the construction of 50% of the houses targeted 
in that phase to trigger a move to the next phase of the Additional Credit.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing would facilitate the reconstruction of an added 14,580  
houses in the North East over a two-year period through the provision of housing support cash 
grants. In doing so, it would support the return of displaced populations in the North East.  It 
would contribute to the training of skilled construction workers and facilitate the  resumption of 
economic activity in the war-devastated region through increased construction activity.  The 
Additional Credit, like NEHRP before it, will have three components:  
 
Page  2
(a) Housing Assistance (US$ 43 million).  The Additional Financing would support 
reconstruction through the transfer of a cash grant of Rs 325,000 to eligible beneficiaries to 
rebuild a fully damaged house.  It would transfer the cash grant to the joint bank account of 
selected beneficiaries in four tranches. The pace of installments would be performance-based and 
the beneficiary would be allowed a period of four months to complete construction.  
 
(b) Capacity Building  and Monitoring ($3 million). The Additional Financing would support a 
comprehensive technical assistance program to ensure smooth implementation.  To this end, IDA 
would support Skills Training for Construction and Technical Assistance for Program 
Monitoring that includes a Communications Strategy, Continuous Social Impact Assessment, 
Environment Audit and an Independent Technical Audit.  
 
(c) Program Management (US$ 3 million). This component would support implementation at 
the central, provincial and district levels to better execute activities funded by the Additional 
Financing. The Grievance Redressal Mechanism would be one such activity. Operating expenses 
would be another.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed Additional Financing would support activities in all 8 districts of Sri Lanka’s 
North East i.e. Amparai, Batticaloa, Jaffna, Kilinochchi, Mannar, Mullaitivu, Trincomalee and 
Vavuniya.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an adequate basis for the mitigation 
of potential environmental impact arising out of the proposed Additional Credit. The 
Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) established the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) in 
1982 as the environmental regulatory agency instituted under the National Environmental Act 
(NEA).  Under the National Environmental Act (NEA), all development projects that fall into a 
prescribed category are required to go through a comprehensive environmental screening and 
planning process (EIA or IEE). CEA has demonstrated the technical expertise and a good track 
record in evaluating environmental impact assessments.  Since the proposed project is concerned 
with housing re-construction there will be no EIA/IEE requirement under the NEA.  
 
In addition, there are number of other government polices, acts and ordinances aimed at 
protecting and conserving the country’s rich natural resourcebase whichwould be directly 
applicable to the proposed Additional Financing. Some of the most relevant statutes are: (i) The 
Forest Ordinance under which logging in natural forests is completely banned (ii) Mines and 
Minerals Act under which the mining of sand and other minerals is regulated under approval and 
licensing (iii) Coast Conservation Act under which offshore coral mining is prohibited. Under 
the Local Authority Ordinances, all building plans need to be submitted to the local authority to 
obtain approval based on conformation to a specified building code.  This code has detailed 
specifications for housing design and septic tank design as well as precautions for prevention of 
ground water pollution from septic tanks.  
 
Although the policy and regulatory framework which exists in the country for natural resource 
management and conservation is rather comprehensive and adequate, enforcement of such 
Page  3
policies and regulations has been weak. Monitoring of EIA approval conditions, especially, is a 
weak area and needs strengthening. In the past, several programs have been funded by bi-lateral 
as well as multi-
lateral donors aimed at improving the capacity of country’s natural resource 
management agencies. Some of these programs are on-going. It is anticipated that all these 
efforts will contribute towards increased institutional capacity of the national agencies to enforce 
regulations more effectively in the future.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment will be the main safeguard policy on environment 
to be triggered under the project. The project will fund reconstruction of houses damaged and 
destroyed as a result of the ethnic conflict over the last 25 years. Since the sites for housing 
reconstruction is on existing housing sites, no significant and irreversible impact would be 
expected on-site. However, the project will require large quantities of natural material such as 
sand, timber, rubble, clay for housing reconstruction, the demand for which can significantly 
intensify mining and extraction. This can potentially trigger environmental problems off-site 
unless adequate precautions are taken to ensure exploitation of natural material within the 
stipulated regulatory framework and approval from relevant authorities.  
 
The on-going NEHRP has built-in certain procedures and mitigatory measures to ensure 
that unsustainable natural resource extraction is minimized when seeking material for housing 
reconstruction. The proposed additional financing should benefit from the same and further 
strengthen, where possible, existing measures undertaken to regulate the supply and use of 
natural building material in order to minimize the impact of sand mining, clay mining, timber 
harvesting etc.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The Additional Financing would not fund reconstruction activities within natural habitats, 
declared forest and wildlife areas. Neither will it support any extractive use of resources from 
declared forest reserves and other environmentally sensitive areas. Furthermore, the proposed 
project will have built-in mitigatory measure to ensure that adverse impacts from mining and 
extraction to natural areas are minimized. Therefore, the policies on Natural Habitats and Forests 
would not be triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
OP 4.10 may be triggered, but given that the beneficiary selection would be an ongoing 
process, it is not yet clear whether indigenous communities would be involved as beneficiaries 
under the Additional Financing.  If it seems likely that any of these communities are to be 
included in the Additional Financing, a diagnostic consultation would be undertaken with the 
communities in question at that point. The consultation would be undertaken by a qualified 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
social scientist/institution, with knowledge of the traditions and culture of the Indigenous people, 
to ascertain their specific wishes and to minimize the possibility that interventions by the 
program and/or its contractors inadvertently create adverse effects within the communities. 
Based on the consultation report, the North East Housing Reconstruction Unit (NEHRU) would 
decide what specific modalities to implement vis-a -vis these communities.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered under the Additional Financing, as the project is based on owner-
reconstruction in situ and the beneficiary identification criteria of NEHRP requires proof of 
ownership of land upon which the house is going to be rebuilt. The mobile Land Task Force 
teams will continue their work, assisting beneficiaries in regularizing their title deeds and assist 
in solving land disputes.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/14/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework was developed during 
preparation of the earlier NEHRP, which is applicable to the Additional Financing as well.  
The Framework includes a complete discussion on the likely environmental issues the project 
could trigger and the level of environmental analysis that would required to be undertaken by 
the project. According to the guidelines set out in this framework, EAs for 29 pilot villages 
were conducted in 2004. Based on the findings of these EAs, the main environmental issues 
were identified at a village level based upon which a detailed Environmental Assessment 
Questionnaire Form was developed, which includes a section for the Environmental 
Manaagement Plan (EMP). The Environmental Assessment Questionnaire has been filled for 
each village funded by the on-going NEHRP. District/Divisional Administrative Officers and 
the Divisional Environmental Officers have been involved in filling the questionnaire for 
each village and doing follow up monitoring. The proposed additional credit will benefit 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
from the safeguard studies already carried out and the on-going safeguard measures can be 
applied and followed.  
 
Significant positive and no negative social impact is anticipated, based on the experience 
with NEHRP. A Continuous Social Impact Assessment forms a key part of the program, 
closely monitoring the selection of beneficiaries, issues pertaining to ethnic equity, the 
functioning of the Land Task Force, the Grievance Redressal Mechanism and the broader 
social impact of the program. A robust Communications Campaign is another feature of the 
Additional Credit.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Naresha Duraiswamy 
02/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/13/2008 
Comments:  Cleared for disclosure in the InfoShop 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Songsu Choi 
02/26/2008 
Comments:   
