Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC2766
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P093132 
Project Name:  Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning (DSWRPP) 
Task Team Leader:  Nihal Fernando 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 24, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Irrigation and 
drainage (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Natural disaster management (P);Rural services 
and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
46.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00
4.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of this project would be to establish long-term sustainable arrangements 
for operation and maintenance of large dams and improve water resources planning. This 
would be achieved through three main project components: (i) improving dam safety and 
operational efficiency; (ii) upgrading and modernizing the existing hydro-meteorological 
information systems; and, (iii) providing technical assistance for developing integrated 
water resources plans for selected river basins.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Improving Dam Safety and Operational Efficiency:  The expected 
outcome of this component would be enhanced public safety of selected high-risk dams, 
sustainable institutional arrangements for effective dam safety management and efficient 
dam operation and maintenance (O&M). This would be achieved through: (a) 
Remediation works for 32 high-risk dams out of the 38 dams for which risk assessments 
have been conducted; (b) Provision of basic safety and operational facilities for the 80 
dams classified as large dams according to the definition of International Commission on 
Page  2
Large Dams (ICOLD). The facilities would include access roads, communications, 
monitoring instruments, rapid response facilities for emergency repairs, floodlights and 
equipment; (c) provision of a team of consultants for implementation support,survey, 
investigation and design, improvement of O&M and operational efficiency, and training; 
and (d) Studies and provision of specialized equipment. The bulk of the civil works 
would fall within this component.  
 
(ii) 
Component 2:  Hydro-Meteorological Information System (HMIS): The expected 
outcome of this component would be enhanced staff capacity and physical and analytical 
infrastructure for monitoring hydro-meteorological data, detecting and forecasting water 
hazards and assessing water resources for multi-sectoral planning, development and 
management. This component would comprise: (a) Establishment of 4 new and 46 
upgraded hydrometric stations; (b) Establishment of data banks at the Irrigation 
Department (ID) and the Department of Meteorology (DoM) and improving the 
analytical capability of staff.; (c) Establishing procedures and providing tools and training 
for real-time analysis of flood situations in the influent streams of some major reservoirs; 
and (d) Groundwater monitoring and assessment including support to upgrade the 
groundwater database.  This component would finance goods, consultancy services and 
minor civil works.  
 
(iii)   Component 3:  Multi-sectoral Water Resources Planning: The expected outcome 
of this component would be water resource development master plans at national level 
and for two selected river basins leading to the completion of 2 or 3 specific detailed 
project feasibility studies in two river basins ready for investment. This component would 
finance consultancy services for:  (a) The development of a national water-use plan; (b) 
Optimization study on use of available water resources in the Mahaweli and adjoining 
connected river basins leading to the preparation of a New Mahaweli Water Resources 
Development Plan. and several feasibility reports for potential projects,  (c)  Preparation 
of a holistic water resources development plan and management proposals for the 
Mundeni Aru river basin (of the Eastern Province); (d) Establishment of institutional 
arrangements, processes/procedures, manuals, state-of-art techniques and modern 
analytical tools for multi-sectoral water resources planning and management.  .  
 
(iv) 
 Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring.  This component would 
assist the PMU and project implementing agencies to execute, manage and monitor the 
project. The assistance would include the provision of consultants, vehicles, equipment 
and incremental staff and operating costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project would cover the entire country.  Since the project would be 
associated with upgrading and rehabilitation of existing facilities there would be no major 
alterations in the existing land use patterns.  The project would not fund any activity 
within forest and wildlife reserves and protected areas, and therefore would not have any 
adverse impact on environmentally sensitive areas.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1.1 
Environmental Safeguards.  
 
Since the DSWRPP would only upgrade and/or rehabilitate existing dams under the 
Dam Safety component, most of environmental consequences of constructing a new dam 
would not be encountered. From a dam safety point of view, there are two categories of 
dams that are considered relevant for the application of environmental safeguards. Dams 
of the first category include ones that require urgent physical rehabilitation: this category 
is mostly comprised of earthen dams operated and maintained by the Irrigation 
Department. Dams of the second category include ones that have a very high impact if 
breached but that do not require physical interventions at present.  Interventions in such 
dams would be primarily on intensive vigilance and monitoring with limited maintenance 
work. Remedial works that are proposed for the dams falling under the first category 
would include one or more of the following; (i) strengthening of the existing dams; (ii) 
repair/ replacement of sluices; and (iii) repair/ improvements to existing spillways; (iv) 
replacement of essential electro-mechanical equipment.  
 
As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in general and 
the dam safety component in particular would be subjected to a project specific 
Environmental Analysis (EA) and the subsequent preparation of an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) for each intervention.  Activity (i) above for the first category 
of dams would warrant an EA and an EMP as it is associated with a number of potential 
environmental impacts, both on site and off site. The scope of the EA for such dams 
would vary depending on the type of interventions planned, the site characteristics and 
characteristics of the sites for borrowing construction materials . However, for activities 
(ii) 
–
(iv), an EMP focusing onbest practices would most likely suffice.  The second 
category of dams, which would not require any significant civil works, would not require 
Page  4
extensive environmental analysis and hence could be limited to the preparation of an 
EMP for any physical maintenance work planned to be carried out.  
 
The remedial works for strengthening of existing dams undertaken are likely to cause 
more serious environmental issues off site where resource extraction would take place 
rather than on site. Some of the work involved in strengthening the dam body would 
require large amounts of sand/soil and rocks to be extracted from one or more places and 
brought to the construction site. The borrow sites, if not properly identified and managed 
(subsequent to extraction) could have serious environmental repercussions. Resource 
extraction in Sri Lanka has reached critical levels where unsustainable operations that 
have continued unabated for many years have destroyed natural environments beyond 
remediation. Therefore, selection of sites for extraction of construction material such as 
earth, rubble etc. should be made after careful evaluation of resource availability within 
the sites concerned and in conformity with the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) 
regulations for designation of such sites.  
 
Another important aspect that ought to be considered in conveyance of material to the 
site is the potential danger of the unintentional spread of invasive species. Sri Lanka has 
many examples of severe invasions of aquatic weeds in waterways as well as terrestrial 
species in dry coastal areas. The spread of invasive plants in already disturbed 
environments such as construction sites is particularly high. This risk can be minimized 
by identifying potential borrow sites in nearby areas where the occurrence of alien 
invasive species are not observed. Therefore, the proper identification of suitable borrow 
sites would be a key consideration in managing the afore-mentioned environmental 
impacts.  
 
Solid waste/debris disposal would be another issue that would need addressing. Dam 
reconstruction would result in removal of large quantities of topsoil, rip rap etc and in the 
generation of concrete debris and other construction wastes. In addition, wastes would be 
generated from worker camps. The project should explore options for re-using material 
such as soil and for the careful disposal of other waste material. It is also mentioned that 
many of the tanks and reservoirs are currently subjected to ad hoc and haphazard disposal 
of garbage, construction debris and industrial/domestic wastewater. Such practices if 
allowed to continue would only undermine the expected benefits from a project of this 
nature. Specific disposal sites would be identified in the respective EMPs.  
 
Effects such as air and water pollution at the sites would largely be temporary and 
localized in nature, provided that adequate precautions are taken to manage such issues. 
If dam rehabilitation work requires the emptying of a reservoir, there would be impacts 
on its aquatic life depending on the extent of drying up that would take place. However, 
seasonal fluctuations in the water levels of tanks in the dry zone are a natural 
phenomenon to which aquatic life is adapted.  In addition, since there would be no 
instances where reservoirs would be emptied below its dead storage capacity, aquatic 
flora and fauna should be well preserved. Similarly, it has been agreed with the 
Government of Sri Lanka that the project would not finance any activity to increase the 
Page  5
storage capacity of the tanks/reservoirs. Hence, environmental issues associated with 
additional inundation of land and private and public property would not apply.  
 
GOSL’s investment in upgrading and/or rehabilitating selected dams under this project 
would not yield the anticipated long term benefits unless there is proper management of 
the watersheds in the catchment areas.  Major environmental factors affecting the 
functioning and the life span of the dam are those caused by the manner in which land, 
water and other resources are used in the catchment areas above the reservoir.  Increased 
pressure on upland areas above the dam is a common phenomenon caused by the 
resettlement of people from the inundated areas and by uncontrolled influx of people to 
the watershed.  On site environmental deterioration as well as a decrease in water quality 
and an increase in sedimentation rates in the reservoir result from clearing forest land for 
agriculture, grazing pressures, use of agricultural chemicals and illegal timber felling for 
commercial purposes. It would therefore be of utmost importance that the dam owners 
work in coordination with the agencies responsible for management of the watersheds to 
identify such issues and arrest them with appropriate measures.  Sustainability of the 
project interventions would be dependent on better management of the surrounding 
watersheds.  
 
Impacts arising from construction of buildings under the different components of the 
project, if any, are expected to be minimal. If the construction work is to be located on 
sites where the implementing agency has existing buildings, it is not anticipated that any 
real environmental concerns may arise and could be dealt with by environmental codes, 
building codes and best practices. The main impacts of building construction for such 
sites would be off-site impacts due to resource extraction for construction. Hence, 
resources should be extracted from authorized locations and sources that are licensed by 
relevant GOSL authorities. Obtaining all necessary GOSL approvals for construction of 
buildings are a pre-requisite for the civil works to be eligible for funding under the 
project.  If buildings are to be constructed on new land, an environmental checklist would 
be applied with an EA conducted only if necessary.  
 
Worker camps can also be a source of potential public health problems and therefore 
would be kept clean and hygienic. Provision of proper sanitation would be key to this, 
especially in the case of preventing the introduction and spread of water-borne diseases. 
Also, the work force may require substantial quantities of firewood for cooking and 
hence increase the demand for it. This could have a threatening effect on the forest 
resources in the area.  In order to eliminate this threat, construction contracts would 
require worker camps to be provided with Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) as cooking 
fuel.  LPG canisters are freely available throughout the country so should not pose an 
undue burden on the contractor.  
 
In addition, run off from the vehicle yards containing fuel and lubricants and run off 
from material stock piles containing particulate matter can all lead to contamination of 
soil and water. Hence, proper waste management for all types of wastes generated on-site 
would be of high importance.  
 
Page  6
1.2 
Social Safeguards  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12):  The project works under the dam safety 
component, would involve: (i) strengthening of existing dams; (ii) repair or replacement 
of sluices; and (iii) repair and improvements to existing spillways. In addition, the project 
would finance the replacement of essential electro-mechanical equipment to improve 
operational efficiency of dams. None of these activities would require acquisition of land 
or restriction to access to resources. . Hence no land acquisition and displacement of 
people are envisaged. However, in a few cases, water flows into the reservoir and 
consequently, irrigation flows might have to be stopped for prolonged periods to conduct 
detailed technical investigations and repair/ rehabilitation works. This could impact 
adversely on the livelihoods of some downstream users.  While the project design 
includes measures to mitigating potential loss of income sources to downstream users ( 
see section 4 below), if there would be a possibility that people would be adversely 
affected, for example civil works do not finish on time to assure irrigation supply, it 
would be necessary to triggering the Bank’s Operational Policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement, OP 4.12.  Mitigation of this risk will rely on effective assessments of the 
timing and nature of the rehabilitation works for the list of dams to be rehabilitated.  
 
Selection of Dams: Sri Lanka has 350 major dams, of which 80 dams are categorized as 
Large Dams. The selection of dams for remedial works under the project is based on an 
assessment of the nature and extent of the risk to public safety. Portfolio risk assessments 
(PRA) for 38 dams have been carried out to prioritize dams according to their hazard and 
risk levels. This risk analysis considered the number of population at risk in the event of 
dam failure as one of the risk profiling criteria. The risk profiles of the analyzed dams are 
ranked according to the safety deficiencies using the Risk Based Profile System 
developed by United States Bureau of Reclamation This is an internationally and widely 
accepted risk ranking methodology.   Subsequently, 32 dams that pose the highest threat 
to public safety have been selected for remedial measures under the component 1.  These 
32 could be classified into four broad categories depending on the nature and extent of 
social impacts of the remedial works:  
 
•
Category I (11 dams) the intervention would not obstruct the water flows to the 
downstream users. Remedies could either be undertaken without obstructing water flows 
or alternatives could be worked out to ensure water flows (example: Victoria Dam):  
 
•
Category II (13)--  there is direct agriculture in the command area but the nature 
of remedial measures would be such that it does not require suspension of water releases 
to users for prolonged period (example: Inginimitiya dam);.  
 
•
Category III (6) -- there is direct agriculture in the command area and the nature 
of remedial measures would require suspension of water releases to the users for 
prolonged periods (example: Tabbowa and Ridiyagama dams); and.  
 
•
Category IV (2)--  those which serve multiple commands and users and whose 
radius of influence extend beyond the immediate agriculture command area to a number 
of other distant hydraulically inter-connected agricultural command areas and  villages/ 
towns (example: Chandrikawewa dam)  
 
Page  7
Categories III and IV would be significant from the perspective of adverse social 
impacts.  
 
Interruption of water flows and impacts: The suspension of the supply of water might 
prevent farmers from growing paddy. Instead, they would have to resort to other crops 
(relatively alien to them, such as maize, cowpea and green gram and ground nuts) using 
residual moisture and limited rainfall during the Yala season and under rain-fed condition 
in Maha (wet) season or forego cultivation for one or two seasons.  However, rainfed 
farming of non-paddy crops would be a new practice to some farmers, because it requires 
different crop husbandry practices. Thus, despite this potential alternative cropping 
possibility, the livelihoods for the following users could be affected adversely:  (i) 
farmers who draw water from the reservoir for cultivating paddy; (ii) landless laborers 
earning wages from agricultural operations in the command area; and (iii) fishers fishing 
from the reservoir. In addition, in a few cases, water supplies for domestic purposes 
(drinking, bathing, washing, and cooking) could be affected.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).  
 
Certain structures in ancient dams, such as sluices, could be of high archaeological 
significance. If they are rep
laced, the old structures may need to be preserved as ‘cultural 
property’.  This would trigger Policy OP 4.11.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Apart from the urgent interventions identified by the various engineering surveys and 
funded by the project currently, it is possible that the Government could undertake other 
interventions in the future as part of a continuous effort to improve/maintain dam safety. 
However, since it is not possible to define what those activities would constitute of, if 
undertaken at some point in future, it is not possible to assess any resultant cumulative 
environmental impact. For large development programs EIAs/IEEs will be mandatory in 
accordance with the National Environmental Act and associated regulations, hence the 
impacts would be addressed through the EIA/IEE studies in the future.  The EAs would 
take activities funded under this project into account, therefore, cumulative impacts, if 
any, would be addressed at that stage.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environmental Impacts: The Dam Safety component of the project would reduce water 
induced hazards to the public by improving dam safety of some of the high risk tanks and 
reservoirs. The proposed interventions are essential and critical and hence alternative 
options do not apply because the dams are already constructed and the project would 
finance only interventions for rehabilitation. Different alternatives for rehabilitation 
would be considered during the engineering design stage and the most sustainable option 
would be selected.  
 
Social Impacts:  Technical alternatives would be explored to the fullest extent so as to 
minimize stoppage of irrigation and other water flows and the adverse impacts thereof.  
Page  8
Water flow stoppage would be resorted to only if there are no other appropriate technical 
alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Safeguards:  
 
The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an adequate basis for the 
mitigation of potential impacts mentioned above.  The Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) 
established the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) in 1982 as the environmental 
regulatory agency instituted under the National Environmental Act (NEA).  Under the 
NEA, all development projects that fall into a prescribed category are required to go 
through a comprehensive environmental screening and planning process (EIA or IEE). 
CEA has demonstrated technical expertise and a good track record of evaluating 
environmental impact assessments.  Since the proposed project would be mainly 
concerned with dam rehabilitation and there would be only limited civil works in other 
components, there would be no EIA/IEE requirement under the NEA.  Nevertheless, it 
has been agreed with GOSL that all interventions that have the potential for adverse 
environmental impacts would be subject to an environmental assessment and any 
identified adverse environmental impacts would be mitigated according to a site specific 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  
 
As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in general and 
the dam safety component in particular would be subjected to a project specific 
Environmental Analysis (EA) and the subsequent preparation of an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) for each intervention.  As the specific interventions in the 
selected dams have not been fully identified yet, specific environmental assessments and 
Empts cannot be prepared at this stage.  Therefore, an Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared that would serve as a template and 
guidance for preparation of specific Easy and Empts.  The EMAF primarily includes an 
assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with dam rehabilitation and 
associated structures, measures for environmental risk mitigation and institutional 
arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, EMP implementation and 
monitoring. The EA/EMP for four selected dams to be taken up in the first year of the 
project has been prepared.   
 
Although an adequate policy and regulatory framework exists in the country for natural 
resource management and conservation, enforcement of the policy and regulations has 
been weak. Monitoring of EIA approval conditions, especially, is a weak area and needs 
strengthening. Several programs to improve institutional capacity, funded by bi-lateral 
and multi-lateral donors, aimed at providing technical and financial assistance to CEA 
and other institutions dealing with natural resource management have been implemented 
in the past. Some of these efforts are on-going. Hence, it is anticipated that the capacity to 
enforce regulations will gradually improve in the future.  
 
Page  9
Proper identification of suitable borrow sites would be a key consideration in managing 
the key potential environmental impacts. It has been agreed with the GOSL that the 
project would not support the use of any borrow material taken from sites within 
protected areas and the use extractive material from designated protected areas, 
regardless to approvals from GOSL, would result in the sub-project being ineligible for 
financing under the project.. The Soil Division of the Irrigation Department, which 
carries out surveys on borrow sites, would be used as a resources agency to identify 
proper borrow sites.   Also, if an identified burrow area is privately owned, the land 
would be temporarily rented out from the owner on a willing basis and the burrow 
material would be purchased on a commercial basis. On completion, the land should be 
restored back to normal (to be highlighted in the EMP).  
 
Specific disposal sites would be identified in the respective Empts to mitigating the 
impacts of solid waste/debris disposal during construction.  The off-site impacts of 
building construction due to resource extraction for construction would be mitigated by 
using existing government building codes and regulations for approval of such buildings 
and extracting the construction material and other resources only from authorized 
locations and sources that are licensed by relevant GOSL authorities. Obtaining all 
necessary GOSL approvals for construction of buildings are a pre-requisite for the civil 
works to be eligible for funding under the project.  If buildings are to be constructed on 
new land, an environmental checklist would be applied with an EA conducted only if 
necessary.  The Project would collaborate closely with the ongoing watershed and 
forestry management projects to mitigate the risks of sustainability of dam safety 
investments that might arise due to poor management of catchments of the dams to be 
financed under the project.  
 
In terms of the project, the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, which would be one of the 
implementing agencies for the project and under which the PMU has been established, 
has ample experience of conducting environmental assessments for dam related work. 
Under the accelerated Mahaweli Development Program, extensive environmental 
assessments have been conducted and risk mitigation measures implemented and the 
appropriate expertise is still available. Monitoring of compliance with the specifications 
in the EMPs for dams to be rehabilitated would be mainly conducted by the 
environmental specialists in the PMU and in the consultants’ team providing supervision 
on implementation. They would report on contractors’ performance in terms of 
implementing conditions give in the particular EMP and take appropriate action 
accordingly. The requirements of the EMPs would be part of the Conditions of Contract 
for all civil works contracts financed under the project.  In addition, it is proposed that 
safeguards monitoring committees, which would include key stakeholders, such as 
members from the local community and local environmental officers, would be 
established to assist with compliance monitoring.  
 
Social Safeguards:  
 
Voluntary Participation:  The temporary interruption of irrigation water, if not planned 
properly, could affect paddy cultivation, however much other crops could be grown. 
Irrespective of whether other crops could be grown or not, the project has developed 
Page  10
measures to mitigate income losses (if any). However, the decision whether to participate 
in the project or not would be fully voluntary and the right to refusal would rest with 
project affected people. To enable communities to decide on participating or not, 
intensive consultations would be held through an effective Information, Education and 
Communication Campaign (IEC). In the case of refusal, such dams would not be taken up 
under the project.  
 
IEC Campaign:    Stakeholders need to be adequately and appropriately prepared to 
enable informed decision-making. To this end, where dam safety works would affect 
irrigation water provision the project would deploy Livelihood Support Facilitators (LSF)  
and launch an extensive IEC campaign. This campaign would comprise intensive 
consultations with Farmers’ Organizations, Women, Fishers, Laborersand other relevant 
stakeholders. The campaign would cover discussions of dam safety issues and designs, 
technical aspects and construction work schedules, quality control requirements, 
arrangements for the monitoring of the construction program and development of a local 
strategy to cope with livelihood impacts. The campaign would assure that potentially 
affected communities are fully informed and consulted on the rationale, nature, and 
timing of works proposed to assure dam safety.   This would lead to a fuller community 
awareness of the potential social and economic disruptions of the contemplated dam 
safety remedial measures and attain a consensus with the users on the implementation 
schedule and salient aspects of the repair work.  
 
Implementation Schedule and Livelihood Support Assistance:  However, it is clear that 
community decisions to opt for or reject inclusion in the project would be highly 
influenced by two major factors – Timing and livelihood Assistance. In the first instance, 
the construction schedule should be such that the Maha (principal) cropping season is not 
disrupted. Second, irrigation disruption should, to the extent practicable, be minimized 
and coincide with either the rainy or slack season and/or dam closure period.  In the event 
of small scale disruptions during Yala or between the two crop seasons, the project would 
work with the community to develop four mutually-agreed LSA plans: (i) Coping 
Assistance Plan to assist cultivator households; (ii) Alternative Cropping Plan, to provide 
best options for alternative (rainfed) crops; (iii) Wage Assistance Plan, to assist laborers 
and fishers; and (iv) Gender Action Plan, to address specific requirements of women.  
 
Implementation Schedule – Remedial Works:  Timing and scheduling of works wouldbe 
critical for a successful community coping strategy. Much of Sri Lanka has two crop 
seasons – Maha, from October to February / March and Yala, from April toJuly; paddy is 
the major crop.  Maha is the more important season, coinciding with the main rainy 
season, during which crops cover the maximum land area. Full area coverage during Yala 
is not possible for want of water. Consultations during project preparation showed that 
farmers could be willing to forego cultivation during the lesser Yala season. However, 
disruption during the Maha season would be dramatic. This means that the project would 
have a window of opportunity, from March to September, for completion of remedial 
measures affecting irrigation. If works affecting irrigation water supply can be completed 
during the Yala season, fewer cultivators would be affected. If remedial measures 
affecting water supply are too extensive or complicated to be fully completed by mid-
Page  11
September, the work would be broken down into achievable packages for the time 
window with remaining works done in the subsequent year. Procurement of essential 
items, such as sluice gates would be synchronized to assure that all material is on site in 
advance of start of works.  
 
The project has prepared implementation schedules for each dam (see attachment) and 
those with LSA are marked with yellow highlights, ‘Social Assessments’. In the same 
table, the contemplated construction time is shown by a red line. Also shown are the 
rainy months and canal closure period. It is clear that the construction period is spread 
over two years.   This longer implementation schedule provides for longer and multiple 
slack periods.  Though the actual time taken for repair effecting irrigation may be at the 
most be 8 months (and even during that period there will be a rainy period of 3 months), 
a
longer construction schedule is provided to enable planning construction such that the 
Maha Season irrigation would not be disrupted. Between the two years, the upstream side 
(where the reservoir is) of the embankment dam repair would be repaired either in first 
year or in the second year. The remaining time would be for repairing other parts, which 
would not affect the delivery of irrigation water. This implementation schedule would 
form a basis for consultations with the communities. Taking into account communities’ 
views, necessary changes would be effected before finalizing the schedule.  
 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU): On the basis of the final implementation 
schedule, community agreement to the project and LSA plans would be sought. This 
would culminate in the signing of a MOU by the project (represented by Resident Project 
Manager/ Project Manager) and the local communities (represented by Farmers’ 
Organizations and Fishers’ Associations).  Once a decision is made by the stakeholders to 
carry out the remedial works, a site level construction monitoring committee would be 
formed to ensure that the dam safety measures are carried out in accordance with the 
agreed implementation plan and in conformity with the agreed window of time.  This 
committee would be built on the existing farmer and other community organizations and 
institutions. Further, the project would not include dams where it is not feasible to clearly 
ascertain willingness of the community to participate in the project. A comprehensive 
baseline survey to take stock of demographics, household economic strategies and 
agricultural assets, including land, would be carried out in communities which opt to 
participate in the project. This would form a basis for the preparation of LSA Plans.  
 
Livelihood Support Assistance Plans. 
The project would work with the community 
to develop four mutually-agreed plans:  
 
(i). A Coping Assistance Plan (CAP), to assist cultivator households to manage   the 
impacts of crop losses. These crop losses can be quickly assessed on the basis  
of 
irrigation areas and yield data.  
 
(ii). An Alternative Cropping Plan (ACP), to provide best options and assist with 
 
sowing of alternative rain-fed crops.  
 
(iii). A Wage Assistance Plan (WAP), to provide wage employment for fishers, landless 
laborers, and vulnerable people.  
 
(iv). A Gender Action Plan (GAP), to address specific requirements of women.  
Page  12
Coping Assistance Plan:  Extensive discussions have been held with the elected 
representatives of farmers’ organizations and federations of selected critical dams during 
the social assessment. The social assessment took stock of their perceptions and reactions 
to the potential public safety threat and management of likely economic disruptions.  It is 
clear that community support is highest where stakeholders understand the dam safety 
threat and feel that the project interventions are timely and essential. In such cases, 
farmers indicated that they could forego the second (more restricted and smaller) Yala 
season of cultivation provided that they are adequately consulted, informed of the nature 
of remedial works, and informed of the implementation schedule well in advance (at least 
4- 6 months before start of civil works), to enable them to prepare themselves.  
 
The farmers’ current coping strategy for the majority who cannot sow during theYala 
season is to put aside about 35 bushels (1Bushel = 22 kg) per household (of 5 people), 
about  150 kg/person, to assure food supply and seed for the next Maha season as well as 
to meet some exigencies. However, farmers stated that, if irrigation supply is interrupted 
beyond the Yala season, they would not be able to sustain themselves and significant 
assistance would be required. Further it was clear that a majority of them could cope with 
assurance of the 7 bushels per capita strategy currently used, although there are some 
vulnerable households who may requite additional assistance.  Thus, the coping strategy 
described by the farmers is essentially designed to provide a ‘paddy buffer’. Thus the 
approach of the project to development of a community designed and endorsed coping 
strategy would depend at a minimum on two key factors: (a) strict adherence to the time 
windows between Maha seasons; and (b) provision of assistance to assure a ‘paddy 
buffer’ needed to meet food requirement and re-start cultivation in the next Maha season.  
 
Community-designed coping strategies would be developed for selected dams as an 
integral part of the community approval process. The estimated budget provision to 
assure the household ‘paddy buffer’ is Rs 10,000 per household (to tide overone season). 
However, if the remedial measures disrupt the Maha season cropping, communities 
would be put to a lot of hardship. In such a case, ‘paddy buffer’ coping strategy would 
not suffice. A full compensation for the crop loss would be needed. This would work out 
to about Rs 50,000 per household per year for Maha and Yala seasons together. The 
project would gather significant experience during implementation. This experience 
would be used to improve this community-based approach to dam rehabilitation projects. 
The legal agreement provides for a formal review for improvement / adjustment of this 
approach within 15 months of project commencement.  
 
Wage Assistance Plan: In respect of landless laborers and fishers, the situation is little 
different from that of the farmers. First; unlike the farmers, they are totally un-organized 
and hence no information exists on them.  Consequently, it is difficult to clearly identify 
the potentially affected people.  Second, there are not many households which do not own 
land and which earn their livelihood exclusively from daily wage labor in farms. Third, 
wage laborers are not fully locally based: they migrate from one place to the other and to 
towns in search of livelihoods. In all, mapping them is difficult. But, it is estimated that 
on average, 10 to 15% of the farmers are exclusively landless laborers. As regards 
Page  13
fishers, each reservoir could have some 50 to 100 fishers depending exclusively on the 
reservoir for their livelihoods. Towards ensuring that their livelihoods are not adversely 
affected, the project would place funds at the disposal of the RPM / PM who (with the 
Livelihood Support Facilitators) would prepare a Wage Assistance action plan to use the 
same and deploy labor for some asset generation/ maintenance work.  Efforts would also 
be made to encourage contractors to engage local people as laborers.  
 
Gender Action Plan: would be prepared as a part of the overall LSA activity, which 
would, inter-alia, : (i) recognize women as distinctly separate groups with a different set 
of requirements of their own; (ii) seek and feed their requirements into the LCA plan; and 
(iii) ensure their participation in decision making.These groups could include women in 
extreme poverty, destitute women, women in conflict situations, disabled widows,  and 
elderly women, single women in difficult circumstances and women heading households.  
 
Domestic water supplies are not likely to be affected for two reasons. One, there are 
many open wells in any command areas. Two, no reservoir is expected to be emptied 
fully and even in the event of a natural disaster, some dead storage water would always 
be available. Still, if there is a necessity to ensure uninterrupted water supplies for 
drinking, the project would enlist the help of the local administration and make available 
water at certain key locations.  
 
Cultural Property (OP 11.03:  
 
At some ancient dams, certain structures, such as sluices, could be of high 
archaeological significance. If they are replaced, they may need to be preserved as a 
‘cultural property’.  In such cases, the project would seek technical assistance from the 
Department of Archaeology (DOA) and undertake an Archeological Impact Assessment 
study. Subsequently, the DOA would draw up an implementation action plan, as deemed 
appropriate.  Chance finds would be subject to enquiry with technical assistance from the 
DOA.  Details of the role and responsibilities of the project and the DOA would be as 
outlined in GOSL’s notification on ‘The Antiquities Ordinance’ and as per Projects 
Procedure Regulations No 01 of 2000. As perthe recommendations of the department, 
procedures for dealing with the cultural property would be incorporated in the contract 
documents with a provision for an orientation program for the project authorities and 
contractors.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental: The key stakeholders include (a) project affected people (b) local NGOs 
(c) administrators/regulators at the district/divisional level (d) project implementing 
agencies at the national level (Department of Irrigation, MASL and to limited extent, 
Ceylon Electricity Board) (e) Central Environmental Authority (f) any other national 
level agency under whose jurisdiction project activities may fall, such as Department of 
Wildlife Conservation.  
 
Page  14
Consultations have been carried out in the preparation of the EAMF. The document has 
been publicly disclosed and no comments were received.  However, more extensive 
consultations with the key stakeholders, especially the potentially affected people, would 
be conducted when site specific EAs are undertaken. The EAMF has been made available 
in the Bank Info shop, while locally it has been translated to Sinhala and Tamil and made 
available at public places. The project would continue with similar public disclosure 
arrangements for safeguard related documents in the future.  
 
Social Assessment:  Social assessments conducted during the project preparation have 
identified key stakeholders both from a geographical/ administrative 
–
national, regional, 
district and village – as well as from functional perspectives.The latter comprised (i)  
Water users of reservoirs such as farmers and farmer organizations and federations,  
laborers earning wage from agricultural operations, fishers fishing in the reservoir, and 
households using water for domestic purposes; (ii)  Water Managers at the operational 
level – chiefly, officers of theIrrigation Department, Mahalweli Authority, Ceylon 
Electricity Board (CEB), National Water and Drainage Board, Agrarian Development 
Department; (iii) Administrators/ Regulators such as the  offices of Divisional Secretary, 
Government Agents; (iv) Water Resources Decision Makers, at the  strategic level -- 
Ministries of Irrigation, Power, Finance, MASL, Disaster Management Centre, 
Department of Meteorology who formulate draft policies and programs as well as 
allocate resources; and (v)   Apex/policy level comprising administrators, policy makers, 
political functionaries, scientific and extension agencies who play a major role  in 
promoting public safety and water resources development and planning.  Systematic and 
extensive consultations with all the key stakeholders have been conducted as a part of the 
social assessments. A framework for continuing consultations during implementation has 
been proposed in the project.  
 
Social Assessment enquiry provided an insight into (i) the socio-economic aspects of 
water resources management; (ii) stakeholder analysis – identifying key stakeholders and  
assessing their expectations from, as well as concerns about, the project; (iii) impact 
assessments – positive as well as negative impacts wouldbe likely to occur as a result of 
the project interventions and the mitigatory measures;   (iv) institutional analysis and the 
implications on implementation arrangements ; and (v) identification of key issues that 
were taken into account in the project design. A detailed report is available on the 
project’s portal.  
 
Institutional and Implementation Mechanisms  
 
Environmental - The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an 
adequate basis for the mitigation of potential impacts mentioned above. Under the NEA, 
administered by the CEA, activities that fall into a prescribed category are required to go 
through a comprehensive environmental screening and planning process (EIA). 
Accordingly, all river basin development and irrigation projects, excluding minor 
irrigation works, require an EA. However, the guidelines are ambiguous about the 
requirement for upgrading and rehabilitation of existing dams.  An agreement has been 
reached with the CEA and IAs that all dam upgrading and rehabilitation and related 
Page  15
activities financed under this project as well as any other activities that may lead to 
potential adverse environmental impacts would require an EA, commensurate with the 
potential for environmental impacts, and detailed EMPs that would be included in the 
civil works contract documents.  
 
In view of resource extraction for construction work, the Geological Surveys and Mines 
Bureau (GSMB) which is the regulatory authority for all mining and quarrying activities 
in the country is important. Approval by the GSMB is required prior to commencement 
of commercial mining (for example, sand). Licenses by the GSMB are issued for 
identified sites for a stipulated quantity based on technical evaluations. However, 
monitoring of such sites and activities to ensure conformity with stipulated conditions is 
rather weak.  Therefore, in addition to the supervisory consultants being responsible for 
ensuring that civil works contractors adhere to the GSMB licensing conditions, the PMU 
Environmental Specialist would ensure compliance with environmental standards.  
 
Conducting site-specific environmental assessments 
–
The primary responsibilityfor co-
coordinating work related to EAs would rest with the PMU. For this purpose an 
environmental specialist would be appointed to the PMU staff whose main task would be 
to ensure that EAs/EMPs are prepared for all the dams selected for rehabilitation and for 
works financed by other components of the project and that suitable mechanisms are 
mobilized to ensure the implementation of the EMPs. IDA clearance of the EIA is a 
prerequisite for disbursement of funds for the civil works. The prescriptions detailed in 
the EMP are mandatory and would be contractually binding as the EMP would form a 
part of the contract.  
 
Social - A detailed activity break down chart for LSA has been prepared. A Community 
Development Specialist would be deployed in the PMU to steer the LSA under the 
guidance and leadership of the Project Director. At the dam level, key responsibility 
would rest with the RPM (in MASL) and PM (in ID). Farmers Organizations and other 
JMCs would endorse the program and extend technical support as appropriate. RPM/PMs 
would deploy LS Facilitators and undertake IEC campaigning as well as community 
consultations. A mechanism for redressing grievances has been worked out. Overall 
responsibility rests with the PMU. A process map, depicting sequentially activities that 
would ensure that participation was voluntary and further measures along with the role 
and responsibilities of the different actors as well as the review/ approval mechanisms, 
has been prepared.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation: A systematic program has been designed to monitor various 
environmental and social parameters. The environmental and social issues would be 
monitored as a part of the overall subproject progress monitoring. Monitoring of 
compliance with EMP specifications by the contractor would be key for proper 
environmental management and would primarily be conducted by an environmental 
committee appointed by the PMU for each site requiring requires regular monitoring. The 
committee would receive input from an environmental specialist on the consultants’ team 
overseeing the design and implementation, environmental specialist in the PMU, 
Environmental Officers of the CEA and interested members of the projected affected 
Page  16
community. Monitoring of compliance would be the responsibility of the “Engineer” on 
behalf of the Employer. PMU would share the quarterlyprogress reports regularly with 
the CEA and IDA.  
 
Regular IDA missions would include specialists to monitor the project’s compliance 
with the World Bank’s safeguard policies. Information related to all subproject proposals 
and the project, as a whole, would be made publicly available at different places, 
including locally at the reservoir level and at the national level.  
 
All key project staff is being made aware of the provisions in the environmental and 
social assessments and these have been budgeted and included in the project budgets. 
Summary of the assessments have been translated into Sinhala and Tamil languages and 
disseminated widely across the stakeholders. Several workshops have been organized to 
enable effective dissemination. The Environmental and Social Assessments have also 
been made available in the Bank Info shop.  
 
Table – 2    PROCESS MAP  
 
Activity 
               Responsibility 
Review/ Approval  
 
Primary Secondary 
 
Assoc. 
 
 
Pre-Planning Phase  
 
1
Preparation of Long List of Dams – based on Risk Assessment 
GOSL  
 
2
Categorization of Dams – I , II, III and IV 
GOSL  
 
3
Priority wise Category III Dams – Activity Initiation 
GOSL  
 
Designing of IEC campaign – training of facilitators, production of 
materials,workshops, advertisements etc. 
CDS  
 
(PMU) 
RPM/ PM 
LSFs 
PD (PMU)  
 
2
IEC campaigning – awareness creation 
RPM/ PM 
LSF 
FOs 
PD  
 
(PMU)  
 
3
Public consultations 
LSF 
RPM/PM  
 
-- CDS 
 
 
(PMU)  
 
4
Community Mapping – FOs / Fishers/ CBOs/ laborers/ others 
LSF
 RPM/PM 
 
 
-- CDS 
 
 
(PMU)  
 
Socio-economic accounting completed and vulnerable households identified  
LSF
 CDS 
 
 
RPM/ PM  
Page  17
5
Agree To Do 
–
1
:
Resolution by communities 
FOs/ Fishers/ CBOs
 RPM/PM 
 
 
LSF PD 
 
 
6
Preliminary site reconnaissance and consultations with affected people on 
environmental concerns relating to proposed dam repair work 
PMU/ES 
 
 PD/PMU 
 
 
7
Initiate discussion on environmental safeguards to provide input to the preparation 
of detail technical plans   
PMU/ES 
 
 
PD/PMU  
 
PMU will seek  Comments from the Bank on the ATD Report  
 
8
DECISION to go ahead or not –  PMU – Planning Phase Initiated  
 
9
Village Resource/ Community Mapping – Detailed  LSF 
RPM/PM 
-
 CDS 
 
 
10
Baseline Information Generation 
SLF 
RPM/PM 
CDS 
PD  
 
11
Consultations done; Technical Proposals explained in detail; Feedback obtained 
on changes/ other requirements; Assurance or otherwise provided.  RPM/  
 
PM LSF  FO/ 
 
 
CBOs CDS/ PD  
 
12
Agree To Do (ATD) – Final - Resolutions 
FOs  
 
CBOs RPM/ PM 
SLF 
PD  
 
11
Preparation of TOR for Environmental Assessments   
ES/  
 
PMU 
  PD/PMU 
 
 
WB  
 
12
Conducting of Environmental Assessment 
Consultants 
 
 
PD & 
ES/PMU  
 
WB  
 
13
Public Consultations on EA 
PMU/  
 
ES 
  CEA/ 
 
 
WB  
 
EA Review and Clearance 
 
 
 
CEA/  
 
WB  
 
13
Go ahead – detailed plans  
 
14
Coping Assistance Plan – for cultivating households  
 
–Number of households  
 
--nature and extent of assistance  
 
--scheduling for releases  
 
--Number of vulnerable households  
 
--nature and extent of assistance  
 
--scheduling for releases.  
 
-- Joint accounts opened  
 
-- Bank account numbers and bank details (all payments will by cheque and paid into 
bank accounts) 
RPM/  
 
PM CDS 
 
 
LSF CBOs 
 
 
PMU  
 
15
Alternative Crop Plans-  cultivating Households  
 
--Crops to  be grown  
Page  18
-- input requirements  
 
--technical assistance  
 
--any other information 
RPM/ PM 
LSF 
FOs  
 
CBOs PD/ PMU  
 
16
Endorsement of coping assistance and alternative crop plans 
FO  
 
CBOs LSF 
CDS 
PMU   
 
17
Wage Employment Plans 
RPM/ PM 
LSF 
Labors  
 
Fishers PMU 
 
 
18
Facilities Plan
–Drinking Water etc 
RPM/  
 
PM/  
 
DS LSF  
PMU 
 
 
19
Gender Action Plan 
RPM/  
 
PM CDS/LSF 
CBOs PMU 
 
 
20
Consolidation of all plans, aggregation of costs and supplementary assistance 
requirements as well as M&E. Public Disclosures done. Objections, if any, are addressed
 
RPM/ PM/  
 
CDS/  
 
LSF DS 
PMU 
 
 
21
Approval of Livelihood Coping Plans, and mechanisms for redressing grievances 
established 
   PMU 
 
 
PMU will share the Plans with, and receive comments from the Bank  
 
Implementation Phase  
 
22
Coping Assistance Plan- implemented  
 
Construction Monitoring Committee established 
RPM/ PM 
LSF 
FOs  
 
CBOs PMU  
 
23
Wage Assistance Plan and Gender Action Plan implemented 
RPM/ PM
 CDS/ 
 
 
LSF 
DS/ GA 
PMU  
 
24
Facilities Plan implemented 
RPM/ PM 
LSF 
DS/  
 
GA PMU 
 
 
25
EMP implemented 
EMC 
 
 
PMU  
 
WB  
 
26
Monitoring of EMP implementation  EMC 
ES/PMU 
 
PMU/WB  
 
27 
Day to day oversight, concurrent monitoring, and ROGs 
RPM/ PM 
LSF
 CDS 
PMU 
 
 
28
Monthly Meetings/ Reviews  PMC/ PD  
 
29
Quarterly Reviews 
PMC/ PD 
 
 
PMU  
 
30
Terminal Evaluation 
PMU 
Consultant 
 
WB  
 
GOSL : Government of Sri Lanka; PMU: Project Management Unit; PD: Project 
Director  
 
RPM: Resident Project Manager (Mahaweli Authority); PM: Project Manager 
(Irrigation Department); CDS: Community Development Specialist; FO: Farmers 
Organization; CBOs: Community Based Organizations; DS: Divisional Secretariat; GA: 
Government Agent; Labors: Laborers; ATD: Agree to Do Report. ES: Environmental 
Page  19
Specialist; WB:World Bank; EMC: Environmental Monitoring Committee; LSF: 
Livelihood Support Facilitator; PMC: Project Management Committee.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  20
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nihal Fernando 
11/18/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
11/12/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/03/2008 
Comments:  Project is retained by SAROQ / Safeguards for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
01/03/2008 
Comments:   
