Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3578
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P110317 
Project Name:  Sri Lanka: Second North East Housing Reconstruction Program 
Task Team Leader:  Naresha Duraiswamy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing construction (100%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
43.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
9.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed IDA Additional Financing to supplement the North East Housing 
Reconstruction Program (NEHRP) is intended to provide the poorest conflict-affected 
families in the North East that meet accepted vulnerability criteria with rebuilt housing 
units. This would entail a cash grant paid in installments to 13,117 most vulnerable 
families to help reconstruct their homes destroyed by the civil conflict. In so doing, this 
segment of the population would be better positioned to reintegrate into the economic 
mainstream. The activities would be implemented in three phases over two and a half 
years. A district would have to complete the construction of 50% of the houses targeted 
in that phase to trigger a move to the next phase of the Additional Credit.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Additional Financing would facilitate the reconstruction of an added 
13,117  houses in the North East over a two and a half-year period through the provision 
of housing support cash grants. In doing so, it would support the return of displaced 
populations in the North East.  It would contribute to the training of skilled construction 
workers and facilitate the  resumption of economic activity in the war-devastated region 
Page  2
through increased construction activity.The Additional Credit, like NEHRP before it, will 
have three components:  
 
a) Housing Assistance (US$ 38.75 million).  The Additional Financing would support 
reconstruction through the transfer of a cash grant of Rs 325,000 to eligible beneficiaries 
to rebuild a fully damaged house.  It would transfer the cash grant to the joint bank 
account of selected beneficiaries in four tranches. The pace of installments would be 
performance-based and the beneficiary would be allowed a period of five months to 
complete construction.  
 
(b) Capacity Building  and Monitoring ($3.4 million). The Additional Financing would 
support a comprehensive technical assistance program to ensure smooth implementation.  
To this end, IDA would support Skills Training for Construction and Technical 
Assistance for Program Monitoring that includes a Communications Strategy, Continuous 
Social Impact Assessment, Environment Assessment and an Independent Technical 
Audit.  
 
(c) Program Management (US$ 1.8 million). This component would support 
implementation at the central, provincial and district levels to better execute activities 
funded by the Additional Financing. The Grievance Redressal Mechanism would be one 
such activity. Operating expenses would be another.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed Additional Financing would support activities in all 8 districts of Sri 
Lanka’s North East i.e. Amparai, Batticaloa, Jaffna, Kilinochchi, Mannar, Mullaitivu, 
Trincomalee and Vavuniya.  
 
The project area is large and consists of many natural and environmentally sensitive 
areas. However, as the project is associated with reconstruction of houses only there will 
be no major alterations in the existing land use patterns.  The project will not directly 
fund any activity within natural habitats, declared forest and wildlife reserves and 
protected areas, hence would not have any adverse impact on the natural and 
environmentally sensitive areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment will be the main safeguard policy on 
environment to be triggered under the project. The project will fund reconstruction of 
houses damaged and destroyed as a result of the ethnic conflict over the last 25 years. 
Since the sites for housing reconstruction is on existing housing sites, no significant and 
irreversible impact would be expected on-site. However, the project will require large 
quantities of natural material such as sand, timber, rubble, clay for housing 
reconstruction, the demand for which can significantly intensify mining and extraction. 
This can potentially trigger environmental problems off-site unless adequate precautions 
are taken to ensure exploitation of natural material takes place within the stipulated 
regulatory framework and approval from relevant authorities.  
 
The on-going NEHRP has built-in specific mitigatory measures to ensure that 
unsustainable natural resource extraction is minimized when seeking material for housing 
reconstruction. This includes the (i) preparation of village specific EMPs, (ii) preparation 
of the resource requirement plan which identifies the demand for materials and possible 
suppliers for each phase (iii) enforcement of regulations relating to resource extraction 
and (iv) promotion of alternative construction material. The proposed additional 
financing should benefit from the same guidelines and further strengthen, where possible, 
existing measures undertaken to regulate the supply and use of natural building material 
in order to minimize the impact of sand mining, clay mining, timber harvesting etc.   
 
Experience from the parent NEHRP indicates that disposal of construction debris and 
availability of water for construction purposes do not pose serious problems. The project 
also has helped improve the sanitary situation by providing a toilet to the beneficiary.  
 
The Additional Financing would not fund reconstruction activities within natural 
habitats, declared forest and wildlife reserves and other protected areas. Neither will it 
support extractive use of resources from any such areas. Furthermore, the proposed 
project will have built-in mitigatory measure to ensure that adverse impacts from mining 
Page  4
and extraction to natural areas are minimized. Therefore, the policies on Natural Habitats 
and Forests would not be triggered.  
 
OP 4.10 may be triggered, but given that the beneficiary selection would be an ongoing 
process, it is not yet clear whether indigenous communities would be involved as 
beneficiaries under the Additional Financing.  If it seems likely that any of these 
communities are to be included in the Additional Financing, a diagnostic consultation 
would be undertaken with the communities in question at that point. The consultation 
would be undertaken by a qualified social scientist/institution, with knowledge of the 
traditions and culture of the Indigenous people, to ascertain their specific wishes and to 
minimize the possibility that interventions by the program and/or its contractors 
inadvertently create adverse effects within the communities. Based on the consultation 
report, the North East Housing Reconstruction Unit (NEHRU) would decide what 
specific modalities to implement vis-a -vis these communities.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered under the Additional Financing, as the project is based on 
owner-reconstruction in situ and the beneficiary identification criteria of NEHRP requires 
proof of ownership of land upon which the house is going to be rebuilt. The mobile Land 
Task Force teams will continue their work, assisting beneficiaries in regularizing their 
title deeds and assist in solving land disputes.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The North and East regions of the country have suffered much damage in terms of life 
and property due to the civil conflict that has lasted for the past 25 years. Needless to say, 
post-conflict reconstruction in these areas will be a massive effort and will last for a 
considerable length of time.  Out of the numerous development needs of the region, 
housing will be a top priority to enable displaced people to return home. Similarly, roads, 
irrigation, water supply, electricity and other public utility facilities will be some of the 
key areas where development work is anticipated to be focused on. As at the moment, 
GOSL has started post-conflict reconstruction in the East and will be doing so in the 
North as and when the environment becomes conducive for such investments.  
 
Most of these physical infrastructure development activities will have the potential to 
trigger adverse environmental impacts, either on-site or off-site. When such activities are 
carried out over a long period of time, cumulative impacts can occur, such as continued 
extraction of sand for several development projects. For large development programs 
EIAs/IEEs will be mandatory (if it falls within the prescribes category) under the 
National Environmental Act and hence the impacts will be addressed through the 
respective EIA/IEE studies. Such studies will provide the opportunity to account for the 
cumulative impact on the environment, if any, of all development work carried out within 
a
specific timeframe.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project is aiming at reconstructing those houses that have been either partially or 
fully destroyed in the North and East region, which is considered as a social and political 
priority. Therefore, alternative options do not apply.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework was developed during 
preparation of the earlier NEHRP, which is applicable to the Additional Financing as 
well.  The Framework includes a complete discussion on the likely environmental issues 
the project could trigger and the level of environmental analysis that would required to be 
undertaken by the project. According to the guidelines set out in this framework, EAs for 
29 pilot villages were conducted in 2004. Based on the findings of these EAs, the main 
environmental issues were identified at a village level based upon which a detailed 
Environmental Information Questionnaire (EIQ) Form was developed, which includes a 
section for the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The Environmental Assessment 
Questionnaire has been filled for each village funded by the on-going NEHRP. 
District/Divisional Administrative Officers and the Divisional Environmental Officers 
have been involved in filling the questionnaire for each village and doing follow up 
monitoring. The proposed additional credit will benefit from the safeguard studies 
already carried out and the on-going safeguard measures can be applied and followed.  
 
The policy and regulatory framework for natural resources management in the country 
provides a strong basis for the project specific environmental safeguard measures taken 
as described above. This consists of (i) The National Environmental Act (NEA) which 
stipulates that activities falling into a prescribed category is required to go through a 
comprehensive environmental screening and planning process (EIA or IEE). Since the 
proposed project is concerned with housing reconstruction, there will be no EIA/IEE 
requirement under the NEA, (ii) Forest Ordinance under which felling of trees in forest 
reserves are completely prohibited. Tree felling for timber is allowed only in designated 
areas under licensed approval, (iii) Mines and Minerals Act which regulates mining 
activities to be undertaken uncer licensed approval in identified areas only, (iv) Coast 
Conservation Act under which offshore coral mining is prohibited (v) Local Authority 
Ordinance under which all building plans are required to be submitted to the local 
authority to obtain approval based on conformation to a specified building code.  
 
The Borrowers institutional capacity at the implementation level to adhere to the agreed 
safeguard policies have been substantially improved over the last 4 years under the 
original NEHRP. Considerable experience has been gathered in the last 4 years in 
implementing the safeguard measures described previously.  Therefore, in terms of 
addressi
ng environmental safeguards of the proposed project, the borrower’s capacity 
will be sufficient.  
 
Significant positive and no negative social impact is anticipated, based on the 
experience with NEHRP. A Continuous Social Impact Assessment forms a key part of 
Page  6
the program, closely monitoring the selection of beneficiaries, issues pertaining to ethnic 
equity, the functioning of the Land Task Force, the Grievance Redressal Mechanism and 
the broader social impact of the program. A robust Communications Campaign is another 
feature of the Additional Credit.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations with the main stakeholder groups were conducted during the preparation of 
environmental safeguard related studies for the original NEHRP. These documents 
namely the Environmental Management and Assessment Framework and the Pilot EIA, 
have been disclosed to the local public as we
ll has been displayed in the Bank’s Infoshop. 
Since the proposed project is an additional financing, no fresh safeguard related studies 
have been required. However, the EIQ, has been translated into Tamil and Sinhala and 
has been displayed on the official website of the NEHRP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/02/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/01/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Indigenous Peoples Development Plan would only be triggered should the 
indigenous peoples be included in the proposed Additional Financing.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Naresha Duraiswamy 
04/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
04/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
04/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/10/2008 
Comments:  Cleared on the understanding the new in-country disclosure date for EA documents 
refers to the existing EIQ which has been translated into Tamil and Sinhala.  English version 
disclosed 2004. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Songsu Choi 
05/16/2008 
Comments:   
