Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3455
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P110324 
Project Name:  Sri Lanka: Road Sector Assistance Project : Additional Credit 
Task Team Leader:  Amali Rajapaksa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.48
25.48 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to lower transportation costs through sustainable delivery 
of an efficient national road system that serves the needs of road users and the Sri Lankan 
public at large.   
 
3. Project Description 
Maintenance and Rehabilitation of National Roads Component:  This consists of civil 
works along national roads comprising of resurfacing and improvement of about 598 km 
of Class A and B National highways. The credit will finance (i) the cost escalation 
associated with the completion of civil works contracts (ii) the widening of the 
carriageway to 6.2 m necessary to provide additional traffic capacity and to accommodate 
the standards stipulated within the National Road Master Plan (iii) the additional works 
identified and determined as necessary during implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Since the project will focus on selected national roads located nationwide, project 
interventions will be country wide.   
 
Page  2
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is designed to provide beneficiaries with improved and sustainable road 
transport by enhancing the durability, efficiency and economic impact of the national and 
rural road network.  Improved road surfaces can reduce travel times and lower the costs 
of vehicle use, while increasing access to markets, jobs, education and health services as 
well as reduce transport costs for both freight and passengers.  Therefore, the project will 
improve the economic and social welfare of the people.  
 
Considering the scope of the project, which is limited largely to maintenance and 
rehabilitation approximately 598 km of Class A and B national roads, with drainage 
improvements where needed, it is anticipated that there will be no significant and/or 
irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts.  Therefore, any potential adverse 
impacts due to road resurfacing and drainage improvement can be easily managed with 
proper planning, design, construction, supervision, monitoring and post-project operation 
and maintenance. Resurfacing of roads has minimal on-site environmental impacts. 
Disturbances to land, interference to soil stability and the hydrology in the area will not 
take place. Impacts on air quality and noise levels will be limited only to the construction 
period. Longer term impacts depend on the projected traffic flow increases and the 
anticipated reduction in traffic congestion, which is likely to arise due to improved road 
conditions.  It is felt that the net effect on air quality and noise levels will be positive over 
the long term.  Any potential adverse environmental impacts triggered under this project 
will be seen off-site where road-building material would be sourced.  
 
The Project does not envisage large scale land acquisition. However, where minor land 
acquisition is unavoidable (e.g. where minor road alignments widening or other 
improvements require small scale land acquisition) the project will be designed to cause 
Page  3
minimum social, cultural and economic disruption.  The Project in these situations will 
use donated land and will ensure: the voluntary nature of the donation; that the donor 
gives up all claims to the land and to compensations for the land; that it is free of 
encumbrances and interests; for any loss of livelihood of vulnerable groups, that 
community devised mitigation measures are acceptable to the affectees; a grievance 
redressal mechanism is available; and the title is transferred to RDA.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With road improvements, it is anticipated that there is a possibility for increased vehicle 
traffic which could result in road safety issues.  GOSL has just embarked on a program to 
better enforce road rules in a bid to reduce traffic accidents and improve road safety.  The 
resurfacing of existing roads would not significantly increase development in the area and 
therefore, long term impacts would be minimal.  Air quality and noise in the areas should 
improve since there should be less traffic congestion if the roads are of better quality.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable under additional finance, as this is connected to RSAP- P086411.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In keeping with the World Bank’s Safeguard Policies, the Road Development Authority 
(RDA) prepared an Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) 
and a Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF) that has provided the necessary 
background for environmental and social considerations to be built into the design of the 
project so that environmentally sustainable implementation can take place.  These 
Frameworks were used as a guide and template by the RDA to undertake environmental 
and social analysis and ensure compliance with the World Bank’s environmental and 
social safeguard policies and the relevant provisions under the National Environmental 
Act (NEA) and associated regulations.  Based on the EAMF, site specific environmental 
analyses has been undertaken, for the twelve roads included under the project, resulting 
in individual Environmental Management Plans being prepared by the Supervision 
Consultants on behalf of RDA.  
 
In order to be more road-specific, the individual civil works Contracts have developed 
Environmental Methods Statements (EMS), based on the EMPs, which identifies location 
and site specific details related to both onsite and off site environmental and social issues.  
The respective EMSs specify the mitigation measures to be implemented by the 
contractor. In addition, all Contractors are required to obtain and abide by relevant GOSL 
licenses for extraction of material from quarries and borrow sites, as well as licenses for 
the use of disposal sites, crusher and asphalt plant site, etc.  The PMU and supervision 
consultants are required to monitor compliance of license conditions and the 
implementation of the EMS very rigorously. The proposed changes in road width have 
not required the preparation of new EMPs, as the original EMPs had taken into account 
the environmental impacts likely to arise within 3 meters from the edge of either side of 
Page  4
the carriageway, which therefore, includes the proposed road widening. In order to assess 
the impact of donated land and since the number of affectees losing minor infrastructure 
(a wall, parapet, shed etc.) is more than 200 a Resettlement Plan has been prepared and is 
being finalized.  
 
In addition to the above, the RDA has established an Environmental and Social Cell at 
RDA to integrate environmental issues into the planning process as well as undertake 
environmental monitoring.  In support of this, the project will continue to provide 
training for appropriate RDA staff in the Planning Division and in the newly created 
Environmental and Social Cell. The Project is financing an intensive training course for 
staff of the national and provincial RDA and other relevant staff in environmental and 
social management of the road sector.  The course will be spread over a one year period 
and will address all aspects of environmental and social assessments as well as mitigation 
of impacts in road projects.  
 
Moreover, the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established with the environmental 
regulatory agency, Central Environmental Authority (CEA), having EIA review 
experience of over a decade.  However, the weak link in the EA process is in the area of 
post approval monitoring.  Therefore, the project shall continue its initiatives to address 
this weakness, including: (i) making the contractor responsible for the implementation of 
the EMS; (ii) requiring the supervisory consultants to have environmental specialists 
monitoring the implementation of the EMS; and (iii) recruiting appropriate staff at the 
PMU to provide the requisite monitoring of the EMS.   Overall, the Central 
Environmental Authority will have a responsibility to ensure that GOSL environmental 
clearance conditions are met. IDA missions will continue to emphasize EMS 
implementation in regular project reviews. These safeguards should ensure effective 
implementation of post approval safeguard conditions.  Monthly meetings are being held 
by the PMU with the supervisory consultants and civil works contractors on safeguards 
compliance.  
 
Finally, while the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established, the experience in 
managing social impacts is rather limited.  Due to this, significant emphasis has been 
placed by other donors in the sector, namely ADB and JBIC, on the proper planning and 
management of resettlement issues arising from road sector operations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental Assessment and Management Framework was prepared with 
stakeholder consultation and was placed for public comment for a 30 day period in 2005. 
Site specific EMPs of CP 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9 were placed for a mandatory 30 day pubic 
comment period, during the period 2005 and 2006. The final EMS for contract packages 
8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 were placed for public comment in End February-early March 2008. 
The Final EMPs were submitted to the Bank in 2005-2006 and the EMSs were submitted 
to the Bank from June 2006 - November 2007; January and February 2008.  
 
Page  5
Similarly, the Social Impact Management Framework was prepared following the same 
procedures and the RP has been prepared with stakeholders consultations and is under 
finalization. The key stakeholders are the direct beneficiaries and affectees suffering 
minor losses in the project stretches (both men and women). Others include transporters, 
road users, students, local NGOs, institutional stakeholders (local governments/PS, RDA, 
Public Utility departments, academia) etc.  Stakeholder consultations will be an on-going 
feature throughout the project period.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Amali Rajapaksa 
04/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
04/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
04/10/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/23/2008 
Comments:  Cleared.  Comments on RAP, if any, will be sent separately. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Binyam Reja 
04/19/2008 
Comments:   
