Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4026 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P113709 
Project Name: Sustainable Tourism Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Michael D. Wong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other industry (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (33%);Other human development 
(33%);Export development and competitiveness (17%);Other rural development (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to create conditions for sustainable (community, cultural 
and environmentally centered) tourism development. This entails supporting systemic changes in 
the institutional and regulatory framework for tourism at the center and in particular, at local 
Government level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will provide technical assistance and investments in three broad categories:  
 
a) Institutional Framework: The project proposes to provide technical assistance to support the 
implementation of the new tourism act and support institutions under the new act to fulfill their 
respective mandates. It will also provide technical assistance to review processes and stream line 
procedures in selected clusters, strengthen local Government service delivery in the selected 
tourism clusters, and introduce new regulatory mechanisms that meet challenges arising out of 
global trends e.g. Mitigating Global Warming, etc.  
 
Page  2
b) Resource base management: The project proposes to establish a public private partnership 
framework for infrastructure to safe guard the natural resource base and build the capacity of 
local governments to regulate these investments effectively. It will fund the planning, feasibility 
studies, etc for localized infrastructure investments and in some cases provide for investments in 
these projects. The project will also introduce PPPs in areas such as Kalpitilya in order to support 
well planned and environmentally and culturally responsible tourism development. The project 
proposes to provide investment for local infrastructure; technical assistance for local planning 
capacity and community involvement; and investment for conserving local heritage sites around 
Arugam Bay.  
 
c) Support for sustainable tourism initiatives: The project proposes to establish a matching grant 
fund to support community initiatives, product innovation by SMEs and communities in line 
with sustainable tourism development. The fund will support the Sri Lankan tourism supply 
chain response to new market demand.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project aims to cover the tourism zones beyond the well established western regions, into the 
north west of the country, i.e. Kalpitiya and the eastern regions Arugam Bay and potentially 
other areas in the Eaast if the conditions allow these include Passikudah and Trincomalee. 
Kalpitiya adjacent to Wilpattu National park is a sparsely populated coast line which provides an 
opportunity for well planned, and environmentally and culturally responsible tourism 
development. This would entail involving the community first, respecting local culture and 
traditions, conserving the natural resources, and focusing on quality rather than quantity.      The 
area around Arugam Bay in the Eastern province has reached a level of peace and stability that 
allows the development of sustainable tourism. The mixed tourism community in Arugam Bay is 
already highly motivated and mobilized and it provides an excellent opportunity to develop a 
community based, culturally sensitive and environmentally friendly tourism sector. Successful 
sector development would then be rolled out to other eastern province based destinations such as 
Batticaloa, Passikudah, Kalkudha, Vakarai, Nilaweli and Trincomallee.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
brief financial management assessment was carried out during the mission, covering the 
Ministry of Tourism (MoT) 
–
Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority, Sri Lanka Tourism 
Promotions Bureau, Sri Lanka Conventions Bureau and Sri Lanka Institute of Tourism and Hotel 
Management. Discussions were held with the Chief Accountant MoT, Director Finance SLTDA 
and Internal Auditor MoT to carry out this preliminary FM assessment. The team concluded that 
the overall financial management assessment can be given a moderate FM risk rating. A more 
detailed, substantial assessment including the flow of funds, confirmation of the reporting lines 
and required dates, etc will be included in the report.  
 
An Environmental and Social Safeguards Management Framework shall be developed, which 
will be used to identify potential environmental and social impacts early in the project cycle and 
to provide broad guidelines to be integrated into project implementation to mitigate any adverse 
environmental or social impacts. Subsequently, specific SIAs will be formulated to cover 
individual sub-projects/components.  
 
Page  3
In view of the considerable conflict risk particularly in the Eastern Province, the implementing 
agency needs to develop capacity to conduct SIAs comprising identification of social risks, and 
design of social impact mitigation plans to promote peace-building and deflate/mitigate potential 
inter-community conflicts in project areas.   Development of a suitable strategy for community 
involvement and benefit-sharing with due attention to questions of social equity (ethnic and 
gender) would be an integral part of the risk mitigation work.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDI) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) will be triggered as the project supports the 
Tourism Development Board and local Governments in developing new destinations in the North 
West (Kalpitiya) and supporting other locations with solid and waste water management 
(Negombo and Arugam Bay).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the environmental assessment (EA) process detailed 
in OP 4.01, the Bank's team will asess if BP 4.04 is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the environmental assessment (EA) process, the 
Bank's team will asess if BP 4.36 is triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the environmental assessment (EA, the Bank's team 
will asess if OP 4.09 is triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP4.11) will also be triggered as the project proposes 
to conserve cultural sites around Arugam Bay in the Eastern provinces. The project also triggers 
OP 4.10 as it proposes to work with communities as providers and beneficiaries of sustainable 
tourism development in Kalpitiya and Arugam Bay (and possible in other Eastern locations).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the social assessment (EA), the Bank's team will 
asess if BP 4.10 is triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Land acquisition should be kept at a minimum but OP 4.12 may be triggered in connection 
with the smaller infrastructure components   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the environmental assessment (EA) process the 
Bank's team will asess if BP 4.37 is triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the environmental assessment the Bank's team will 
asess if BP 7.50 is triggered.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
Based on information obtained through the environmental and social assessment (ESA) 
process the Bank's team will asess if BP 7.60 is triggered.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/04/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/04/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
January 31st 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael D. Wong 
02/25/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/27/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
03/02/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
