Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3355 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P110278 
Project Name: Enhanced Education Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Harsha Aturupane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (45%);Secondary education (45%);General public 
administration sector (5%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (5%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Sri Lanka Education Sector Development Project is supporting Sri Lanka’s Education Sector 
Development Framework and Program (ESFP) 2006-2011 to: (a) promote equitable access to 
basic education (grades 1-9) and secondary education (grades 10-13), (b) improve the quality of 
education, (c) enhance the economic efficiency and equity of resource allocation and distribution 
within the education system, and (d) strengthen education governance and service delivery.  
 
The additional financing through the proposed Enhanced Education Development Project 
(EEDP) will be used to scale up activities supported by the ESDP. The development objectives 
of the ESDP, the parent project, will not change.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Ministry of Education proposes to scale up support for activities in the ESDP that will 
promote a multi-cultural, multi-ethnic and multi-religious society in the entire country, and for 
the rehabilitation and development of the education system in lagging regions, especially conflict 
affected areas.  Strategic activities to achieve these objectives include: (a) promoting English 
language skills, both to improve the economic opportunities of children in lagging regions, and 
Page  2
as a link language between Sinhalese and Tamil children, (b) promoting a multi-ethnic and 
multi-religious society through the school curriculum and textbooks, (c) strengthening the 
capabilities of principals and teachers to manage and teach in multi-ethnic and multi-religious 
schools through relevant staff development and student exchange programs, (d) reducing 
regional disparities in higher-order learning spaces and assets such as school ICT centers and 
library resource centers, (e) promoting co-curricular activities among children in the country, 
including children from the Northern and Eastern provinces interacting with children in the rest 
of the country, and (f) special targeted programs to improve education levels in communities 
affected by the conflict, including attending to basic learning requirements of school children and 
special and non-formal education programs. Vulnerable groups such as children in lagging 
regions, especially children from conflict affected households, will be major beneficiaries of the 
additional financing.  
 
The scaled up activities to be supported by the additional funding from the EEDP will help to 
achieve the ESDP development objectives of: (a) promoting equitable access to basic education 
and secondary education; (b) improving the quality of education; (c) enhancing the equity of 
resource allocation and distribution within the education system; and (d) strengthening education 
service delivery.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All Sri Lanka   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Environment:  The composite GOSL environmental clearance process, in principle, is consistent 
with World Bank environmental safeguard policies and public disclosure requirements. 
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for development projects were made mandatory 
under the National Environmental Act (NEA) in 1993.  A list of prescribed projects, based on the 
magnitude and potential for adverse environmental impacts, that require EIAs are listed in 
Gazette Extraordinary No. 772/22 (1993).  The Central Environmental Authority has been 
reviewing and approving EIAs for prescribed projects since 1993 has developed solid technical 
expertise and capacity for this task over the last decade.  However, in view of the low potential 
for significant adverse environmental impacts, all potential construction or renovation activities 
proposed under the project fall below the thresholds identified in the “prescribed list”. While 
there are no direct environmentalassessment regulations by the GOSL applicable to this project, 
it has been agreed that the environmental safeguard policies of the World Bank which has been 
outlined in the ESSAF, developed specifically for the Education Sector Development Grant 
(ESDG), will be adhered to. Site selection, design, contracting, monitoring, evaluation of 
subprojects and the preparation of the safeguard analysis in accordance with the ESSAF will be 
undertaken by the respective education agencies at the national and provincial levels. Although 
environmental expertise in the Ministry of Education and Provincial Education Authorities is 
weak, the training conducted by the ESDG for Engineers employed by these authorities has 
improved capacity and would provide an adequate basis to fulfill the environmental safeguard 
requirements of the proposed project.  The project envisages on-going environmental assessment 
training of relevant staff.  
 
Page  3
Social: The project is expected to have significant positive and no negative social impact. It has 
been agreed with the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) that no land acquisition will be financed 
under the credit and that new school ICT centers, library resource centers  and water and 
sanitation facilities will only be provided on existing school lands.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
SRI LANKA  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
FOR EDUCATION SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK AND PROGRAM  
 
I. Objectives  
 
1. The Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) provides 
general policies, guidelines, codes of practice and procedures to be integrated into the 
implementation of the World Bank-supported Enhanced Education Development Project (EEDP) 
in Sri Lanka. The EEDP will provide additional financing to the Education Sector Development 
Project (ESDP), which follows a sector wide approach (SWAp) supporting the GOSL education 
development framework to strengthen the basic and secondary system throughout the country.  
 
2. The proposed EEDP would support an expansion of ESDP activities in all nine provinces 
of the country, with special emphasis on five provinces affected most by the impact of the 
conflict: Northern and Eastern Provinces and three neighboring provinces (North Central, North 
Western and Uva). The additional funds would assist in scaling up these ESDP initiatives to 
promote a favorable environment for a multi-ethnic, multi-religious and multi-cultural society: 
(a) improving the teaching and learning of English; (b) establishing a system to regularly review 
the curriculum and textbooks, especially in key subjects such as civics and history, to promote 
social cohesion; (c) expanding the activities of the Teacher Education Institutions to strengthen 
the skills of teachers to teach in multi-ethnic and multi-religious social contexts; (d) 
strengthening the activities of the Principals Development Center to improve the skills of 
principals to manage schools in a multi-cultural environment; (e) increasing the number of 
higher-order learning spaces and assets, such as school ICT centers and library resource centers, 
in conflict affected regions to reduce regional disparities; and (f) exchange programs for 
students, and staff of teacher education institutions, between the different parts of the country. 
About 85 percent of the additional financing would be targeted at the activities above, aimed at 
addressing the sources of the conflict. In addition, the additional financing would support 
activities to address some of the consequences of the conflict, such as non-formal and special 
education for out-of-school children and catch-up programs for students re-entering school, 
rehabilitation of damaged education facilities, and the expansion of basic needs in schools, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
including an integrated package of water and sanitation facilities, health education materials and 
teacher training, for schools in conflict affected areas. About 15 percent of the additional 
financing is expected to be targeted at these activities addressing the consequences of the 
conflict.  
 
3. Projects and programs financed with IDA resources need to comply with World Bank 
Operational Policies.  Therefore, activities eligible for funding under this program will be 
required to satisfy the World Bank’s safeguard policies, in addition to conformity with 
environmental legislation of the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL). The ESSAF has been 
developed to ensure compliance with the World Bank’s safeguard policies under the current 
conditions in Sri Lanka.  The objective of the ESSAF is to ensure that activities under the 
proposed operations will address the following issues:  
 
ï
¶
Protect human health;  
 
ï
¶
Prevent or compensate any loss of livelihood;  
 
ï
¶
Minimize environmental degradation as a result of either individual subprojects or 
their cumulative effects;  
 
ï
¶
Minimize impacts on cultural property; and  
 
ï
¶
Enhance positive environmental and social outcomes.  
 
II. General Principles  
 
4. The proposed EEDP will support Sri Lanka’s Education Sector Development Framework 
and Program (ESDFP) over 2008-2011. The EEDP would cover activities both at the Central 
Ministry of Education (MoE) and the activities in the nine provinces. The program would cover 
approximately 10,000 schools across the country. Considering the scope of the program, it is 
unlikely that there will be any significant environmental impacts as a result of the program 
activities.  Since it is possible that the program will finance the construction of new school 
buildings and renovation of existing school buildings, there may be the potential for 
environmental impacts. In addition the Tsunami has created the increased need for the 
construction of new schools to replace schools destroyed within the “no development” buffer 
zones along the coast line.  
 
5. Since the exact locations of new school buildings is not known at this stage and may not 
be known at appraisal, the ESSAF provides guidance on the approach to be taken during  
program implementation for the site selection and design of relevant subprojects and the 
planning of mitigation measures. This Framework is consistent with the relevant World Bank 
Safeguard Policies as well as the National Environmental Act and associated regulations and the 
requirements of the National Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP).  Considering that 
construction activities will not be permitted in environmental sensitive areas such as wetlands 
and marshes, if it is to be financed under the SWAP, it is anticipated that building construction 
will result in minor environmental impacts.  Therefore, the EEDP has been assigned an 
Environmental Category of "B".  
 
It has also been agreed that Environmental Codes of Practice, developed by the Institute for 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Construction Training and Development (ICTAD), will be followed during construction 
activities that will be supported under the ESDP, which will be in lieu of a project Environmental 
Assessment.  Environmental Management Plans which will include specific guidelines for debris 
disposal as well as resource extraction will be prepared for all specific construction activities 
financed under the project. Considering the scattered nature of construction anticipated under the 
project, it is not expected that there will be significant accumulated environmental damage due to 
project activities.  The Tsunami related reconstruction is likely to create a  demand for 
construction material such as sand, clay for bricks and timber. In order to avoid encouraging 
illegal extraction of such resources, all construction contracts under this project will include 
clauses in the contracts to ensure that sand, clay and timber are obtained from authorized 
locations and sources that are licensed by relevant GOSL authorities.  Building construction and 
renovation will adhere to the existing building and other applicable codes of practice in Sri 
Lanka.  
 
ï
¶
The project is expected to have significant positive and no negative social impact. 
It has been agreed with the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) that no land acquisition will be 
financed under the credit and that new school ICT centers, library resource centers  and water 
and sanitation facilities will only be provided on existing school lands.  
 
ï
¶
The proposed operations will finance feasibility and detailed design studies for 
these subsequent investments, which will include environmental assessments (if necessary), 
environmental management plans and social studies as required by World Bank safeguard 
policies;  
 
ï
¶
Project design and subproject selection will aim at maintaining regional balance 
and local equity among ethnic and religious groups. Employment opportunities within the 
projects will be available on an equal basis to all, on the basis of professional competence, 
irrespective of gender or ethnic or religious group. In all projects which require consultations 
with local communities or beneficiaries, consultations will be conducted to elicit the views of the 
male and female population; and  
 
ï
¶
This ESSAF has been disclosed in the Ministry of Education, Divisional 
Secretariat Offices in the Divisions where construction activities occur, relevant Provincial 
Councils and Local Authorities, the Central Environmental Authority and other public places in 
Sri Lanka in English, Tamil and Sinhala and in the World Bank InfoShop.  
 
III. 
Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)  
 
6. This ESSAF has been developed specifically for the proposed operation to ensure due 
diligence, to avoid causing harm or exacerbating social tensions, and to ensure consistent 
treatment of social and environmental issues by the Ministry of Education and the Government 
of Sri Lanka. The purpose of this Framework is also to assist the sub-project Implementing 
Agencies in screening all the subprojects for their likely social and environmental impacts, 
identifying suitable mitigation measures and implementation of these measures through an 
environmental management plan.  
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
7. OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.  The proposed EEDP may finance, among other 
things, the construction of new school buildings and renovation of existing schools. Construction 
activities are not anticipated to cause any major environmental impacts considering that these 
will not be permitted in environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands and marshes. The 
Tsunami has created the increased need for the construction of new schools to replace schools 
destroyed within the “no development” buffer zones along the coast line. This is likely to create 
a
huge demand for construction materials such as sand, clay for bricks and timber which will 
place a burden on these resources.  
 
8. Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts from relatively 
limited scale and magnitude of the construction and/or renovation works, the proposed operation 
is to be classified as category ‘B’.  Since the exact locations of new school buildings is not 
known at this stage and may not be known at appraisal, the requirement to carry out an 
Environmental Analysis as part of project preparation can be waived but, for subprojects with 
potential adverse impacts, a limited Environmental Analysis will be done during project 
implementation prior to disbursement of funds for that particular activity.  Since the potential 
environmental impacts are expected to be minimal, an Environmental Management Plan will be 
prepared for each relevant activity.  In order to avoid encouraging illegal extraction of such 
resources, all construction contracts under this project will include clauses in the contracts to 
ensure that sand, clay and timber are obtained from authorized locations and sources that are 
licensed by relevant GOSL authorities. All building construction (including the Tsunami related 
construction) and renovation will adhere to the existing building and other applicable codes of 
practice in Sri Lanka. To ensure that the building contractor is responsible for adherence to the 
following Codes of Practice (ICTAD specifications) which will be included in the contract 
documents:  
 
SCA/3/1  - 
Irrigation and land Drainage  
 
SCA/3/2  - 
Water Supply, Sewerage & Storm Water  
 
Drainage  
 
SCA/3/3  - 
Reclamation Works  
 
SCA/3/4  -  
Ground Water Exploration & Exploitation  
 
SCA/4 
 
- 
Building Works (Vol I)  
 
SCA/4 
 
-  
Building Works (Vol II)  
 
SCA/6 
 
- 
Coastal Harbour Engineering Works  
 
SCA/8 
 
- 
Electrical & Mechanical Works  
 
Any other Standard Specifications approved by the Government of Sri Lanka.  
 
In addition, the contractor is required to pay attention to and address the following in the 
Environmental Management Plan:  
 
1. Electromagnetic radiation– issues such as the location of  
 
telecommunication towers and consequences of permitting  
 
such towers to be built on top of school buildings,  
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
buildings near H/T cables etc.  
 
2.
Addressing noise pollution during construction activities.  
 
3.
Cultural Features preservation of culturally significant  
 
buildings.  
 
4.
Ecological issues of the sites  
 
5.
Transport and access to site.  
 
6.
Overshadowing and access to daylight and sunlight, with  
 
possible options for passive solar design and its effect  
 
on
site layouts.  
 
7.
External appearance (aesthetics)  
 
8.
Floodwater protection provisions.  
 
9.
Designing appropriate landscaping.  
 
10.
Energy conservation and efficiency.  
 
11.
Waste disposal, salvage, re-use and recycling of  
 
materials.  
 
12.
Avoidance of hazardous materials.  
 
13.
Safety, security and fire.  
 
14.
Energy efficient lighting options.  
 
15.
Potential for sick building syndrome  
 
If any landfilling is required for site preparation such as filling of low lying lands and full 
Environmental Impact Assessment (not only an Environmental Management Plan) will be a 
condition for IDA financing.  
 
9. OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  No land acquisition will be financed under the 
credit and that new school ICT centers, library resource centers  and water and sanitation 
facilities will only be provided on existing school lands.  
 
10. 
OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The project is not expected to pose any 
risk of damaging cultural property, since it will only comprise physical works on exiting school 
lands. Nevertheless, clear procedures for identification, protection of cultural property from theft, 
and treatment of discovered artifacts will be included in standard bidding documents.  
 
11. 
OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. While OP 4.10 applies to a number of 
reasonably well defined groups in the interior, stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Development 
Plans (IPDP) will not be required, as the Education Sector Development Grant is not expected to 
negatively impact on any Indigenous groups. Subproject preparation will assess the presence of 
Indigenous People in the project area and will conduct separate consultations to elicit their views 
and identify the need for specific culturally compatible mechanisms for their participation and 
ensure incorporation of adequate measures in project design.  
 
IV. 
Safeguard Screening and Mitigation  
 
12. 
The site selection, design, contracting, monitoring and evaluation of subprojects 
will be
undertaken by the respective education agencies at the national and provincial levels.  
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The safeguard screening and mitigation process will include:  
 
ï
¶
A
proposed checklist of likely environment and social impacts to be filled out for 
each subproject(Attachment 1);  
 
ï
¶
Procedures for the protection of cultural property, including the chance discovery 
of archaeological artifacts, unrecorded graveyards and burial sites (Attachment 2);  
 
ï
¶
A
sample Environmental Safeguards procedures for Inclusion in the Technical 
Specifications of Contracts (Attachment 3 ).  
 
V. Environmental Assessment Clearance Process  
 
13.
The composite GOSL environmental clearance process, in principle, is consistent 
with World Bank environmental and public disclosure requirements.  Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) for development projects were made mandatory under the National 
Environmental Act (NEA) in 1993.  A list of prescribed projects, based on the magnitude and 
potential for adverse environmental impacts, that require EIAs are listed in Gazette 
Extraordinary No. 772/22 (1993).  The CEA has been reviewing and approving EIAs for 
prescribed projects since 1993 has developed solid technical expertise and capacity for this task 
with technical assistance projects from USAID, the Netherlands and the World Bank over the 
last decade.However, in view of the low potential for significant adverse environmental impacts, 
all potential construction or renovation activities proposed under the project fall below the 
thresholds identified in the “prescribed list”.   While there are no direct environmental 
assessment regulations applicable to this project, GOSL has agreed to conform to the ESSAF 
developed specifically for this project. Site selection, design, contracting, monitoring, evaluation 
of subprojects and the preparation of the safeguard analysis in accordance with the ESSAF will 
be undertaken by the respective education agencies at the national and provincial levels. The 
Ministry of Education and Provincial Education Authorities do not have environmental and 
social expertise at present, so will have access to Environmental and Social Specialists, financed 
under the project, who will be responsible for ensuring that the ESSAF is adhered to prior to 
financing building construction or renovation. Social and Environmental safeguards will be 
monitored by the Divisional Environmental Officers of the Central Environmental Authority 
(CEA), located in every Divisional Secretariat Office in the country. The World Bank will 
review the first three Environmental Management Plans to ensure compliance with the ESSAF 
and then undertake reviews during routine project monitoring to ensure EMPs meet the 
conditions of the ESSAF.  
 
VI. 
Capacity-Building and Monitoring of Safeguard Framework Implementation  
 
14. 
As part of the capacity-building to be provided for implementation of the 
proposed operations, the Safeguards Focal Points, Divisional Environmental Officers in the 
respective Divisions will receive training in ESSAF’s application.  
 
15. 
To assist in this capacity-building, and to provide subsequent guidance and review 
of the ESSAF’s application, the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) will contract specialist 
services for environmental and social safeguards, as required. During supervision of these 
operations, the World Bank will assess the implementation of the ESSAF, and recommend 
Page  9
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
additional strengthening, if required.  
 
VII. 
Consultation and Disclosure  
 
16. 
The ESSAF will be shared by the Ministry of Education with concerned 
nongovernmental organizations, civil society and potential affectees.  It will be disclosed in 
Tamil, Sinhala and English by the Ministry of Education on behalf of the GOSL in Sri Lanka and 
it will also be made available at the World Bank’s InfoShop. Relevant subproject specific 
safeguard documents/mitigation plans (EMPs) prepared subsequently will also be disclosed to 
the public.  
 
VIII. 
Guidelines for preparation of Environmental Management Plans  
 
17. 
Having identified the potential impacts of the relevant sub project, in the case of 
the Education SWAP, the next step is the identification and development of measures aimed at 
eliminating, offsetting and/or reducing impacts to levels that are environmentally acceptable 
during implementation and operation of the project through the preparation and implementation 
of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). EMPs provide an essential link between the 
impacts predicted and mitigation measures specified.  World Bank guidelines state that detailed 
EMP’s are essential elements for Category A projects, but for many Category B projects such as 
in the Education SWAP, a simple EMP alone will suffice.  While there are no standard formats 
for EMPs, it is recognized that the format needs to fit the circumstances in which the EMP is 
being developed and the requirements, which it is designed to meet. EMPs should be prepared 
after taking into account comments from the affectees, and relevant government institutions.  
The final version should include any clearance conditions from IDA as well.  Given below are 
the important elements that constitute an EMP.  
 
a. Description of mitigation measures  
 
18.
Feasible and cost effective measures to minimse adverse impacts to acceptable 
levels should be specified with reference to each impact identified. Further, it should provide 
details on the conditions under which the mitigatory measure should be implemented (ex; routine 
or in the event of contingencies). The EMP also should distinguish between type of solution 
proposed (structural & non structural) and the phase in which it should become operable (design, 
construction and/or operational).  Efforts should also be made to mainstream environmental and 
social opportunities as reasonable.  
 
b. Monitoring programme  
 
19.
In order to ensure that the proposed mitigatory measures have the intended results 
and complies with national standards and donor requirements, an environmental performance 
monitoring programme should be included in the EMP.  The monitoring programme should give 
details of the following;  
 
•
Monitoring indicators to be measured for evaluating the performance of each mitigatory 
measure (for example national standards, engineering structures, extent of area replanted, etc).  
 
•
Monitoring mechanisms and methodologies  
Page  10
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
•
Monitoring frequency  
 
•
Monitoring locations  
 
c. Institutional arrangements  
 
20.
Institutions/parties responsible for implementing mitigatory measures and for 
monitoring their performance should be clearly identified. Where necessary, mechanisms for 
institutional co-ordination should be identified as often monitoring tends to involve more than 
one institution.  
 
d. Implementing schedules  
 
21.
Timing, frequency and duration of mitigation measures with links to overall 
implementation schedule of the project should be specified.  
 
e. Reporting procedures  
 
22.
Feedback mechanisms to inform the relevant parties on the progress and 
effectiveness of the mitigatory measures and monitoring itself should be specified. Guidelines on 
the type of information wanted and the presentation of feedback information should also be 
highlighted.  
 
f. Cost estimates and sources of funds  
 
23.
Implementation of mitigatory measures mentioned in the EMP will involve an 
initial investment cost as well as recurrent costs. The EMP should include costs estimates for 
each measure and also identify sources of funding.  
 
Attachment 1  
 
Environmental Checklist for Assessing the Suitability of sites for Construction Financed 
under the Education Sector Development Grant SWAp  
 
To be filled by an authorized official  
 
(Where choices are given please circle the most appropriate entry or entries. If the space 
provided for responses is not sufficient, please state the information on another sheet of paper)  
 
No Item 
Details 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
1
Name of the Site  
 
2
Province  
 
3
District  
 
4
Divisional Secretary Division (s)  
 
5
Local Authority  
 
6
Grama Niladari Division (s)  
 
7
Brief description of the project  
 
(Be as brief as possible, confining to main elements only, If Possible, provide a 1:10,000 
scaled site map inclusive of area within 500m radius from the project site; if this information 
cannot be obtained, provide a sketch of the site area drawn to an approximate scale)  
 
Page  11
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
8
Does the site /project require any;  
 
Yes 
No 
If yes give the extent (in ha)  
 
Reclamation of land, wetlands  
 
Clearing of forest  
 
Felling of trees  
 
9
Distance from coastline (m) (high water  mark)  
 
10
Minimum land area required for the proposed development (based on UDA 
guidelines) (ha)  
 
11
Available total land area within the identified location (ha)  
 
12
Expected construction period  
 
13
Anticipated Date of Completion  
 
14
Present Land Ownership 
State    Private Other (specify)  
 
15
Total approximate Cost of the Project  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT  
 
PHYSICAL  
 
16
Topography & Landforms (map): Attach an extract from relevant 1: 50,000 
topographic sheet/ if detailed maps are available provide them. If this information is unavailable, 
please describe the location.  
 
17
Relief (difference in elevation) 
Low <20m 
Medium 20-40m 
High 
40-60 >60m  
 
18
Slope   Low <30% 
Medium 30-40 % 
High 40-60 % Very High > 60%  
 
19
Position on Slope  
Bottom 
Mid-slope 
Upper-slope  
 
20
Soil Type (Please select from soil groups given below or provide a brief 
description)  
 
21 
Depth of top soil  
 
Shallow  
 
<
20cm Moderate 
 
 
20
–
100 cm 
Deep  
 
>100cm  
 
22
Soil Erosion (this information will be based on the site and surrounding 
environment) Low 
Medium 
High  
 
23 
Climate 
Wet Zone 
Intermediate Zone  
 
Dry Zone/ Semi Arid Zone  
 
24
Annual dry period  
 
25 
Source of fresh Surface Water  
Spring/canal 
Tank/Reservoir
 
Perennial Stream 
Seasonal Stream 
None  
 
26
Surface Water Use (at the site and/or surrounding environment) 
Domestic
 
Washing/Bathing 
Irrigation 
Animal use 
Other  
 
27 
Surface Water QualityPoor 
Moderate 
Good  
Page  12
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
28 
Ground Water Availability 
Dug Well 
Tube Well 
Other (specify)  
 
29 
Ground Water Use 
Domestic 
Washing/Bathing 
Irrigation 
Animal 
use Other 
 
 
30 
Ground Water Quality  
Poor 
Moderate 
Good  
 
31
Incidence of Natural Disasters  
Floods Prolonged droughts 
Cyclones/tidal 
waves  Other (specify)  
 
32 
Geological Hazards 
Landslides 
Rock falls 
Subsidence 
Other 
(specify)  
 
ECOLOGICAL  
 
33
Habitat Types in the Project Site  
 
(indicate the approximate % of each habitat type) 
Natural forest (   %), degraded 
forest(   %), natural scrubland(   %), degraded scrubland(   %), riverine forest, grassland(   %), 
abandoned agricultural land(   %), marsh(   %), lagoon(   %), estuary(   %), coastal scrub(   %), 
mangrove(   %), salt marsh(   %), home-gardens(   %), Other (   %) (List) 
N/A  
 
34
Habitat types within 500m radius from the site periphery  
 
(indicate the approximate % of each habitat type) 
Natural forest (   %), degraded 
forest(   %), natural scrubland(   %), degraded scrubland(   %), riverine forest, grassland(   %), 
abandoned agricultural land(   %), marsh(   %), lagoon(   %), estuary(   %), coastal scrub(   %), 
mangrove(   %), salt marsh(   %), home-gardens(   %), Other (   %) (List) 
N/A  
 
35
Are there any environmentally and culturally sensitive areas within the project 
site and 500 meters from the project boundary? 
Protected Areas 
Migratory pathways 
of animals  
 
Archeological sites 
Wetlands   
Mangroves strands  
 
36
Are there any plants (endemic and threatened species) of conservation importance 
within the project site and 500 meters from the project boundary?  
 
If yes, encouraged to provide a list  
 
37 
Are there any animals (endemic and threatened species) of conservation 
importance within the project site and 500 meters from the project boundary? If yes, encouraged 
to provide a list  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL SENSITVITY  
 
38
Item 38 is Applicable to New Sites Only:  
 
Does the project wholly or partly fall within any of the following areas?  
 
Area Yes 
No Unaware 
 
 
a
100m from the boundaries of or within any area declared under the National Heritage 
Wilderness Act No 4 of 1988  
 
b
100m from the boundaries of or within any area declared under the Forest Ordinance 
(Chapter 451)  
 
c
Coastal zone as defined in the Coast Conservation Act No 57 of 1981  
 
d
Any erodable area declared under the Soil   Conservation Act (Chapter 450)  
Page  13
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
e
Any Flood Area declared under the Flood Protection Ordinance (Chapter 449)  
 
f
Any flood protection area declared under the Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and 
Development Corporation Act 15 of 1968 as amended by Act No 52 of 1982  
 
g
60
meters from the bank of a public stream as defined in the Crown Lands Ordinance  
(Chapter 454) and having width of more than 25 meters at any point of its course  
 
h
Any reservations beyond the full supply level of a reservoir  
 
i
Any archaeological reserve, ancient or protected monument as defined or declared under 
the Antiquities Ordinance (Chapter 188).  
 
j
Any area declared under the Botanic Gardens Ordinance (Chapter 446).  
 
k
Within 100 meters from the boundaries of, or within, any area declared as a Sanctuary 
under the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance (Chapter 469)  
 
l
100
meters from the high flood level contour of or within, a public lake as defined in the 
Crown Lands Ordinance (Chapter 454) including those declared under section 71 of the said 
Ordinance  
 
m
Within a distance of one mile of the boundary of a National Reserve declared under the 
Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance  
 
39
Does the project wholly or partly fall within any other government reservation not 
mentioned above (eg: Railways, telecommunication etc)  
 
40
Are there liquor selling outlets in the vicinity of the School? is yes, provide 
distance from the site  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT DURING THE  
 
CONSTRUCTION PERIOD  
 
IMPACT 
    MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT 
 
 
High Med. 
Low 
N/A 
 
 
41
Soil erosion  
 
42 
Water pollution  
 
43 
Noise pollution  
 
44 
Solid waste generation  
 
45 Sewage 
generation 
 
 
Cess Pool  
Sewage Pond  
 
Septic Tank  
 
Other  
 
46
Loss of vegetation cover  
 
47 
Habitat loss or fragmentation  
 
48 
General disturbance to animal behaviour  
 
49
Interference with normal movement of animals  
 
50
Irreversible/irreparable environmental change  
 
Page  14
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
IMPACT MITIGATION/ENHANCEMENT  
 
51
Sewerage Disposal 
Cess Pool  
 
Sewage Pond  
 
Septic Tank  
 
Other  
 
52
Solid Waste Disposal  
 
53  
 
Drinking Water Supply  
 
Common Dug Well 
Yes / No 
Individual dug well 
Yes / No  
 
Common Tube Well   
Yes / No 
Town supply 
–
pipe 
Yes / No  
 
Spring 
Yes / No 
Town supply – Stand post 
Yes / No  
 
54
Alteration to storm water drainage pattern  
 
No changes  
No major Changes 
Major changes  
 
55
OVERALL OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
(a) 
Does this site require an Initial Environmental Examination/Environmental 
Impact Assessment (IEE/EIA) or any other Environmental Assessments (EA) under the local 
regulations (CEA, Provincial Environmental Authority or any other); please state the reasons.  
 
(b) 
Although local regulations may not require IEE/EIA at this Site, are there 
environmental issues which need to be addressed through further environmental investigations 
and/or EA? If the answer is “Yes” briefly describe the issues and type of investigations that need 
to be undertaken.  
 
(c) 
Will this site be abandoned after this Analysis; please state the reasons.  
 
(d) 
Does the proposed site meet the urban planning requirements under the UDA and 
Local Authority regulations? if the answer is “No”, what needs to be done to meet these 
requirements; if the answer is “Yes”, has the project site obtained the necessary approvals?  
 
(e) 
In addition to the above issues, please indicate any additional observations, 
recommendations if any  
 
56 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLAN  
 
(please insert more lines if required)  
 
Please provide information for this section based on the following aspects:  
 
1.
Onsite and off site impacts to the Environment  
 
2.
Approvals/licenses obtained/required to carry out the civil works (LA, UDA permits, 
Archeological Department ETC) and resource extraction/purchase (eg: Sand, timber, clay for 
bricks)  
 
3.
Impacts on the Environment during the construction and operation phases.  
 
4.
Information from Items 41 – 54, above can be included here  
 
Activity  Potential Impacts/Issues 
Mitigation Measures  Monitoring Requirements 
a
nd Indicators
Budget for mitigation measures and sources of funds
Reporting Procedure 
Page  15
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(for Mitigation and Monitoring)  
 
57 
Name of the officer completed the form (From the Developer)  
 
58
Designation and contact Information  
 
59 
List of team members  
 
60 
Overall observation and recommendation  
 
61 
Signature and date  
 
62 
Name and Contact Information of the officer who checked this form  
 
63 
Signature and Date  
 
**Great Soil Groups of Sri Lanka  
 
1
RBE 
Reddish Brown Earths 
4 
RYL 
Red-Yellow Latosols  7 
R
 Regosols 
 
 
2
LHG 
Low Humic Gley 
5 
A 
Alluvial Soils  8 
G 
Grumusols  
 
3
NBS 
Noncalcic Brown Soils 
6 
SS 
Solodized Solonetz 
9 
IBL
 
Immature Brown Soil  
 
Attachment 2  
 
Page  16
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Protection of Cultural Property  
 
1.        Cultural property include monuments, structures, works of art, or sites of 
significance points of view, and are defined as sites and structures having archaeological, 
historical, architectural, or religious significance, and natural sites with cultural values.  This 
includes cemeteries, graveyards and graves.  
 
2. The following procedures for identification, protection from theft, and treatment of 
discovered artifacts  should be followed and included in standard bidding documents as provided 
in Attachment 6.  
 
Chance Find Procedures  
 
3. Chance find procedures will be used as follows:  
 
(a) 
Stop the construction activities in the area of the chance find;  
 
(b) 
Delineate the discovered site or area;  
 
(c) 
Secure the site to prevent any damage or loss of removable objects.  In cases of 
removable antiquities or sensitive remains, a night guard shall be present until the responsible 
local authorities and the Ministry of Cultural Affairs & National Heritage take over;  
 
(d) 
Notify the supervisory Engineer who in turn will notify the responsible local 
authorities and the Ministry of Cultural Affairs & National Heritage immediately (within 24 
hours or less);  
 
(e) 
Responsible local authorities and the Ministry of Cultural Affairs & National 
Heritage would be in charge of protecting and preserving the site before deciding on subsequent 
appropriate procedures. This would require a preliminary evaluation of the findings to be 
performed by the archeologists of the Ministry of Cultural Affairs & National Heritage (within 
72 hours). The significance and importance of the findings should be assessed according to the 
various criteria relevant to cultural heritage; those include the aesthetic, historic, scientific or 
research, social and economic values;  
 
(f)Decisions on how to handle the finding shall be taken by the responsible authorities and 
the Ministry of Cultural Affairs & National Heritage.  This could include changes in the layout 
(such as when finding an irremovable remain of cultural or archeological importance) 
conservation, preservation, restoration and salvage;  
 
(g) 
Implementation for the authority decision concerning the management of the 
finding shall be communicated in writing by the Ministry of Cultural Affairs & National 
Heritage; and  
 
(h) 
Construction work could resume only after permission is given from the 
responsible local authorities and the Ministry of Cultural Affairs  & National Heritage 
concerning safeguard of the heritage.  
 
4. These procedures must be referred to as standard provisions in construction contracts, 
when applicable, and as proposed in section 1.5 of Attachment 6.  During project supervision, 
the Site Engineer shall mon
itor the above regulations relating to the treatment of any chance find 
Page  17
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
encountered are observed.  
 
5. Relevant findings will be recorded in World Bank Project Supervision Reports (PSRs), 
and Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs) will assess the overall effectiveness of the 
project’s  cultural property mitigation, management, and activities, as appropriate.  
 
Attachment  3  
 
Safeguards Conditions for Inclusion in the Technical Specifications of Contracts  
 
General  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The Contractor and his employees shall adhere to the mitigation measures set 
down and take all other measures required by the School Engineer to prevent harm, and to 
minimize the impact of his operations on the school environment.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The Contractor shall avoid the use of heavy or noisy equipment/activities during 
school hours.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The contractor, on completion of construction, should take full responsibility in 
ensuring a clean and safe school premises.  
 
Disposal of solid waste and debris  
 
ïƒ˜ 
All construction debris and residual spoil material including any left earth shall be 
disposed by the contractor at a location approved by the Local Authority for such a purpose.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The debris and spoil shall be disposed in such a manner that (i) waterways and 
drainage paths are not blocked, (ii) the disposed material should not be washed away by floods 
and (iii) should not be a nuisance to the public.  
 
Protection of Ground Cover and Vegetation  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall provide necessary instructions to his workers not to 
destroyground vegetation cover unnecessarily.  
 
Soil Eorison  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall take all steps necessary to ensure the stability of slopes including 
those related to temporary works.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Work that will lead to heavy erosion shall be avoided during the raining season. If 
such activities need to be continued during rainy season prior approval must be obtained from 
the Engineer by submitting a proposal on actions that will be undertaken by the contractor to 
prevent erosion.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The work, permanent or temporary shall consist of measures as per design or as 
directed by the Engineer to control soil erosion, sedimentation and water pollution to the 
satisfaction of the Engineer. Typical measures would include grass cover, slope drains, retaining 
walls etc.  
 
Labour Camps  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Labour camps shall be provided with adequate and appropriate facilities for 
disposal of sewerage and solid waste. The sewage systems shall be properly designed, built and 
Page  18
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
operated so that no pollution to ground or adjacent water bodies/watercourses takes place. 
Garbage bins shall be provided in the camps and regularly emptied. Garbage should be disposed 
off in a hygienic manner, to the satisfaction of the relevant norms.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall ensure that all camps are kept clean and hygienic.  Necessary 
measures shall be taken to prevent breeding of vectors.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall report any outbreak of infectious disease of importance in 
alabour camp to the Engineer and the Medical Officer of Health (MOH) or to the Public Health 
Inspector (PHI) of the area immediately.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall remove the labour camps fully after its need is over, empty septic 
tanks, if instructed by the engineer shall be closed, remove all garbage, debris and clean and 
restore the area back to its former condition.  
 
Dust Management  
 
ïƒ˜ 
To prevent dust pollution during the construction period, the Contractor shall 
carry out regular watering of the construction site and shall cover material stocks onsite to 
prevent dust and other particles getting airborne.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
All vehicles delivering materials shall be covered to avoid spillage and 
dustemission.  
 
Health and Safety  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall take necessary actions to prevent breeding of mosquitoes at 
places of work, labour camps, material stores etc. Stagnation of water in all areas including 
gutters, used and empty cans, containers, tyres, etc shall be prevented.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Contractor shall keep all places of work, labour camps, plus office and 
storebuildings clean devoid of garbage to prevent breeding of rats and other vectors such as flies. 
ïƒ˜ 
Construction vehicles, machinery and equipment shall be used and stationed only 
in designated areas of the work site and should not pose any danger to school children.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Material stockpiles shall be located sufficiently away from the areas frequently 
used by school children.  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Construction sites should be fenced out temporarily in order to avoid any risk 
posed to school children from construction activities  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The contractor shall enforce vehicle speed limits for construction vehicles in areas 
near and inside the school premises  
 
Sourcing of Raw Material  
 
ïƒ˜ 
The contractor shall ensure that all raw material such as sand, rubble, metal, 
timber etc required for the construction of the building are sources from licensed sources. If the 
contractor himself pans to operate his own quarry/sand pit, all necessary approvals from the 
relevant authorities shall be obtained. Contractor will need to submit copies of such approvals to 
the School Engineer.   
Page  19
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/29/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable, as the Environmental and Social Screening Framework developed for the 
parent Education Sector Development Project will be used for the Enhanced Education 
Development Project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harsha Aturupane 
09/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/03/2007 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
09/03/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  20
