Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC4351
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P107847 
Project Name:  Provincial Roads Project 
Task Team Leader:  Tawia Addo-Ashong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 11, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Rural services and 
infrastructure (25%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is aimed at improving access to socio-economic centers in Eastern 
and Uva provinces through the sustainable management of improved road infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 Rehabilitation of Provincial Roads  
 
1a: the upgrading, rehabilitation of about 200km of provincial roads and other road 
infrastructure in selected, prioritized geographical areas in the Uva Provinces ($70 
million)  
 
1b:
the upgrading, rehabilitation of about 100km 100km of provincial roads and other 
road infrastructure in selected, prioritized, areas in the Ampara District of the Eastern 
Province ($20million).  
 
Component 2: Maintenance program.  
 
This component will finance goods and services to assist the provincial roads 
departments to develop and perform an effective maintenance strategy on their network.  
The component will also support the existing provincial road maintenance program 
Page  2
consisting of routine, preventative and emergency maintenance works and also 
implement a number of pilot long term maintenance contracts.  
 
Component 3: Implementation Support and Capacity Building. This component will 
finance the strengthening of the capacity of the Provincial Council Road Departments in 
planning and budget management within a framework of fiscal constraints. The capacity 
of the roads departments is weak and experience in management of development partner 
funded projects is limited.  The Component will support:  
 
(i) 
technical assistance to the road departments in the areas of financial management, 
environmental and social management, procurement and contract management to 
improve systems and procedures for the management of the road network under their 
responsibility;  
 
(ii) 
 office and laboratory equipment and vehicles to assist in project implementation 
and maintenance of the road network;  
 
(iii) 
coordination and monitoring of project activities;  
 
(iv) training, 
 
 
(v) 
 capacity development for the local construction industry, and  
 
(vi) 
 Any additional service that may be required to facilitate project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed works will be undertaken in the Uva Province and the Ampara District of 
the Eastern Province in Sri Lanka.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDI) 
Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Road rehabilitation will be limited to the Right-of-Way and so civil works are expected to 
cause minimal social and environmental impacts. Resurfacing of roads has minimal on-
site environmental impacts. Disturbances to land, interference to soil stability and the 
hydrology in the area will not take place if the construction activities are managed 
properly. Impacts on air quality and noise levels will be limited only to the construction 
period. Longer term impacts depend on the projected traffic flow increases and the 
anticipated reduction in traffic congestion, which is likely to arise due to improved road 
conditions.  It is felt that the net effect on air quality and noise levels will be positive over 
the long term.  Any potential adverse environmental impacts triggered under this project 
will be seen off-site where road-building material such as metal, sand and gravel would 
be sourced. Although involuntary land acquisition is not envisaged but OP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement is triggered to account for any anticipated neagtive impact on 
livelihood of squatteres and encroachers located in the RoW or corridor of Imapct. Any 
land that may be required will be obtained through voluntary land donation where 
conditions will be fulfilled through the signing of an Agreement/MOU. These include the 
voluntary nature of the donation, that it is free of encumbrances, does not negatively 
impact livelihood of any vulnerable groups, and if so, community devised compensatory 
mechanism is acceptable to affectees, that a  local level grevience redressal mechanism is 
available, that the owner gives up all claims to the land and it is transferred to the 
recipient through an Agreement /MOU or any other process prevalent in the country. All 
privately owned assets/infrastructure, etc. will be compensated at replacement cost or 
rebuilt irrespectively of the possession of title to the land on which the asset etc. is 
located. An operational plan to address social safeguards impacts for the priority roads in 
Uva is under preparation and will be completed by negotiations.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With road improvements, it is anticipated that there is a possibility for increased vehicle 
traffic which could result in road safety issues.  The project should ensure proper road 
markings and roads signs are in place, as well as traffic management measures. Air 
quality and noise in the areas should improve on long-term since there should be less 
traffic congestion if the roads are of better quality. There are no long term negative social 
indirect impacts anticipated. The main negative impacts will be that of loss of small 
amounts of land and impact from loss of small assets/infrastructure etc ( a portion of a 
boundary wall/ a gate/ fence etc.) that may obstruct the road due to its location in the  
RoW. These will all be replaced or compensated at replacement cost.There may also be 
some negative impacts on livelihood of squatters/encroacers located in the RoW or CoI. 
Their livelihood will be restored ( where ever required).In addition ther may be some 
impact on access to shops/residences during construction period. These will be provided 
with alternate access or compensated for loss of economic activity where alternate access 
may be difficult to provide due to narrow roads. There are however, positive impacts 
anticipated in terms of access to social and economic facilities and employment 
Page  4
generation locally during construction where equality in access to employment will be 
assured to both women and men through a clause in the contract document. Another 
positive long term impact anticipated is the creation of awareness through information 
dissimination and training in HIV/AIDS to staff of the implementing agency and 
contractors. In terms of conflict prevention particularly, in Ampara the country conflict 
filters will be used to assist in this area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The roads were selected through a number of activities conducted over time. As a starting 
point a study had been conducted and these roads shortlisted on the basis of among other, 
poverty, connectivity, access to services, condition of roads etc. This was followed up 
with consultations held with mixed communities (Sinhalese, Tamils and Muslims) along 
the selected roads during pre-appraisal and then during the preparation of the Social 
Impact Management Framework and the under prepartion social operational plans.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As per the World Bank's Safeguard Policies, the Ministry of Provincial Councils and 
Local Government and the Provincial Road Development Departments of Uva and 
Eastern provinces have an Environmental Assessment and Management Framework 
(EAMF) that has provided the necessary background for environmental considerations to 
be built into the design and implementation of the project. This framework also takes 
relevant provisions under the National Environmental Act (NEA) and associated 
regulations into consideration. On the basis of this framework road-specific 
environmental assessments (EAs) have been commissioned with EAs for five prioritized 
roads completed together with their respective Environmental Management Plans 
(EMPs).  
 
The requirements of the EMPs have been included in the bid document as BOQ items to 
ensure the contractor incorporates sufficient provisions for implementing the EMP. The 
respective EMPs specify the mitigation measures to be implemented by the contractor. In 
addition, all Contractors are required to obtain and abide by relevant GOSL licenses for 
extraction of material from quarries and borrow sites, as well as licenses for the use of 
disposal sites, crusher and asphalt plant site, etc.  The Project Implementing Units (PIUs) 
and supervisory consultants are required to monitor commissioning of work with relevant 
licenses, adherence to license conditions and the implementation of the EMP very 
closely.  
 
While Sri Lanka has a well established process of EA which is lead by the Central 
Environmental Authority (CEA) there is a weakness in the EA process is in the area of 
post approval monitoring.  In order to address these weaknesses, as well as since the PIUs 
currently do not have adequate capacity to ensure environmental compliance, it has been 
agreed to recruit environment specialists to the two PIUs. These specialists will also play 
a
role in providing support to develop in-house capacity in the PRDDs that will be 
necessary for their future work in road construction and rehabilitation. The Project will 
Page  5
finance formal training for staff of the PRDDs. In addition, the project shall ensure that 
(1) the contractor is responsible for the implementation of the EMP; (2) supervisory 
consultants to have environmental specialist monitoring the implementation of the EMP; 
and (iii) take necessary action through a penalty system during non-compliance of EMP.   
Overall, the Central Environmental Authority will have a responsibility to ensure that 
GOSL environmental clearance conditions are met. IDA missions will continue to 
emphasize EMP implementation in regular project reviews. These safeguards should 
ensure effective implementation of post approval safeguard conditions.  Monthly reviews 
should be held by the PIUs with the supervisory consultants and civil works contractors 
on safeguards compliance.  
 
The borrower has prepared the SIMF and is in the process of preparing the operational 
plans to address the social safeguards concerns and also fare recruiting staff to assist in 
implementing the operational plans. The Social Impact Assessment and relevant social 
mitigation is under preparation. In addition the SIMF provides for capacity building and 
training of staff of the implementing agency and contractors on safeguards 
implementation (including consultation grievance redressal and payment of compensation 
(where applicable). The M&E system will also monitor and ensure compliance with the 
safeguards.The PIU will have the relevent staff to implement the social safeguards 
operational plans and will be provide training to all project and contractors staff to 
implement them. The M&E system will monitor the implementation and gaps ( where 
identified)and mitigation will be provided by the PIU.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders in this project are many and include among other,  i) the communities 
living alongside the roads to be rehabilitated and/or maintained, ii) direct affectees losing 
land ( through voluntary donation), small private/community owned assets/ 
infrastructure/livelihood etc.  iii) all road users including men, women, youth, and 
children who use the roads  for going to work,  schools, hospitals, markets, other 
towns/cities; iv) transport owners and those employed in this sector using these roads, v) 
institutuional stakeholders.  including all government departments/agencies/Grama 
Nildaries/Divisional Secretaries, etc., involved with these roads in different capacities; vi) 
NGOs, CBOs, Samatha Committees, living in the periphery and working around these 
areas, vii) other donor agencies involed in funding roads network in Sri Lanka.  The 
SIMF provides the principles and methodologies for stakeholder consultation, 
participation as well as development of a methodology for a grievance redressal 
mechanism. All Project documents will be publicly disclosed to all stakeholders through 
government/project websites, placing the documents at all sub project officices where 
they will available to all stakeholders, as well as at some central locations such as public 
libraries. In addition the executive summary and the entitlement matrix will be translated 
into local languages and disclosed in a similar manner. The public awareness campaign ( 
that is a part of the SIMF) also provides for dissemination of information about project at 
the local level.The social operational plans will operationalize all the guidelines laid out 
in the SIMF.  
 
Page  6
The Environmental Assessment and Management Framework Site specific EAs and 
EMPs for 5 prioritized roads were prepared and were placed for public comment on ?. 
The road-specific EAs and EMPs are expected to be carried out for the remaining roads 
identified for Uva Province and once the roads have been selected for Eastern province 
and will be opened up for public comments. In addition, PRDDs will maintain hard 
copies of EAMF, EAs and EMPs in their respective offices and will allow public to 
access if and when needed. PRDDs should continue to engage the communities and 
consult with them on a regular basis to ensure all issues that may get raised particularly 
during the implementation period are taken into account.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/12/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/04/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/12/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tawia Addo-Ashong 
05/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darshani De Silva 
05/12/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
05/12/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/12/2009 
Comments:  Cleared subject to conditions given in clearance memorandum. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
05/12/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. As the proposed project is dealing with roads rehabilitation and maintenance 
within the right of way, the OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered as a precautionary measure. 
