Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4229 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/04/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P112933 
Project Name: Eco-Systems Conservation And Management Project (ESCAMP) 
Task Team Leader: Sumith Pilapitiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (67%);Environmental policies and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to improve the management and stewardship of Sri 
Lanka’s terrestrial, marine and wetland ecosystems in select locations within and outside 
protected areas (PAs) through: (i) strengthening of the institutional capacity of environmental 
conservation agencies and regional planners; and (ii) enhancement of the revenue earning 
opportunities of PAs and affected communities.  
 
The objective will be achieved through a series of structured and interrelated interventions that 
would: (i) support decentralized management and decision-making in the environmental 
conservation agencies; (ii) encourage cooperation between the Department of Wildlife 
Conservation (DWC) and the Forest Department (FD) in managing the protected areas (PAs) on 
an ecosystem basis; (iii) pilot or test innovative models for converting the human-elephant 
conflict (HEC) to a situation of human-elephant coexistence (HECOEX) in partnership with the 
affected local communities; (iv) invest in training for ecosystems conservation and management; 
(iv) improve protected area infrastructure facilities and visitor services to raise the quality and 
revenue potential of nature-based tourism in Sri Lanka; and (v) integrate social and ecological 
Page  2
concerns into development planning through the use of regional strategic environmental 
assessments.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have three key components: (1) conservation and management of 
natural ecosystems; (2) enhancement of the quality of nature-based tourism in protected 
ecosystems; and (3) technical assistance for mainstreaming ecosystem concerns into 
development planning.  
 
Component 1:  Conservation and Management of Natural Ecosystems will consist of: (i) 
introduction of a grant facility to promote a landscape approach to conservation and management 
of natural ecosystems; (ii) mechanisms aimed at mitigation of the human-elephant conflict 
(HEC); and (iii) capacity building for effective ecosystem management.  
 
Component 2:  Enhancement of the Quality of Nature-based Tourism in Protected Ecosystems 
will support the development of plans for nature-based tourism and visitor services for PAs 
identified as potential sites on the basis of needs assessments to be conducted and financed under 
the project.  
 
Component 3:  Technical Assistance for Mainstreaming Ecosystem Concerns into Development 
Planning will support: (i) institutionalizing the strategic environmental and social assessment as a 
planning tool for ecosystem management; and (ii) providing technical assistance to the 
Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The ground level activities of the proposed project will focus on ecosystems in priority areas 
identified in Sri Lanka’s Biodiversity Conservation Action Plan (BCAP) and the National 
Conservation Strategy (NCS).  While priority will be given to three broad climatic zones, which 
include: (1) the southwest and central wet zones; (ii) southeast dry and arid zone; (iii) mixed 
climatic zone consisting of sections of the dry, intermediate and wet zone.  Critical ecosystems 
outside these three zones will also be included as necessary. Therefore, the project will have a 
countrywide focus but be limited to sensitive ecosystems such as wildlife forest protected areas, 
forest reserves, watersheds, wetlands and marine protected areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Environment  
 
The Borrower has a reasonably good track record of implementing bank-financed projects and a 
demonstrated capacity for implementing and monitoring safeguards. Project preparation will be 
undertaken by a working group which is adequately represented by both field and HQ level 
officers of DWC, FD and Central Environmental Authority (CEAu) under the supervision of a 
Steering Committee which has already been appointed. Project implementation will take place 
mainly through DWC, FD and Central Environment Authority (CEAu) with the MENR playing a 
coordination role. As such, there will be no external project management unit overseeing 
implementation. With DWC, FD and CEA (all three agencies have oversight responsibilities for 
Page  3
environmental safeguards in Sri Lanka) taking the lead in project preparation and 
implementation, there will be no dearth of environment expertise and input to the project.  
 
Sri Lanka has a comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for natural resource 
management and conservation. Most of the conservation ordinances have been recently reviewed 
and updated by the GOSL. Despite the availability of a good legislative framework, activities 
that erode and threaten biodiversity still take place due to weak enforcement of such policies and 
regulations. Institutionally, all three agencies have been recipients of donor funding for capacity 
building in the last ten years or so and have recently undergone institutional reforms with the 
introduction of decentralization and empowerment of field staff, more accountability and 
transparency, market based incentives and wider stakeholder participation in the planning and 
decision making process. Therefore, it is believed that the capacity of the implementing agencies 
and the enabling legal environment are adequate for the purpose of planning and implementing 
this project.  
 
Component 1 of the proposed project would establish a grant facility that would require the 
submission of proposals by PA managers for the financing of project activities based on 
respective PA management plans.  Since it would not be possible to undertake environmental 
assessments of PAs until the specific activities to be financed under the project are developed, an 
Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework (ESAMF) is proposed to be 
prepared by project appraisal stage in lieu of a project specific environmental assessment.  All 
physical activities, civil or otherwise, undertaken in sensitive areas will be subjected to 
appropriate environmental assessments/analysis and activity specific environmental management 
plans, prior to implementation. If needed, capacity building will be carried out as part of project 
implementation to ensure that procedures will be applied consistently.  
 
Social  
 
The project is expected to have positive social impact and little or no negative social impact. 
The potential adverse social impacts, as anticipated at this stage, would largely result from land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement, which will be avoided or kept at an absolute minimum.  
As mentioned above, since the exact location of project interventions are not known at this stage, 
a
framework for land acquisition and involuntary resettlement will be prepared as part of the 
ESAMF.  This Framework will be consistent with the requirements of the National Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (NIRP) and the Bank’s Operational Policy/Bank Procedure (OP/BP) 4.12.  
 
In some areas, project activities may also affect sites and areas of significance to indigenous 
peoples. Addressing these concerns, the ESAMF will propose principles, policies, guidelines and 
procedures to identify/verify the prevalent and potential social safeguard issues and address them 
as integral parts of project design and implementation even if there are no safeguard concerns 
associated with the project interventions. This relates in particular to issues of community 
involvement, equity and conflict.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDI) 
Ms Nadeera Rajapakse (SASDI) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment: Components 1, 2 and 3:  
 
Overall, the proposed project activities would result in a positive impact on the 
environment. However, safeguards Category A has been proposed for the project -- as the 
management of PAs and sensitive ecosystems may involve activities affecting ecologically 
sensitive micro-ecosystems within the PA network, such as: the removal of alien invasive 
species, habitat enrichment and construction of basic infrastructure (e.g., roads, water holes and 
buildings).  Such activities may have adverse implications on biodiversity, unless proper 
environmental analysis is undertaken. The HEC management component may have social 
implications as well since it could affect the indigenous community in Sri Lanka.  
 
Since it is not possible to undertake environmental assessments until the specific activities 
to be financed under the project (in all components) are developed an Environmental and Social 
Assessment and Management Framework (ESAMF) will be prepared. The ESAMF will serve as 
a
template for PA specific Environmental Assessments and/or Environmental Management Plans 
(EMP) -- in accordance with OP/BP 4.01 to be undertaken for activities to be supported by the 
project prior to disbursement of funds for the respective activity.  It will: (i) articulate the criteria 
and due diligence processes for each project component and sub-component; (ii) incorporate 
precise time-bound action plans to assure compliance; and (iii) outline the public consultation 
process; and (iii) identify and mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts.  
 
The potential for the emergence of social issues during the implementation of the pilot 
projects for HEC mitigation is high.  The EASMF will have a section on how the environmental 
and social issues that may arise under this sub-component should be managed.  No HEC 
interventions will take place until environmental and social impact assessments and management 
plans have been developed and reviewed by the Bank.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Natural Habitats is triggered under Components 1 and 2:  
 
These components require the submission of proposals by PA managers to finance project 
activities based on respective Protected Area (PA) management plans. This would trigger OP/BP 
4.04, depending on the specific activities that would be carried out. Since the specific 
interventions will be known only after the detailed activities are developed, the ESAMF will 
provide the template to undertake an Environmental Assessment and/or Environmental 
Management Plans (EMP), which will take into account the OP/BP 4.04 aspects.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Forests is triggered under Components 1 and 2:  
 
These components require the submission of proposals by PA managers to finance project 
activities based on respective Protected Area (PA) management plans. This would trigger OP/BP 
4.36, depending on the specific activities that would be carried out. Since the specific 
interventions will be known only after the detailed activities are developed, the ESMF will 
provide the template to undertake an Environmental Assessment and/or Environmental 
Management Plans (EMP), which will take into account the OP/BP 4.36 aspects.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Physical Cultural Resources  
 
At the Concept stage, we are not aware whether this safeguard policy will be triggered. A 
final determination of whether this policy needs to be triggered will be made during project 
preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Indigenous Peoples  
 
Since an indigenous community located in the buffer zone of the Maduru Oya National Park 
may be affected by HEC, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be part of the ESAMF 
and will be consistent with the requirements of the Bank's Operational Policy/Bank Procedure 
(OP/BP) 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement  
 
At this stage we are not aware whether this safeguard policy will be triggered. The proposed 
project will try to avoid any involuntary resettlement or keep it at an absolute minimum. Since 
the exact locations of the project interventions are not known at this stage, a framework for land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement will be prepared as part of the ESAMF. This framework 
will be consistent with the requirements of the Sri Lanka National Involuntary Resettlement 
Policy (NIRP) and the Bank's Operational Policy/Bank Procedure (OP/BP) 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/24/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework September 30, 
2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
02/28/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/08/2009 
Comments:  PCN ISDS cleared. Will review specific safeguards management documents when 
available. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
08/03/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. 
