Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2009 
Report No.:  AC4144
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P087145 
Project Name:  Gemi Diriya II (Estates) 
Task Team Leader:  Meena M. Munshi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%);General industry and trade 
sector (25%);Other social services (20%);Water supply (20%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (29%);Participation and civic engagement 
(29%);Rural non-farm income generation (28%);Gender (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the APL program is to support GOSL’s strategy enhancing 
quality of life of poor households of the poorest divisions in the country and increasing 
incomes and well being of the poor and most vulnerable through: (i) empowering the 
poor and developing and strengthening of institutions of the poor; (ii),  better access of 
the poor to basic social and economic infrastructure and services and support for 
productive activities; and (iii) the development of policies, rules, systems, procedures and 
institutional arrangements that would allow the government to transfer funds directly to 
communities and provide them with technical and other support on a demand-driven 
basis.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is the second phase of a three-phase APL supporting the poverty reduction 
program.  An APL was adopted as the most appropriate lending instrument to support 
policy and institutional development, which are long-term undertakings and thus require 
sustained support over time.  
Page  2
Phase 2 is expected to geographically expand to two new provinces and two new 
districts, while also covering additional poor regions/divisions in the on-going districts. 
In addition, Phase 2 would focus on vertical expansion and consolidating gains of Phase 
1
and further strengthen community institutions and promote sustainable livelihoods 
through linking federations with private and public sector agencies. More specifically, 
Phase 2 will strengthen the value chains of key economic sectors, like dairy, high-value 
commercial agriculture (maize, fruits and vegetables, spices, etc), and handicraft, through 
further aggregation of producers; better market linkages as well as linkages to the 
financial sector; better delivery of livelihood support services; and improvement in 
technology.  Phase 1 has also been instrumental in forging partnerships between the rural 
youth and key industries with employment potential, especially the textile, the food retail 
and the ICT sector.  
 
Vertical expansion would also consist in the strengthening of local government 
organizations; and the testing of a model of local area development in 10/15 Pradeshiya 
Sabhas so that the local governments provide efficient services and address the issues of 
accessibility and connectivity that hamper sustainable livelihoods in the lagging regions.  
 
In addition, specific focus during Phase 2 would be on providing technical assistance to 
the existing local level agencies 
–
Divisional Secretary, Samurdhi officials, and other 
local level officials – to implement the national programs using the same approach and 
operational guidelines.  
 
The proposed project would consist of the following five components:  
 
Component A. Intra-Village Development:  This component aims to mobilize villages to 
form Village Organizations (VOs) and directly finance the VOs with a Village 
Development Fund (VDF) based on an approved Village Development Plan (VDP) for 
social, economic and community infrastructure investments.  
 
Component B. Inter-village Connectivity Development  
 
This component would aim to  strengthen the capacity of Pradeshiya Sabha 
functionaries to plan, deliver and maintain services in a cost-effective, participatory and 
transparent way;  and  pilot-test the Pradeshiya Sabha Incentive Fund model, which 
would consist of funding of cluster subprojects to address inter-village connectivity 
constraints  
 
Component  C. Private, Public and Producer Collaboration and Partnership: This 
component would develop partnerships with the private sector agencies for bringing in 
new technology and marketing opportunities; and enhance skills for employment 
generation and off-farm activities especially among unemployed youth.  
 
Component D. Project Management: This component would facilitate overall 
coordination, planning, implementation, learning and monitoring of the project at the 
national and provincial level.  
Page  3
Component E.  Convergence and Policy Support: The component will build capacity of 
local level officials and public agencies to deliver government programs using the CDD 
approach to respond to demands and needs of Gamaneguma villages and help the 
communities manage their developmental activities and funds both for intra-village 
infrastructure and livelihood development.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program would specifically reach out 1 million people living in 1200 most poor 
villages and estate communities and 15 Pradeshiya Sabha. Phase 2 would cover 7 districts 
in five provinces of Uva, Sabargamuwa, Southern Province, North Central and Central 
Province.   As part of environmental and social assessments, protected areas, critical and 
sensitive ecosystem and natural habitats and socially sensitive groups that might be 
present in the project areas will be identified and appropriate safeguards will be 
developed based on this analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDI) 
Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Environmental Safeguards  
 
A
majority of project investments in Phase I were labour intensive, small scale civil 
works and household level, individual, livelihood support income generating activities.  
Civil works are localized activities at village levels likely to be associated with 
rehabilitation and improvements of intra-village rural roads, and construction of drinking 
water facilities and buildings that mostly utilize local construction material. However, as 
opposed to Phase I which included only localized small-scale infrastructure schemes, the 
Page  4
Phase II will finance the essential and urgent improvements to inter-village infrastructure 
development to improve connectivity, productivity and income of the people depending 
on those schemes.  There it will be required to enforce the safeguards more vigorously, 
although the anticipated related negative environmental impacts are minor and easily 
manageable.  
 
The project is not expected to create serious cumulative negative environmental impacts 
due to the implementation of multiple project components. Given the nature and scale of 
the project activities and the possible negative environmental impacts as has been 
inventoried in the environmental screening checklists, no major adverse cumulative 
impacts are anticipated.  
 
Given the small size and rehabilitation nature of   these activities, their potential adverse 
environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas 
including wetlands, forests, grasslands and other natural habitats have not been 
significant. It is evident from the implementation experience of the ongoing Phase I 
components that the implementation has not resulted in significant potential 
environmental safeguard issues and negative impacts.  If there are any potential negative 
impacts they are site-
specific related to the project’s village level infrastructure 
rehabilitation, improvement and construction activities and household level income 
generating activities and are manageable with proper planning, oversight, and 
monitoring.  
 
2. Social Safeguards  
 
Involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12):  
 
Phase I experience: During Phase I of the project, the OP was not triggered. It was 
agreed that there will be no involuntary land acquisition under the project. Land 
requirements in general were expected to be minimal and this requirement will be met 
through (i) Available un-encroached government and; (ii) verifiable voluntary land 
donations; or (iii) through out right purchase (willing seller-willing buyer). It was also 
agreed that due precautions would be in place to ensure that (i)  Poor are not forced to 
donate land; and (ii) due precautions would be taken to minimize/avoid temporary 
adverse impacts during construction through ESMF.  
 
A
detailed analysis of land acquisition during phase I has been undertaken by the 
project. The analysis reveals that:  
 
1.
Most of the lands (77%) have come from Government and Pradeshiya sabha owned 
lands and temples. Land donated by community constitutes only 23%.  
 
2.
Large amount of lands have been donated by relatively few larger land holders. 
Nearly 60% of lands have come from 20% top land donors. The lower 50% donors have 
contributed only 13.5% of lands. The overall average private land donation comes to less 
than 0.04 acres. If the larger land donations (from better of families) is excluded, the 
average land donated per donor is only 0.01 Acres. Thus it can be concluded that the land 
requirements have been modest.  
Page  5
3. The project has followed transparent methods of seeking donations and the donors 
have been duly recognized by the communities in public functions. Save and except one 
case of a poor donor (who refused to donate land), there are no complaints or reports of 
forced donations.  
 
4.
There have been general time delays in transfer of land titles, which often cause 
delays in sub project implementation..  
 
Phase II: The nature of sub projects will continue to remain similar to phase I. The 
interconnectivity component, which will be a new activity during phase II, will 
emphasise on livelihood infra structure (road up gradation, agri marketing/processing 
centres, ICT etc.) to be implemented by Pradeshiya sabhas. Based on the positive 
experience of phase I and the nature of investments contemplated, the project has 
proposed to continue the same methodology and approach for land acquisition during 
Phase II. Involvement of Pradeshiya Sabhas during phase II is expected to further 
facilitate availability of public lands for subprojects. Given the community driven nature 
of the project and the emphasis placed on principles of unity, the project does not intend 
implementing sub-projects that do not enjoy the whole hearted support of communities. 
The project authorities confirmed to the mission that Sub projects involving involuntary 
donation will not be taken up.  
 
Based on this, the following agreements were reached with the client:  
 
1. 
The project will continue adopting the same approach as phase I during phase II  
 
2.
Documentation of land transactions will be improved and will be available on the 
MIS data base  
 
3.
The project will ensure that no poor household is coerced into donating their land. 
This will be verified and certified during appraisal.  
 
4.
The project will ensure that there are simple and transparent grievance redress 
mechanisms which are disseminated to communities   
 
5.
The project will streamline procedures to minimize time delays in legal transfer of 
titles.  
 
6.
Sub project appraisal criteria will continue to include verification of voluntariness 
during Phase II.  
 
Indigenous People (OP 4.10): Social assessments during preparation indicated very 
scarce presence of indigenous groups (“Veddahs) in the project area. This hasbeen further 
confirmed during actual implementation experience of Phase I. Hence the OP is not 
triggered. How ever, it is possible that the project may come across an odd group of 
veddah’s during Phase II implementation. The ESMF would therefore contain a check list 
for ensuring culturally appropriate and informed consent/choice for Veddahs in such rare 
cases. In any case, given the CDD nature and vulnerability focus (women, youth and 
poorest of the poor) of the project, there is already an inclusive process framework for 
addressing the concerns of all vulnerable groups through participation and informed 
consent.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project has considered various other alternatives for the implementation 
arrangements and has adopted the CDD approach where community based decentralized 
decision-making and management process will be adopted. Natural resource management 
will also take a similar process with technical oversight and facilitation from the relevant 
government agencies.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Sri Lanka has a comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for mitigation and 
management of environmental impacts arising out of development activities. The 
government established the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) in 1982 as the 
environmental regulatory agency under the National Environmental Act (NEA). Under 
the NEA, all development projects that fall within the prescribed list of projects are 
required to go through a comprehensive environmental screening and planning process 
using Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) and Initial Environmental Examinations 
(IEE). The CEA has demonstrated technical expertise and good track record of evaluating 
environmental impacts assessments. In addition, there are number of other national 
agencies mandated for environmental protection which have the capacity for management 
of areas designated to be sensitive under their jurisdiction. However, given the nature and 
scope of the proposed project activities, it is unlikely that EIA/IEE would be requires for 
any of the activities under the project.  
 
The GOSL is in the process of process of reviewing the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) developed during the Phase I of the project. It will be 
updated based on this review and incorporated with the safeguards requirements of the 
expanded scope of the Phase II.  
 
The ESMF will refine and define checklists and tools for screening of project activities, 
including a negative list of activities and their nature and characteristics that would not be 
funded under the project; specify procedures for assessment, screening and clearances; 
list roles and responsibilities of community members, social mobilizers, project staff at 
village, district and provincial levels including District Environmental Officers; clarify 
the norms and procedures required for screening, supervision and monitoring; include a 
plan for capacity building and training; develop a dam safety assurance plan if required 
and ecological agricultural plan (pest management plan).  
 
The process for addressing environmental concerns through the institutional 
arrangements and procedures used by the Project for managing the identification, 
preparation, approval and implementation of subprojects are defined in generic steps in 
this framework. The first activity on the ESMF front should be the elaboration of a clear 
Page  7
sub-project cycle and the identification of the key decision points for managing the 
ESMF screening process, including the subproject specific reviews/assessment and 
management plans, as discussed below. In addition specification of civil works contract 
documents will continue to include and enforce generic and activity specific clauses 
requiring environmental compliance in the execution of project’s civil works. Provisions 
will be included in cost estimates for civil works to undertake measures both for 
enhancing positive environmental impacts and mitigate/prevent negative effects.  
 
Based on the experience of application and implementation of this framework, the 
provisions and procedures of this framework will be updated and modified from time as 
appropriate to suit to the project activities (in consultation with PSs).  
 
All the project activities and sub-projects that will be prepared on the basis of Village 
Development Plans will be screened by the communities and project implementing staff 
for environmental aspects following the checklists and procedures. Environmental 
screening process will distinguish sub-projects and activities that will require thorough 
environmental review to prevent/mitigate negative environmental impacts or those which 
will provide opportunities to enhance positive impacts. Services of the District 
environmental officers or subject matter specialists should be obtained to modify project 
designs and incorporate environmental management aspects depending on the complexity 
and nature of the issue.  
 
While most project activities in Phase I are expected to have generic environmental and 
social issues that are manageable through standards and codes of practice, there will be 
project activities in Phase II that carry a higher risk of environmental and social 
disruptions and/or impacts. These subprojects should be the subject of environmental 
and/or social reviews as the key management tool for identifying opportunities for lower 
impact project opportunities and/or for the identification of necessary mitigation 
measures in accordance with the prevailing legal framework and the Bank’s safeguard 
policies.  
 
During the initial needs assessment process to develop Village Development Plans 
(VDPs) and Pradeshiya Sabha Development Plans (PSDPs), communities and other 
major stakeholders will be provided initial awareness building on the environmental 
aspects. Subsequently, all project activities and subprojects that will be prepared on the 
basis of VDPs and PSDPs will undergo environmental screening using the checklists and 
procedures by the Village/PS subcommittee as well as project implementing staff 
following the roles and responsibilities defined in the environmental framework.   
Environmental screening process will distinguish sub-projects and activities that will 
require thorough environmental review to prevent/mitigate negative environmental 
impacts or those which will provide opportunities to enhance positive impacts. 
Integration of environmentally recommended measures in the subproject design will 
ensure that the subproject impacts are taken care of. Supervision during implementation 
is needed so that all the environmental remedial measures are implemented as planned.  
 
Page  8
The GOSL has created an institutional set up to develop sub-project specific safeguards 
implementation plans and have identified implementing responsibilities. The Project 
envisages capacity building at all levels to ensure that the ESMF is effectively 
operationalized. The Project staff (Hub and District Team) involved in environmental 
matters has to be exposed to formal training in the management of environmental issues. 
The training program for various role players will include an orientation program on the 
ESMF, environmental assessment processes, and participatory methodologies. Capacity 
building will help improve the effectiveness of stakeholders at various levels in the 
management of environmental and social impacts during planning, implementation and 
operation of proposed investments.  
 
Capacity building will enhance the ESMF management capacity by allowing real 
application of the critical practices such as (1) Basic practices: screening impacts, 
scoping assessments, planning mitigation options, public consultation to assess feasibility 
and acceptability options; (2) Environment: site selection to minimize environmental 
impacts and social disruption; restoration of drainage patterns including mitigation 
matters in contracts; management of impacts during construction; monitoring of 
effectiveness of measures; and (3) Monitoring and grievance redress: transparency and 
supervision responsibilities.  
 
The Pradeshiya Sabha’s (PS) have a very limited institutional capacity to implement the 
ESMF. Except for a Secretary, who usually keeps track of all activities in a PS, the other 
council members including the Chairman, are elected community representatives. 
However, as a part of the institutional capacity building, the sub committee members 
including the technical and environmental officers will be trained in different aspects of 
the Project, including interpretation and implementation of environmental impact 
management guidelines.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project design and implementation will involve consultation and participation of all 
key stakeholders at different levels. These stakeholders include rural communities in 
project areas, government departments at different administrative levels, particularly PSs, 
elected representatives, private sector and public sector institutions, voluntary sector and 
community-based organizations. The institutional and management levels have been 
formed based on extensive consultation and participatory processes. The Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been drafted based on experience 
during Phase I and inputs provided by key stakeholders during numerous consultations 
held. The final version of the ESMF will be publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal. 
In addition, the planning of the sub-projects, decision-making, selection process, 
resources management and monitoring will involved participatory and transparent 
processes adopted during Phase I of the project. The specific guidelines including 
screening checklists, Environmental Management Plans and Environmental Codes of 
Practices will be widely disseminated up to the village level in local languages.   
 
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
No 
Page  10
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meena M. Munshi 
04/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darshani De Silva 
04/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan 
04/18/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
05/04/2009 
Comments:   
