                                                                                                                                                                                                    43448


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 04/23/2008                                    Report No.: AC2062
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Sri Lanka                            Project ID: P097329
                                                                                                            Project Name: Public Sector Capacity Building Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Tatiana Nenova
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007      Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2008
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: SASFP                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                          Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: General public administration sector (60%);Central government administration
                                                                                                            (30%);Law and justice (10%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Economic statistics, modeling and
                                                                                                            forecasting (S);Macroeconomic management (S);Administrative and civil service reform

                                              Public                                                        (S);Law reform (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             22.60
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                    Authorized                                                      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 3.50
                                                                                                                                                                                       3.50
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                         Simple [X]            Repeater []
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Yes [ ]     No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                                        Public

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            To enhance the effectiveness, efficiency and productivity of two key public sector
                                                                                                            agencies (Department of Census and Statistics [DCS], and Auditor General's
                                                                                                            Department [AGD]) through an investment package that includes organizational
                                                                                                            strengthening, capacity building, information management, communication
                                                                                                            improvements, physical and information technology infrastructure, and Information and
                                                                              Authorized                    Communication Technology (ICT) support.

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            Upgrading Statistical Capacity (US$14.05 million of which US$12.05 million from
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            IDA): This component is based upon the detailed SMP and its complementing and
                                                                                                            amplifying Implementation Plan, and will help to develop tools for demand-driven core
                                                                                                  Public    data collection and dissemination. Areas of support include skill development,
                                                                                                            information and technology, client relations, and physical infrastructure development.
                                                                                                            The elements of the component are as follows:

 Organizational Development:
       Technical Assistance (TA) to design and implement a data collection and
coordination strategy by DCS with other data collection agencies to reduce duplication of
work and transaction costs
       Skill development programs that follow international statistical standards,
including training, workshops, and study tours

 Statistical and IT Infrastructure and Client Service:
       TA for IT-related needs assessment in terms of survey design, data collection,
transmission, processing, management, and dissemination
       Design, development and implementation of the IT and statistical systems
required per the DCS need assessment
       Training and workshops on IT implementation issues
       Hardware and software for data development and information sharing
       Consultant services to design and improve client-oriented data sharing and
consultation, as well as a user-education strategy to facilitate statistically accurate use of
data among users
       Training focused on user services and responsiveness to user needs
       Web-based data dissemination and clear articulation of policy to improve
datasharing

 Data Development:
       TA to design and develop an integrated meta- and data- base on major
economicand social statistics
       Study visits to familiarize technical staff with international best practice
       Statistical series training

 Physical Infrastructure: Construction and equipment of a modern building to house all
18 DCS divisions currently accommodated in eight separate locations in and around
Colombo. This single structure would eliminate significant challenges in coordination
and communication, as well as costly, unsafe, time-consuming transport of physical data
to storage. IDA will finance all component costs except the cost of land for the building
(US$2 million) which is provided by GOSL.

 Project Management: Funding of incremental operating costs and project management
expenses. Details on the composition of the component management unit are included in
annex 4.



 Improving Auditing Standards (US$12.05 million of which US$10.55 million is from
IDA): The component addresses weaknesses in the financial management of public
resources, the effectiveness of the public audit function, and the availability of public
access to information. The component's action plan is based on the AGD's IDP. To
modernize AGD, elements of the component focus on human resource (HR)
development, communications and external relations, auditing methodologies, and
IT/physical infrastructure.

 Audit Methodology:
       Consultancy services to prepare manuals and guidelines to assist AGD to expand
audits to include investigative and performance audits over the medium term
       Specialized training program on improved audit methodologies for investigative
and performance auditing of public entities

 Human Resource Development:
       Consultancy services to design the HR development strategy and training
modules, as well as an objective staff evaluation system
       Local and foreign training of international best audit practice
       Twining arrangements for public auditing staff

 Communications and External Relations:
       Consultancy services to implement a communications infrastructure and tools for
communicating with Parliament, auditees, and the general public
       Funding for mechanisms strengthening media access to AGD information and
hardware to support better media relations
 IT and Equipment/Fittings:
       Hardware and software to implement the IT operating systems
       Training for staff on IT-based audit over the medium term
       Furniture, fittings, and communication, networking, and IT infrastructure forthe
AGD independent building and customization of offices through carrying out of works.

 Physical Infrastructure: Construction and equipment of a modern building to house
AGD. The current building that AGD is occupying is to be demolished under an
environmental plan of the government. Using funds to re-wire an old building is
inefficient. The new construction permits a complete modernization of electronics and
wiring, as the IT strategy suggests a WAN connecting head office and the regional
offices. IDA will finance all component costs except the cost of land for the building
(US$1.5 million) which is provided by GOSL.

 Project Management: Funding of incremental operating costs and project management
expenses. Setup details on the component management unit are included in annex 4.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented throughout Sri Lanka.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (OPCQC)
   Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 Based on the scope of the Project the building construction civil works financed under
the project are the only activities that are likely to have potential environmental impacts.

 Considering the relatively limited scale of building construction works, it is not
anticipated that there will be significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and
social impacts. Therefore the proposed operation is classified as Category B for
safeguards. The only Safeguards Policy that will be triggered under this project is OP/BP
4.01- Environmental Assessment and there is no likelihood that any other safeguards
policies will be applicable to this Project.

 Sri Lanka has a well established construction industry and the country has
institutionalized a process for obtaining building approval which ensures that the
proposed construction follows construction specifications and other relevant regulatory
requirements if the Urban Development Authority and the respective Local Authorities.
Therefore, it is proposed that Environmental Management Plans (EMP) based on an
environmental analysis of the potential impacts identified through an Environmental
Information Questionnaire would be undertaken for the routine building constructions,
instead of EIAs. In the event that any land-filling of low lying land and/or land located in
environmentally sensitive areas or in an area where there are GOSL restrictions on
building construction is proposed for any building construction a full EIA is a pre-
requisite for fund disbursement. Considering the scattered nature of construction works
under the project, it is not expected that there will be significant accumulated
environmental damage due to project activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Based on the activities proposed to be financed under the project, potential indirect and/or
long term impacts on the environment due to anticipated future activities in the project
area are not expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to ensure compliance with OP 4.01, an Environmental Safeguards Management
Framework (ESMF) has been prepared based on which safeguards assessments will be
conducted for the civil works financed under the project once specific sites are identified.
Accordingly, the ESMF has identified the institutional arrangements for safeguards
assessments and monitoring. The ESMF has formed the basis for appraising the
environmental and social aspects of the project.

 Construction specifications developed by the Institute for Construction Training and
Development (ICTAD) and the relevant regulation of the Urban Development Authority
and the respective Local Authorities will be followed during the construction/renovation
activities. The Borrower shall obtain all GOSL approval permits for construction and
renovation of buildings prior to fund disbursements for the civil works. The EMPs will
include specific guidelines for debris disposal as well as resource extraction (sand,
timber, metal etc). In order to avoid (encouraging) illegal extraction of resources such as
sand, clay for bricks and timber, all construction contracts under the project will include
clauses in the civil works contracts to ensure that such resources are obtained from
authorized locations and sources licensed by relevant GOSL authorities.

 SOCIAL:
 Overall, the project is expected to yield positive social development outcomes. It aims
to improve the functioning of key departments in the public sector to enhance
accountability and transparency in the use of public resources. Strengthening the
Government's ability to develop national policies based on accurate and timely statistical
information and analysis will ensure better and more transparent targeting of public
sector finances on national social and economic priorities, benefiting all Sri Lankans,
including the poor.

 Although the project supports small investments in infrastructure, particularly in
refurbishing existing government buildings for information technology and office space,
no acquisition of privately owned land or displacement of people is expected under the
project. Civil works will be carried out on publicly owned land free of any squatters or
encroachers.

 Implementation arrangements: The Procurement Officers of the respective
Implementing Agency shall be responsible to coordinate the relevant procedures outlined
in the ESMF. They shall procure the necessary expertise to complete the Environmental
Information Questionnaire and prepare EMPs for the civil works site. In addition, they
will be responsible to ensure that all GOSL approval permits are obtained prior to any
fund disbursements for the respective building works. The construction specifications
specified by ICTAD and the EMP will form part of the Conditions of Contract for all
civil works contracts. Non-compliance with these conditions should be linked to financial
penalty clauses in the contract as well. Compliance monitoring of the building codes and
the EMP will be the responsibility of the Procurement Staff and the Construction
Supervisory Consultants of the respective implementing agency/building works,
respectively. Compliance will also be monitored during IDA supervision missions.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Since it is most likely that building construction activities are likely to be within existing
premises, limited in scale or in authorized commercial development areas, demarcated by
the Urban Development Authority, it is not anticipated that there will be any public
concerns with regard to the project. However, in the event that there is any wider public
interest with any potential adverse impacts resulting from the civil works under this
project, the respective implementing agency is required to consult the affected public. In
the event that there are any affectees on sites being identified for the building works, all
relevant stakeholders will be consulted (according to the World Bank guidelines) and
EMPs will be placed for public comment. The ESMF has been disclosed in-country and
in IDA's Public Information Center.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                         Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11/15/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    04/02/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12/12/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name            Date
Task Team Leader:                 Ms Tatiana Nenova               04/02/2008
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Sumith Pilapitiya
Social Development Specialist     Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg    04/02/2008
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Simon C. Bell
 Comments:

