Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3454 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P110324 
Project Name: Sri Lanka: Road Sector Assistance Project : Additional Credit 
Task Team Leader: Amali Rajapaksa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
28.00
28.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to lower transportation costs through sustainable delivery of an 
efficient national road system that serves the needs of road users and the Sri Lankan public at 
large.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Maintenance and Rehabilitation of National Roads Component:  This consists of civil works 
along national roads comprising of resurfacing and improvement of about 620 km of Class A and 
B
National highways. The credit will finance (i) the cost escalation associated with the 
completion of civil works contracts (ii) the widening the carriageway to 6.2 m necessary to 
provide additional traffic capacity and to accommodate the standards stipulated within the Road 
sector Master Plan (iii) the additional works identified and determined as necessary during 
implementation for completion of the project maintaining appropriate standards for construction 
and safety.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will focus on selected national roads located nationwide.   
 
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In keeping with the World Bank’s Safeguard Policies, the Road Development Authority (RDA) 
prepared an Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) and a Social 
Impact Management Framework (SIMF) that has provided  the necessary background for 
environmental and social considerations to be built into the design of the project so that 
environmentally sustainable implementation can take place.  These Frameworks were used as a 
guide and template by the RDA to undertake environmental and social analysis and ensure 
compliance with the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies and the relevant 
provisions under the National Environmental Act (NEA) and associated regulations.  Based on 
the EAMF, site specific environmental analyses has been undertaken, for the twelve roads 
included under the project, resulting in individual Environmental Management Plans being 
prepared by the Supervisory Consultants on behalf of RDA. In order to be more road specific, 
the individual civil works Contractors have developed Environmental Methods Statements 
(EMS), based on the EMPs, which identifies location and site specific details related to both 
onsite and off site environmental and social issues.  The respective EMSs specify the mitigation 
measures to be implemented by the contractor. In addition, all Contractors are required to obtain 
and abide by relevant Government Of Sri Lanka (GOSL) licenses for extraction of material from 
quarries and borrow sites, as well as licenses for the use of disposal sites etc.  
 
The PMU and supervisory consultants are required to monitor compliance of license conditions 
and the implementation of the EMS very rigorously.  
 
The proposed changes in road width have not required the preparation of new EMPs, as the 
original EMPs had taken into account the environmental impacts likely to arise within 3 meters 
from the edge of either side of the carriageway, which therefore, includes the proposed road 
widening.  
 
The GOSL has a National Resettlement Policy and the SIMF was based on this policy and the 
Bank's OP 4.12. Although land acquisition is not envisaged, but in order to assess the impact of 
donated land and since the anticipated number of affectees losing minor infrastructure ( a wall, 
Parapet, shed etc.) is not known and abbreviated Resettlement Plan or a resettlement plan will be 
prepared ( as required).  
 
In addition to the above, the RDA has established an Environmental and Social Cell at RDA to 
integrate environmental issues into the planning process as well as undertake environmental 
monitoring.  In support of this, the project will continue to provide training for appropriate RDA 
staff in the Planning Division and in the newly created Environmental and Social Cell. The 
Project is financing an intensive training course for staff of the national and provincial RDA and 
other relevant staff in environmental and social management of the road sector.  The course will 
be spread over a one year period and will address all aspects of environmental and social 
assessments as well as mitigation of impacts in road projects.  
 
Moreover, the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established with the environmental regulatory 
agency, Central Environmental Authority (CEA), having EIA review experience of over a 
decade.  However, the weak link in the EA process is in the area of post approval monitoring.  
Therefore, the project shall continue its initiatives to address this weakness, including: (i) making 
Page  3
the contractor responsible for the implementation of the EMS; (ii) requiring the supervisory 
consultants to have environmental specialists monitoring the implementation of the EMS; and 
(iii) recruiting appropriate staff at the PMU to provide the requisite monitoring of the EMS.   
Overall, the Central Environmental Authority will have a responsibility to ensure that GOSL 
environmental clearance conditions are met. IDA missions will continue to emphasize EMS 
implementation in regular project reviews. These safeguards should ensure effective 
implementation of post approval safeguard conditions.  Monthly meetings are being held by the 
PMU with the supervisory consultants and civil works contractors on safeguards compliance.  
 
Finally, whilst the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established, the experience in managing 
social impacts is rather limited.  Due to this, significant emphasis has been placed by other 
donors in the sector, namely ADB and JBIC, on the proper planning and management of 
resettlement issues arising from road sector operations.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is an additional finance project.  The site specific Environmental Management Plans and 
detailed Environmental Methods Statments had been completed in 2005, 2006 and 2007 under 
the RSAP P086411 Project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This is an additional finance project.  The Resettlement plan has been prepared under the 
Road Sector Assistance Project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/25/2008 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As this is an additional finance project, the site specific Environmental Management Plans 
and detailed Environmental Methods Statments had been completed in 2005, 2006 and 2007 
under the RSAP P086411 Project   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Amali Rajapaksa 
02/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/22/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. Please refer to comments in clearance memo. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr G. George Tharakan 
02/26/2008 
Comments:  Two comments: (a)financing amount is now going to be IDA$78m with no GoSL 
contribution.  This needs to be changed; (b) I presume that the ISDS is similar to the one for the 
original Credit. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
