Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/11/2008 
Report No.:  AC3732
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  St. Lucia 
Project ID:  P111708 
Project Name:  Additional Financing to the St. Lucia Disaster Management Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Francis Ghesquiere 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives are: (a) to fu
rther reduce the country’s vulnerability 
to adverse natural events (such as hurricanes, floods etc.) through investing in risk 
management activities; and (b) to strengthen the institutional management and response 
capacity of the respective ministries and agencies for disaster management through the 
provision of facilities, critical equipment, technical assistance and training.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing (AF) will scale up the activities undertaken under Component 
1: Physical Prevention and Mitigation Works and will allocate some of the additional 
project funds to Component 4: Project Management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As in the original project, the project will be carried out throughout the island of Saint 
Lucia.  Site selection for small works has been based on the following criteria:  
 
(i) Specific risk exposure to natural disasters (flood, wind damage, land slips, etc);  
 
(ii) Strategic importance of infrastructure at risk; and  
 
(iii) Probable Community participation in the works.  
Page  2
Scope and coverage remains unchanged.  In terms of environmental issues, the project's 
environmental specialist has participated in every mission since project inception.  The 
specialist has confirmed that the scope of work does not exceed that of the original 
project.  The AF will continue to support activities in areas that were already covered by 
the project's original DMPII.  In addition to operating in the same zones, the AF scope 
and the type of AF financed activities remain unchanged.  The AF will also continue to 
support activities in Dennery; a village of 5,000 inhabitants, which is located on the east 
coast and is vulnerable to floods.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gerald E. Meier (LCSUW) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Additional works contemplated under the extension of the project are of the same nature 
as those currently underway and no mayor change in the safeguards framework is 
anticipated.  However, the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be updated to 
account for any potential cumulative impacts of additional works involving the extension 
of a berm and elevation of embankment from the Dennery Bridge.  In addition, since the 
works at Dennery as part of the AF will trigger the application of the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards Policy (OP 4.12), the Land Acquisition Framework 
satisfactorily adopted during the original project has been updated and will be applied for 
works under the AF as required.  The environmental framework in the Operation Manual 
also sets the criteria for the need and extent of environmental assessments for the small 
works projects.  These same criteria/ screening procedures will be followed.  The PCU 
will use this to assure that future works proposed are in compliance with Bank’s 
safeguards procedures.In the case that activities are found to increase the project's 
category, an Environmental Assessment will be done.  
 
Page  3
There was a full review of the implementation of the EIA framework in the Mid Term 
Review (MTR), which indicated that the project has met or exceeded all environmental 
safeguard expectations.  In summary, the findings of this assessment were the following:  
 
General Environmental Performance of Projects under DMP II 
–
No problems were 
encountered with implementing the EMF.  The PCU and the Ministry of 
Communications and Works have consistently demonstrated a commitment to the 
implementation of project environmental policies and guidelines both in spirit and in 
action.  The roles and responsibilities for authorizing and supervising the project financed 
works, including the guidelines and the screening process, have been clearly defined and 
applied.  For example, when engineers realized that without additional work on the 
private land upstream there would be continued flooding, the PCU immediately contacted 
the Bank, so as to address the issue of encroachment on private lands first. The team’s 
social specialist began to work with the Governmentto guide them on this issue.  
 
The environmental issues will remain specific to local areas since the AF's Component 1 
will focus on small physical prevention and mitigation activities.  The rehabilitation from 
Hurricane Dean will be limited to small works necessary for rapid economic and social 
recovery. The environmental screening methods for environmental impact and cultural 
property currently employed under the DMPII will be applied during the identification 
and selection process of all the works implemented under the AF.  
 
As mentioned previously, the original project did not trigger the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguard Policy, as the acquisition of land was not originally envisioned.  
However, the need to extend the berm from the Dennery River Bridge was identified 
during implementation.  This extension required the acquisition of a portion of seven 
plots of privately owned land.  Although no physical relocation of housing units was 
necessary, nor was there any need for livelihood restoration or social assistance, the 
involuntary taking of land triggered the Bank's 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement Policy.  
The PCU, with the assistance of the team’s social development specialist, has been 
working on the implementation of the Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan the PCU 
drafted in February 2007, on behalf of the government.  A fundamental requirement of 
the plan was for the land owners to be fairly compensated, before the beginning of the 
physical extension works, in accordance with national legislation and Bank policy.  
 
As of January 2008, three out of the seven land owners have received their due 
compensation.  The four pending payments pertain to absentee land owners living outside 
Saint Lucia.  The Government of Saint Lucia is in contact with these landowners and will 
continue to work with them as needed to carry out the land registration process.  The 
Government has opened, in the care of the High Court, a sundry deposit account in the 
General Ledger, and a savings account at the Bank of Saint Lucia, to guarantee the 
availability of compensation funds for the remaining landowners for a period of 12 years. 
A
confirmation of the disbursement of the money into the accounts will be sent by June 
30, 2008.  The Land Acquisition Framework will mandate that the works on the newly 
acquired lands cannot proceed until the Bank receives confirmation of the disbursement 
of compensation funds for the absentee landowners into a bank account to guarantee 
Page  4
payment to these landowners.  In the unforeseen case that the design for the extension 
works is modified and additional land acquisition becomes necessary, this acquisition 
will follow the same procedures established in the Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan.  
 
Likewise, in respect to the beach reclamation sub-project under Component 1.a. no 
physical relocation or loss of a preexisting shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, or 
loss of income sources or means of livelihood is foreseen. However, the Bank's policies 
will apply to other activities resulting in involuntary resettlement, which in the judgment 
of the Bank, are (a) directly and significantly related to the Bank-assisted project, (b) 
necessary to achieve its objectives as set forth in the project documents, and (c) carried 
out, or planned to be carried out, contemporaneously with the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Other than the safeguard considerations highlighted above, the AF is estimated to 
produce a positive social impact, as it will continue to strengthen the local participation in 
the disaster risk management system.  This will be the case particularly in the specialized 
NGO’s low-cost community-based landslide risk prevention work, where the community 
is closely involved in the identification, preparation and execution of local risk 
management projects.  
 
In the case of the Dennery coastal defenses, as with the original project, expected 
impacts from activities include a reduction in catastrophic property loss from severe 
storm damage, reduced coastal erosion, and less pressure for relocation along the margins 
of the adjacent river watersheds.  The beach reclamation area and the creation of a public 
space will restore the community’s principal recreation area, which will generally 
improve local quality life. These impacts will be limited to the Dennery Bay area; due to 
the fact that the bay is a wholly closed hydraulic system. The relevant screening and 
assessment procedures will be used.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The original project analyzed five scenarios for the flood protection work at Dennery to 
evaluate how best to protect the area. A sixth option was created after extensive 
consultation with the Dennery community and concurrence with environmental and 
engineering review.  This option includes Buried Revetment/Sand Management/River 
Protection, two Breakwaters, and Limited Land Reclamation and Improved Drainage.  
The additional mitigation works under the AF are being requested to solidify the gain 
achieved through works implemented in Dennery village under the original project.  The 
Bank Environmental Specialist has checked that new works do not exceed in scope.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) dated February 22, 2004 was prepared for 
the Dennery Village flood protection works under the original project, including a social 
assessment and stakeholders’ workshop.  The work program was developed in 
Page  5
consultation with the Dennery community, so as to minimize environmental degradation.  
The EIA showed that there was a strong demand for the project from the Dennery 
residents who are at risk of experiencing damage to their property from sea swells, storm 
waves and floods. According to the original study, many of the residents place a high 
social value on living in their present location, which would be further protected with the 
additional works.  The success of the original activities was exemplified when it 
protected the community successfully during Hurricane Dean last year, and is also 
evident by the request for Additional Financing.  
 
As highlighted above, an Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan - required for the 
acquisition of private lands involved in the extension of the ravine works in the Dennery 
River - was developed in February 2007 with the oversight of the project's social 
specialist.  This plan was submitted by the GOSL and approved by the Bank, and the 
requirements are being met.  As per Saint Lucian Law, all land in question is now owned 
by the GOSL.  The land acquisition required pertained only to those lands adjacent to the 
Dennery River, which would be involved in the river defense works.  Although the need 
for land acquisition triggered the Involuntary Resettlement policy OP 4.12, this 
"involuntary taking of land" did not, however, give rise to any physical relocation or loss 
of preexisting shelters, loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of income sources or 
means of livelihood.  
 
Preparation of the original project included preparation of an EA to identify key 
elements that must be considered for project location and design for the small mitigation 
works.  These guidelines and screening processes will be capable of detecting possible 
impacts in archeological or historical sites and ensuring compliance with OP 11.03.  The 
EA included in the Operation Manual of the original project is applicable for this work in 
the additional phase and includes:  
 
a) 
A PCU project implementation procedure for environmental management of 
small works activities.  This requires special attention based on the Bank’s environmental 
and social safeguard policies and integrates requirements promulgated under Saint Lucian 
law.  
 
b)
Environmental guidelines and screening process describing procedures to be 
followed to comply with the Bank’s safeguards policies; those guidelines result in the 
incorporation of contract clauses to be included in contacts issued under the small 
mitigation works activities.  This process applies to small works activities, such as the 
construction or repair of retention walls, river wall protections, etc.  
 
Borrower Capacity: The PCU has successfully implemented past and on-going 
operations with the Bank and is well aware of the Bank’s policy on environmental 
impact.  As recorded in the Mid Term Review, implementation has been very 
satisfactory.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the residents of the communities benefiting from AF 
investments in physical prevention and mitigation activities. They have received tailor-
made safeguard tutorials and are aware of the Bank's policies vis-
Ã
-vis informational 
sessions provided by the project's environmental specialist.  
 
Dennery Village: The primary beneficiaries will be the Dennery Community, local 
authorities, and local civil society; those that have been closely involved in the 
development of the proposed mitigation measures.  Extensive public consultations were 
held with the community, resulting in the development of the engineering approach that 
was chosen for the original project.  The additional mitigation works will solidify the 
achievements of the Dennery village.  The works completed so far have improved coastal 
protection and reduced economic losses.  
 
The team worked with the PCU to assure that consultations were conducted in preparing 
the Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan.  These consultations revealed a need for a 
continuous dialogue with affected land-owners.  Since then, the Community 
Development Officer for the town of Dennery has been working satisfactorily as a liaison 
between the PCU and the affected people, to ensure that they are well-informed about the 
compensation process and the scope of the proposed works.  
 
The EIA will be updated to account for any potential cumulative impacts of additional 
works, such as the extension of the berm or the elevation of embankment from the 
Dennery River Bridge, and will be disclosed prior to the start of the additional works.  
 
Additional Small Mitigation Works: These have generally been identified at the request 
of local communities.  In many cases, works will be implemented with strong community 
participation and will result in the strengthening of existing works against severe storm 
events.  The proposal includes the provision of technical assistance by an NGO 
specializing in low-cost community-based disaster risk management and landslide 
mitigation, with previous experience with the Saint Lucian Government.  
 
If the screening procedure reveals that a safeguard might be triggered, the review 
requirements under Bank policy and Saint Lucian law will be activated, under PCU 
implementation procedures, which require public consultation with affected groups. As 
these projects relate to the prevention and mitigation of flood and hurricane impacts, the 
stakeholders include all levels of society, but particularly benefit the economically 
disadvantaged segments that cannot provide for their own protection.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/30/2008 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The PID and ISDS concept stage(cleared by SAT) have been sent to the Infoshop. The 
updated EA to account for any potential cumulative impacts of additional works will be 
disclosed prior to the start of the additional works involving the extension of a berm and 
elevation of embankment from the Dennery Bridge.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Ghesquiere 
06/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gerald E. Meier 
06/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kimberly Vilar 
06/10/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
06/11/2008 
Comments:   
